


'ill' 



'/Mil!'! I' 



I ,' Tra 



DRNtU UNlVEflSITV UBBARV 



3 1924 101 104515 









.I'inii'i 



^§m 



! 



ii : , ' r 



; "\ 



•'illP'Hl 



■!l 



1 ij 



!h 1,1 I 



PfP , ^l|'l''i I 




llli'El 




Cornell University 
Library 



The original of this book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31 9241 01 1 0451 5 



THE 



PULPIT COMMENTARY 



EDITED BY THE 

VERY REV. H. D. M. SPENCE, D.D., 

DEAN OF GLOUCESTER ; 
AND BY THE 

REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A. 

WITH 

INTRODUCTIONS 

BY THE 



VEN. ARCHDEACON F. W. FARRAR. D.D.. F.R.S.— RT. REV. H. COTTERILL, D.D., F.R.S E. 

VERY REV. PRINCIPAL J. TULLOCH, D.D.— REV. CANON G. RAWLINSON, M.A. 

REV. A. PLUMMER, M.A., D.D. 



FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY 
Nkw Yobk and Toronto. 



THE 



PULPIT COMMENTARY 



EDITED BY THE 



VERY REV. H. D. M. SPENCE, D.D., 



DEAN OF GLOUCESTER; 
AND BY THE 



REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A. 



II. CHRONICLES. 



(E^E^osition anh fomiletics: 
By key. PHILIP C. BAEKER, M.A., LL.B., 

VICAR OF RUISHTON. 



fomilics bg barions <JLutl)ors: 

REV. W. CLARKSON, B.A. REV. T. WHITELAW, D.D. 



FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY 
New York and Toronto. 



THE 

SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 

INTRODUCTION. 



The Second Book of Chronicles is occupied with the reign, workB, and 
career of Solomon, and -with the history of the separate kingdom of Jndak, 
omitting altogether the connected history of that of Israel. It goes down 
to the memorahle proclamation of Cyras, which authorized the return of 
the captives and sanctioned the rebuilding of the temple. This book 
embraces the third and fourth divisions of the whole work, once entitled in 
its unity Chronicles, according to the very obvious fourfold arrangement 
of it, observed by so many expositors of this historical portion of the Old 
Testament. The third division, occupied with the reign of Solomon, fills 
eh. L — ^ix. And the fourth division, occupied with the history of the suc- 
cessive reigns of the separate kingdom of Judah, fills ch. x.— xxxvi. 21. 
The arrangement of this book, therefore, in parts and sections, with dates 
of reigns and the synchronisms for them (according to Milman'a table) in 
the line of Israel, so long as it lasted, will be as follows : — 

Arrangement of 2 Chronicles in Parts and SEcnoNB. 

Part L Ch. i. — ix. Solomon and his reign. 
His burnt offerings at Gibeon ; the vision granted to him, and his prayer ; hif wiadom, 

wealth, chariots, and horsemen. Ch. i. 
His determination to build the temple, and preparations for it. Ch. ii. 
The building of the temple, with its plan, measures, chief features, omsmenti. 

Ch. iii. — V. 1. 
The dedication of the temple. Ch. v. 2 — vii. 
Other buildings, arrangement* of labour between " tributaries " and " rulers ; " restored 

appointments of priests and Levites; and the ships given or lent for help by 

Hiram. Ch. viii. 
The visit and testimony of the Queen of Sheba ; the ivory throne of Solomon; hifl 

riches and prosperity and presents ; his wide dominion, length of reign, and at last 

death. Ch. ix. 
Part IL Ch. x. — xxxvi. 21. TTie dissension and schism in the kingdom, with the 

separate history of that division of it which held the capital and the temple and 

the unbroken succesgion of David. 

n. OHRONIOLSa. t 



a INTEODUOnON TO THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



Tb« NToIt of Jeroboam, and lecession of the ten tribes. Ch. z. 






Klagief Jodak. B.a. 


Kings of IsraeL 


*.«. 


Behoboam : cL xi., xii. 979 


Jeroboam L 


*— 


._ 979 


▲bijah : ch. xiii ^ ... 962 








Aaa : ch. xir.— xrL .„ ... 959 










Nadab... 


.». 


... 957 




Baasba 


... 


.. 956 




Elah ... 


... 


... 932 




Zimri ... 


... 


... 930 




Ahab ... 


... 


... 919 


Jehoshaphat : eh. xvll.— zzL S... 918 


Ahaziah 




... 897 




Jehoram 


... 


... 895 



Jehoram, or Joram : ch. xzL ... 893 

Abaziah : ch. xxii. 1 — 9 ... 885 

Athaliah : ch. xxii. 10— xiiii. 15 884 

Jehoash : ch. xxiii. 11 — xxiv. ... 878 



Jehu 



884 









Jehoahaz 


855 








Jehoash ... ~. 


841 


Amaziah : ch. xxy. 


••« 


838 


Jeroboam 11. ... 


825 






809 


Interregnum 

Zechariah and ShaUum 

Menahem 

Fekahiah 

Pekah... 


781 
770 
769 
759 
758 


Jotham : ch. xxtU. ... 


••• 


757 






Ahaz : ch. xxviiL 


• •a 


741 


Interregnum (second) 
Hoshea ._ .^ 


737 
728 


Heiekiah : ch. xxlx. — ^xxxiL 


... 


726 


Samaria taken „ 


719 


Manasseh : ch. xxxiii. 1 — ^20 


... 


697 






Amon: 20 — 25... 


... 


642 






Josiah : ch. xxxir., xxxv. 


... 


640 








... 


609 






Jehoiakim : i — 8 ... 


... 


609 






Jehoiaohin: 9,10 ... 


... 


598 






Zedekiah: 11—17... 


... 


698 






The Captivity, and the destruction 








of Jerusalem: ch.xxxTi.17- 


-21 


587 






The proclamation of Cyrus : 










ch. xxxvi. 22 


.23 


536 







THE 



SECOND BOOK OF THE CHEONICLES. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTEB L 



Ver. 1 — oh. ix. 31. — The Cabeeb of 
BoLOMON AS Kino of the United Einodou 
is'here commenced, covering the ground to 
the end of ch. ix. The same period is 
described in 1 Kings i. — xi. And the fol- 
lowing table of parallel passages (as given 
by Keil) may be put here for convenient 
reference : — 
S Chron. i. 2—13. 1 Kings iii. 4—15. 



i. 14—17. 

ii. 

iii. 1 — V. 1. 

V. 2— vii. 10. 

Tii. 11—22. 

viii. 

U. 1—12, 13—28. 

ix. 29—31. 



X. 26—29. 

v. 15—32. 

Ti., vii 13—51. 

▼iii. 

ix. 1—9. 

ix. 10—28. 

X. 1—13, 14—29. 

xi. 41—43. 



The present chapter of seventeen verses 
tells (1) of Solomon's sacrifice at " the high 
place of Gibeon," whither he was accom- 
panied by "all the congregation" (vers. 
1 — 6). Next (2) of the vision given to him 
that same night, with his prayer and the 
answer vouchsafed to it (vers. 7 — 12). And 
lastly, (3) of the wealth and the signs of it 
which became his thereupon (vers. 13 — 17). 

Vers. 1 — 6. — Solomon's lacrifice. 

Ver. 1. — ^Was strengthened in his king- 
dom. This expression, or one very closely 
resembling it, is frequently found both in 
Chronicles and elsewhere, so far as the 
English Version is concerned. But the verb 
in its present form (hithp. conjugation) is 
found in Chronicles, omitting other books, 
just fifteen times, and rarely, if ever, falls 

U. CHBONIOLES. 



to the level of the mere passive voice. It 
carries rather the idea of a person who 
exerts himself, and does all that in him lies 
to nerve himielf with strength for any object 
(1 Chron. xi. 10; xix. 13; cli. xii. 13; xiii. 
7, 8, 21 : XV. 8 ; xvi. 9 ; xvii. 1 ; xxi. 4 ; 
xxiii. 1; xxv. 11; xxvii. 6; xzxii. 5). It 
may suggest to us that Solomon threw the 
force of moral energy and resolution into his 
work and life at this period. The Lord his 
Ood was with him; i.e. Jehovah his (lod 
was with him. Tlie parallels of this very 
simple and natural expression are too nume- 
rous for quotation. Some of the earliest are 
found in well-known connections in tlie 
Book of Genesis, as e.g. xxi. 22 ; xxvi. 28 ; 
xxviii. 15, 20 ; xxxi. 3. Again, Numb. xiv. 
14,43; xxiii. 21; Josh. xiv. 12; Judg. vi. 
13; Kuth ii. 4; 1 Sam. xvii. 37; 2 Sam. 
V. 10; 1 Chron. xi. 9; xxii. 11, 16; ch. xv. 
9; xix. 11; xxxvi. 23; Amos v. 14. The 
beautiful New Testament equivalent occurs 
in 2 Thess. iii. 16, and elsewhere. Like 
some other of those earliest coucisest reli- 
gious expressions, brevity and simplicity 
are fnlly charged with suggestion. And the 
above quotations will be found to furnish 
examples of the manifold practical use of 
the Lord's pretence with any one. That 
presence may infer the help just ot com- 
panionship, or of sure sympathy, or of needed 
counsel, or of strength in the hour of tempta- 
tion, or of absolute practical help, or of the 
highest revealings of faith. The whole circle 
of need, of human and Christian need, the 
Divine presence " will supply " (Phil. iv. 19). 
The " need" of Solomon in his present posi- 
tion was patent and pressing. Would that 
he had always kept by the true supply of it I 
Magnified him exceedingly. This verb in 
its piel conjugation, signifying "to make 
grow," occurs twenty-six times in th< various 



THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHBONIGLES. [oh. 1. 1—17, 



booki of the Old Testament, some of the 
more charaoteriBtic occurrences of it heing 
found in the following passages : Gen. xii. 
2 ; Numb, vi 5 ; Josh. iii. 7 ; iv. 17 ; 1 Kings 
L 37, 47 ; 2 Kings x. 6; 1 Chron. xxix. 12, 
25 ; Bsth. iii 1 ; Job vii 17 ; Pb. irxiv. 4 ; 
Ixix. SI ; Isa. L 2 ; xllv. 14 ; Ezek. xxxi. 4 ; 
Dan. i. 5 ; Hog. ix. 12. 

Ver. 2. — This verse and the following 
four supersede the on* verse, 1 Kings iii. 4 ; 
and the five together give us, of course, a 
much fuller view of the events of the saori- 
flce. Our present verse purports to show 
the repraentative components of " all Israel " 
in a fourfold olaesification. Captains of 
thousands and of hundreds (see first 1 Chron. 
xiii. 1 ; xxviL 1 ; xxviii. 1 ; and then Exod. 
xviii. 21, 25 ; Numb. xxxi. 14, 48, 52, 54 ; 
Deut. i. 15; 1 Sam. viii. 12; xvii. 18; xviii. 
13 ; xxii. 7 ; 2 Sam. xviii. 1 ; 2 Kings xi. 9, 
15, 19). The judges. The office and the 
person of the judge were held in high 
honour among the Jewish people from tke 
first, and perhaps, also, with a noteworthy 
uniformity, even in the more degenerate 
periods of their history. Their commence- 
ment in patriarchal simplicity can be easily 
imagined, and receives illustration from 
such passages as Job xxix. 7, 8, 9 ; xxxii. 9. 
Their more formal development may be 
considered to date from the crisis related in 
Exod. xviii. 14 — 24. And the allusions to 
the judge and his oiBce thenceforward sus- 
tain our impression of the honour in which 
they were held, arising, no doubt, largely 
&opi the deep-felt necessity for them, the 
more society crystallized (Numb. xxv. 5; 
Deut. xvi 18; xix. 17; xxi. 2; Josh. viii. 
83; 1 Chron. xxiii. 24; xxvi. 29; ch. xix. 
8 — 10). In 1 Chron. xxiii. 24 we are told 
how David set apart "six thousand Levites" 
to be "officers and judges." Every governor. 
The word employed here (s'toj) is rendered 
by five different words in our Authorized 
Version : " prince " (Gen. xvii. 20, patsim), 
" ruler" (Bxod. xvi. 22, passim), "captain" 
(Numb. ii. 3, passim), " chief" (iii. 24, po»- 
fini), »nd "governor" in the present passage 
only. It is evidently a term 9f generic 
•ignifloation, used of a king (I Kings xi. 34; 
Ezek. xii. 10) ; of leaders of the lahmaelites 
(Oen. xvii. 20); of the captains of the tribes 
of Israel (Numb. vii. 11); of the chiefs of 
&mllieB (Numb. iii. 24) ; while the use of it 
(Oen. xxiii. 6) to set forth the position of 
Abraham as one raised to eminence so high 
uid undisputed that it might be clearly said 
to be Gk)d 8 doing, is sufficient to determine 
it* emtral signification. The chief of the 
lathen ; t.<. Uie heads of the fathers. The 
flnt occurrence of the expression, "the 
heads of their fathers' houses" (Exod. vi. 
14), and of "the heads of the fathers of the 
Lerites according to their families " (Exod. 



vi. 25), sufficiently explains the onginal and 
perfectly natural meaning of the phrase. 
The great Importance and siguiflcance of 
the position of the heads " of families and 
« of houses " and " of fathers " in early patri- 
archal times must necessarily have declined 
by the time of Solomon, when the nation 
bad received so much more of civil form and 
system. But the name remained, and the 
family and sooial position did not fail to 
make themselves felt, and finally the oj^cial 
recognition of them in David's time is 
evidenced by 1 Chron. xxvii. 1, and in 
Solomon's time both by the present passage 
and ch. v. 2 with its parallel 1 Kings viii. 1. 
Our present use of the expression ought 
probably to show it, in close apposition with 
the foregoing words, " to all Israel " (wrongly 
translated " in all Israel " in the Authorized 
Version), and which itself is a repetition of 
the "to all Israel" in the beginning of the 
verse. Although the existing Hebrew point- 
ing of the verse does not favour the supposi- 
tion, it may be that the writer means to 
emphasize Solomon's summons as made both 
to the kingdom as such, and to the people 
also as a united people. We are not, 
indeed, told here, in so many words, what it 
was that Solomon said " to all Israel." But 
there can be no doubt as to liis object, as 
betrayed in the first clause of the following 
verse. 

Ver. 3. — All the congregation; i.e. in the 
persons of their captains, judges, princes, 
and family representatives. The high place 
... at Giheon. It may readily be allowed 
that even nature and instinct would suggest 
a certain fitness in selecting high places, and 
the impressive grandeur of groves, for the 
worship of the High and Lofty One and for 
the offerings of sacrifice to him. It was not 
otherwise historically (Gen. xii. 7, 8 ; xxii. 
3, 4; xxxi. 54). However, /irrf, it was part 
of the education of a nation (situated in the 
heart of the young world) in the unity of 
the one God, that its worship should be 
offered in one place, and the smoke of its 
sacrifices ascend &om one altar; and secondly, 
it was not difficult to foresee that the very 
force that lay in the associations, which 
dictated the choice of some places (not least, 
certainly, "the grove"), would constitute 
their weakness and snare. The prohibitions, 
therefore, of the Mosaic Law (Deut. xii. 5, 
11, 14, 19, 21, 26), witnessed to by such 
oorroborations as are found in commands to 
obliterate certain Oanaanitish traces, that 
looked long time a diflierent way (Lev. xvii 
3 ; xxvi 30; Numb, xxxiii. 52 ; Deut. xxxiii. 
29; Josh. xxii. 29; 1 Kings xx. 23), approve 
themselves as in thorough harmony with 
what all would feel to be the genius of the 
religious education of Israel, and, through 
Israel, of the nations of the world. The 



OH. 1.1—17.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



wonder that impresses us is rather that 
means were not found to abide by the 
•* letter " of the Law to a far greater degree 
during all the generations that elapsed 
before the people were settled in their land, 
and were gathered in their temple so typical. 
Is it not possible to regard this as an im- 
pressive instance of how, even in a system 
that suught to be of the closest and most 
exclusive, the "spirit," by force of circum- 
stances, resented the tyrannous bondage of 
the " letter " ? Anyway, for ages from the 
time of that prohibition, the nation had the 
moral principle aa their guide rather than 
any possibility of keeping safe within a 
commandment's "letter" (so see Judg. vi. 
25, 26; xiii. 17—24; 1 Sam. vii. 10; xiii. 9; 
xvi. 5; X. 5; 1 Chron. xxi. 26; 1 Kings 
xviii. 30). Even now, accordingly, the pro- 
hibited is still the observed, and by Solomon, 
too, in the steps of David, even if it be 
necessary to describe it as the " winked at." 
And to tile " high place " at Gibeon Solomon 
and all the representatives, the eongregation 
of Israel, have to repair in order to do sacri- 
fice. The tabernacle was now at Gibeon, 
whither it had come from Nob (1 Chron. 
xvi. 89, 40 ; 1 Sam. zxi. 1, 6 ; from which 
latter reference, speaking of the "shew- 
bread," it comes that we know the taber- 
nacle to have resided at Nob awhile; for 
the oircumstanoe is not positively narrated 
in any passage of the history (but see also 
1 Sam. xxii. 9, 1 1). Gibeon was one of the four 
Hivite cities, the other three being Beeroth, 
Ghepbirah, and Kirjath-jearim. It had its 
first fame from its " wiliness " (Josh. ii. 3, 
4, etc.). By the directest road, it was five 
miles distant from Jerusalem, in the direc- 
tion of the sea, It was further noted for 
the encounter between Joab and Abner 
(2 Sam. ii. 12 — 17). Again, for the slaying 
of Amasa by Joab (2 Sam. xx. 6 — 10), and 
for the death of Joab himself at the hand of 
Benaiah, at the very horns of the altar 
(1 Kings ii. 28—34). Although the exact 
date of the lodging of the tabernacle at 
Gibeon is not told us, nor even the person 
who was answerable for bringing it there, 
yet tliere can be no reasonable doubt that 
it was David, as we read (1 Chron. xvi. 40) 
of his appointing the priests to offer "the 
daily sacrifices" there, on the brazen altar 
of Moses, when Zadok was at their head, 
and Heman and Jednthun were their resi- 
dent musicians. In what particular part of 
Gibeon or of its immediate neighbourhood 
the tabernacle was stationed cannot be said 
witli any certainty. Amid a considerable 
choice of likely places, one forming part of 
Gibeon itself, and just south of El-Tib, 
•eems the likeliest, and to be preferred to 
the suggestion of Stanley ('Sinai and Pales- 
tine,' p. 216X of Neby-Samuil, which is a mile 



distant. The present imposing occasion ii 
the last of any importance on which Gibeon 
is brought before us (see also 1 Kings viii. 
S ; 1 Chron. ix. 35). There was the taber- 
nacle. The removal of the tabernacle to 
Gibeon no doubt followed immediately on 
the destruction of Nob by Saul (1 Sam. 
xxii. 9 ; 1 Chron. xvi. 39, 40, compared with 
37 ; xxi. 28, 29). Moses . . . made in tk« 
wilderness (see Exod. XXT., xxvi., xxvii., 
xxxiii. 7 — 10). 

Ver. 4. — But the ark. Again, as in 
1 Chron. xvi. 39/ the writer emphasizes the 
fact of the temporary divorce that had 
obtained between the ark and the tabernacle 
(so 1 Sam. vi. 20; 2 Sam. vi. 2—19; 1 Kings 
iii. 2, 4, 15 ; 1 Chron. xiii. 3—14 ; xv. 1—3, 
12—15, 23—29). David's pitching of the 
tent for it is recorded emphatically 1 Chron. 
XV. 1 ; xvi. 1 ; 2 Sam. vi. 17. 

.Ver. 5. — The brazen altar. This state- 
ment is introduced to lay stress on the fact 
that, tliough the ark indeed was not with 
tiie tabernacle, the brazen altar of burnt 
ofiFering assuredly was there, this constitut- 
ing the place, the proper spot, for sacrifice 
and worship. (For the account of the brazen 
altar and its making, see Exod. xxvii. 1 — 8 ; 
xxxviii. 1 — 7; also Numb. xvi. 38, 39.) 
This altar of burnt offering is often spoken 
of as the altar, to distinguish it from the 
altar of inceuae (Exod. xxx. 1 ; xxxix. 38 ; 
Numb. iv. 11). Bezaleel. (For detailed 
genealogy, see our 1 Chron. ii. 3—20; also 
Exod. xxxi. 2—5 ; xxiv. 30 — 35.) He put 
before. The reading (p0, " was there 
before," is to be preferred, tallying as it 
does exactly with Exod. xl. 6. This was 
the reading understood by the Septuagint 
and Vulgate. The majority of manuscripts, 
however, and the Syriao Version, have Dp. 
Songht unto it. The analogy of the use of 
this word would make to be preferred the 
translation " sought him," t'.e. the " Jehovah " 
just spoken of. But whether the object of 
the verb be in this place Jehovah or the 
altar, it would seem probable that the clause 
purports to say that Solomon and his people 
were accustomed to repair thitl^er, while 
now they were about to repair thither with 
a very vast burnt offering. 

Ver. 6. — A thonsand burnt offeringi. 
The first instance of the burnt offering if 
Gen. viii. 20, and thereafter in the same 
book XT. 9, 17; xxii. 2, 7, 13. It was 
manifestly the ehiefest of the encharistio 
kind of sacrifices, and for manifest reasons 
also was preceded by a " sin " offering (Exod. 
xxix. 36—38 ; Lev. viii. 14, etc.). (For full 
details of the ceremonial, see Lev. i,, vi., vii., 
viii., pasnm.) The extraordinary numbet 
of the burnt offerings on this and soma 
similar occasions may well excite on 
wonder (Numb, vii 8, 17; 1 Kings Tiil 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. i. 1—17. 



6i; oh. W. 1 compared with tU. 7. See 
also Herod., 'Hist.,' vii. 43). The priests, 
of coniee, performed the sacrifices at the 
command of Solomon. 

Vers. 7 — 12. — The vuion and prayer of 
Solomon, and Ood^s answer to that prayer. 
(Comp. 1 Kings iii. 5 — 15 ; ix. 2.) 

Ver. 7. — That night. This can mean no 
other night than that which followed the 
day (or the days) of sacrifices so multitn- 
dinoua. The parallel account in 1 Kingsiii. 5 
tells us the way in which " God appeared 
to Solomon," viz. by dream. The words of 
God's offer. Ask what I shall give thee, are 
identical in the parallel place. 

Ver. 8. — Thou hast showed great meroy 
onto David my father. These also are the 
exact words found in the parallel place, but 
they omit tlie words, " thy servant," before 
"David," found there. And hast made me 
to reign in his stead. This concise expression 
takes tlie place of two equivalent expressions, 
found iit the end of the sixth and beginning 
of the seventli verses in tlie parallel passage, 
the former of which passages also describes 
it as '• this great kindness," i.e. kindness on 
the part of God— ^a description very much in 
harmony with David's own grateful acknow- 
ledgment to God (1 Kings i. 48). Up to 
this point our present account differs from 
its parallel in cutting out Solomon's eulogy 
of his father ("According as he walked 
before tliee in truth and in rigliteousness 
and in uprightness of heart with thee "), 
and his humbler disparagement of himself 
("And I, a little oliild, kuow not how to go 
out or come in "). 

Ver. 9. — Now, lord God, let thy promise 
unto David my father be established. This 
challenge on the part of Solomon, Intended, 
without doubt, most reverently, is not given 
in the parallel place, and forms not only a 
distinctive but an interesting additional 
feature of the present account. It is thought 
by some that the " promise "here challenged 
is not very distinctly recorded anywhere, 
but surely passages like 1 Chron. xvii. 12 — 
14; xxii. 10; xxviii. 6, 7 amply meet the 
case. See also 2 Sam. vii. 12, 15. King 
over a people like the dust. It is noteworthy 
that, though the equivalent of this phrase 
is found in the parallel, the distinctiveness 
of thia nmile is not found there. (For the 
nse of the simile to express a vast number, 
see Gen. xxviii. 14 ; Numb, xxiii. 10 ; Zeph. 
L 17; Zeoh. ix. 3.) It ia not at all of fre- 
quent nse in Scripture. 

Ver. 10. — Give me now wisdom and 
knowledge. The force of the opening of 
this verse, and the relation of it to the 
former, are both preindiced by the "now" 
(nnj) being deposed from its right posi- 
tion u ihe^rtf word in the verse. For the 



rest of this verse, the parallel passage hai 
" an understanding heart," in place of our 
" wiidom and knowledge ; " and " that 1 may 
discern between good and bad, in place of 
our that I may go out and come in before 
this people. In using the words, " wisdum 
and knowledge," Solomon seems to have 
remembered well the prayer of his fati.er 
(1 Chron. xxii. 12). (For the pedigree of the 
simple and effective phrase, " know how to 
go out and come in," see Numb, xxvii. 17; 
Deut. xxxi. 2; 1 Sam. xviii. 13, 16; 2 Sam. 
iii 25). It is at the same time refreshing 
to revisit the times when the most exalted 
nominal ruler was also the real ruler, as 
being the leader, the judge, the teacher in 
the highest sense, and "the feeder" of hi» 
people. Nor is it less refreshing to notice 
how, in Israel at least, the fact was so well 
recognized and hououred, that justice and 
to jvdge just judgment lay at the deepest 
foundation of civil society. 

Ver. 11. — With this verse the answer to 
Solomon's prayer begins. It is here con- 
cisely given in two verses, but occupies five 
(vers. 10 — 14) in the parallel place, including 
the verse not found here, which says, " 'I'he 
speech pleased the Lord, that Solomon had 
asked this thing." Otherwise there is no 
essential difference of any importance, though 
it may be noted that the parallel gives voice 
to the promise of " length of days," on the 
condition of Solomon fulfilling his part in 
showing obedience to the Divine will, and 
in following the steps of his father. Biches, 
wealth (d'D3J ie'J)). The most elementary 
idea of the former of these two words seems 
to be "straight growth," "prosperity;" of 
the latter, "to gather together" or "heap 
up." The former is found first in Gen. xxxi. 
16; and in the verb (hiph. conjugation) in 
Gen. xiv. 23. Afterwards it is found in 
almost all of the historical books, in the 
Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and in the 
prophets Jeremiah and Daniel. The latter 
word occurs only five times (Josh. xxii. 8 ; 
in this and the following verses ; and in 
Eocles. T. 19; vi. 2). Its Chaldee form is 
also found in Ezra vi. 8 and vii. 26. A com- 
parison of these passages scarcely sustains 
the supposition of some, suggested by the 
derivation of the word, that it marks 
specially those stores of useful things 
which constituted largely the wealth of 
Old Testament times. Wisdom and know- 
ledge. The distinction between these ii 
evident, as also that they are needful comple- 
ments of one another for the forming of a 
catholic, useful, sound character. 

Ver. 12. — Such as none of the kings . . . 
1)efore thee, neither . . . after thee. Thesa 
words were sadly ominous of the short-lived 
glory of the kingdom. Only two kings had 
reigned before Solomon in Israel, and the 



OH. 1. 1—17.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 



(;lory of the kingdom too surely onlminated 
in bis reign, and even before the end of It 
(ch. iz. 22, 23 ; 1 Cliroa xxiz. 25 ; Ecoles. 
ii. 9). On the other hand, the gratuitous 
and spontaneous fulness of promise in the 
Divine reply to a human prayer that 
" pleased " the Being invoked is most 
noticeable, and preached beforehand in- 
deed, the lesson of the life of Jesus, " Seek 
ye first the kingdom . . , and all these 
tilings shall be added unto you" (Matt. vi. 
33). The contents of this verse are followed 
in the parallel by the words, " And Solomon 
awoke ; and behold it was a dream." There 
can be no doubt that what is here rehearsed 
did not lose any force or anything of reality 
from its transpiring in a dream, of which 
the abundantly open statement of the 
method of it, as in " sleep," and in " a 
dream," may be accepted as the first cogent 
evidence. But beside this, the frequent 
recital in the Old Testament of occasions 
when significant and weighty matters of 
business import were so conducted by the 
Divine will forms ample ground and 
defence for the other class of occasions, of 
which more spiritual matter was the sub- 
ject (Gen. xxviii. 12 ; xli. 7 ; xx. 3 ; xxxi. 
10, 24 ; xxxvii. 5 ; xl. 5 ; xli. 32 ; Judg. 
vii. 15; Job xxxiii. 15; Dan. ii. 3; vii. 1; 
Matt. i. 20; ii. 13, 22 ; xxvii. 19). On the 
other hand, siile by side with such passages 
are those tliat refer to dreams for their 
emptiness and transiency of impression, 
when similes of this kind of thing are 
required (Job xx. 8; Ps. Ixxiii. 20; cxxvi. 
1). Tliis IS not the place to enter into any 
argiiiuent of a metaphysical or physiological 
character respecting dreams, and what they 
may or may not avail. But as some persons 
know even "too well how dreams have brought 
them most vivid, most torturing, and most 
exquisite experiences in turn, there will 
seem, to tliem at least, the less difficulty in 
admitting utterly their availableness for 
communications of highest import, not only 
from G(id to man, but under certain con- 
ditions from man to God. Without doubt, 
certain disabilities (and those, perhaps, more 
especially of the moral kind) attach to our 
mind in dreams. But do not dreams also 
find the scene of the keener activities of 
mind pure? Granted that the mind is then 
nnder ordinary circumstances without a 
certain control and self-commanding power, 
yet is it also in some large respects much 
more at liberty from that besetting tyranny 
of sense with which waking hours are so 
familiar I Hence its consummate daring and 
swiftness and versatility in drenm beyond all 
that it knows in the body's waking state. 

Ver. 13. — Solomon's return after sacrifice 
from Gibeon to Jerusalem, and from " before 
tiu tdbernade of the congregation" to 



" before the ark of the covenant of the Lord" 
in Mount Zion. (1 Kings iii. 15.) Thii 
Terse not merely bears the trace of a slightly 
corrupt text in the presence of the Hebrew 
preposition , before nca, where there can 
be no doubt the preposition D should stand, 
but also suggests (keeping in view our 
ver. 3, and comparing 1 Kings iii. 15) 
the condensed and cut-down method of 
Chronicles, and its strong preferences for 
selecting out of the various material at its 
command. The tabernacle of the congrega- 
tion. This styling of the " tabernacle " is 
of very frequent occurrence. It is found 
above thirty times in Exodus, and fully as 
often in Leviticus and Numbers. After- 
wards it is sprinkled more rarely in the 
historical books. The reason of its being 
styled " the tabernacle of the congrega- 
tion " (ny.io) is doubtful — perhaps because of 
the gatherings of the people in front of it, 
or possibly because of its being the place 
where God would meet with Mdses. The 
other name, the tabernacle of " witness" or 
" testimony " or covenaut " (nnjl) ; Numb, 
ix. 15, etc.), is not unfrequent. Hence the 
LXX. iTKrivii ToC naprvpiov; the Vulgate, 
tabernaculum testimnnii; and Luther's 
Stiflshiilten. This verse very much stints 
the information contained in the parallel, 
to the effect that Solomon forthwith took 
his place before the ark of the covenant 
in Mount Zion, and ofiered burnt offerings 
and peace offerings, nml gave a teast to all 
his servants (2 Sam. vi. 17 — 19; 1 Chron. 
xvi. 1—3; Deut. xiv. 26—29). And he 
reigned over Israel. These words seem 
nugatory both in themselves and as placed 
here. They probably stand for 1 Kings iv. 1. 
Vers. 14 — 17. — The attraction to Jeruiar 
lem of the signs of wealth — chariot*, horset, 
etc. — on the part of Solomon. The excitement 
attending the great sacrifices at Gibeon, and 
before the ark in Jerusalem, had now sub- 
sided. And we obtain just a glimpse of the 
range of thought and purpose present to 
the mind of the reigning king. The large 
expenditure of money would infer with- 
out fail the show of brilliant prosper!^ 
in the grand city for the time. Whether 
this would last, and whether it would not 
infer oppressive taxation somewhere or other 
(1 Kings ix. 15, 21, 22 ; x. 25) among the 
people, time would show. Had this expendi- 
ture been all to record, none could suppose 
the commencing of the practical part of the 
king's reign either sound or auspioioua. 
But, of course, it is to be qualified by other 
things that were transpiring, with whick 



THE SECOND BOOK OP THE OHBONIOLES. [oh. i. 1—17. 



the parallel acquaints us (e.g. 1 Kings ill. 16 
— 28), only in different order. We now, 
however, begin a rapid and self-contained 
sketch of the reign of Solomon to his very 
death (oh. ix.) — the sketch one of marked 
characteristics, and in consistent keeping 
with the presumable objects of this work. 
For it is rery mnch monopolized by the 
account of the temple. 

Ver. 14. — The contents of this and the 
following three verses are identical with 
the parallel 1 Kings x. 26 — 29, except that 
the words, " and gcild," of our ver. 15 (ch. ix. 
20) are not found there. The position of 
these four verses in the parallel, towards 
the close of the account of Solomon, would 
seem more natural than their position here, 
which has somewhat the appearance of a 
fragment interpolated, as on the other hand 
the account of the harlot-mothers there. 
Solomon gathered chariots and horsemen. 
The chariot was no institution of Israel 
(so Deut. XX. 1), neither of their earliest 
ancestors, nor of those more proximate. 
The earliest occasions of the mention of it 
(Oen. xli. 43; xlvi. 29; 1. 9) are in con- 
nection with Egypt, and almost all subse- 
quent occasions for a long stretch of time 
snow it in connection with some foreign 
nation, till we read (2 Sam. viii. 4 ; 
1 Chron. xviii. 4) of David "reserving 
horses" unhoughed "for a hundred 
chariots," apparently also "reserved" out 
of the very much larger nnmber which ho 
had taken in battle Iruni Hadadezer King 
of Zobah. The very genius of the character 
of God's people, a pilgrim-gemus, as well as 
their long-time pilgrim-Zif'', quite accounts 
for the " chariot," though it be a war-chariot, 
having never ranked among their treasures 
(Deut. xvii. 16; 1 Sam. viii. 11). Now, 
however, Solomon thinks it the time to 
make it a feature of the nation's power and 
iplendour. He gives the large order for 
fourteen hundred chariots apparently to 
Egypt (ver. 17 ; also ch. ix. 28), the appro- 
priate number of horses to which would be 
mrobably four thousand (ch. ix. 25 ; comp. 1 
Kings iv. 26, where note the corrupt numeral 
forty thousand, x. 26). Solomon's fourteen 
hundred chariots were probably intended 
to exceed the numbers of the Egyptian king 

!ch. xii. 3 ; comp. ch. xiv. 6), of Hadadezer's 
2 Sam. viii. 4; 1 Chron. xviii. 4), and of 
the Syrians (2 Sam. x. 18). But, on the 
other hand, see 1 Sam. xiii. 5 and 1 Chron. 
zix. 7, unless, as seems very probable, the 
numerals in these places are again incorrect. 
Dr. Smith's ' Dictionary of the Bible ' con- 
tains an interesting article on the chariot 
(Tol, i. 295). For significant allusions to 
th* horiemen, reference may be made to 



1 Sam. viii. 11; 1 Kings xx. 20; 2 Kings 
ii. 12 ; Isa. xxi. 7. Twelve thousand horse- 
men. These probably purport what we 
should call borae-eoldiers, or cavalry. And 
it is likely that they come to designate 
these in virtue of the Hebrew word here 
used (D-Bips) meaning horses of the cavalry 
tort (see Gresenins, 'Lexicon," evb voce). 
The chariot cities. In ch. viii. 5, 6 we are 
expressly told that Solomon "built" pur- 
posely these cities, for the chariots and for 
the horsemen, just as he built the " store " 
cities (see also 1 Kings ix. 17 — 19 ; Xenoph., 
•Anab.,'i. 4. §10). 

Ver. 15. — And gold. The omission of 
these words in the parallel (1 Kings x. 27) 
is remarkable in the light of what we read in 
ch. ix. 20. We find the contents of this verse 
again in ch, ix. 27 ; as also in the parallel 
(1 Kings X. 27), just quoted with the excep- 
tion already named. Cedar trees. The 
meaning is felled trunks of cedar (1 Chron. 
xxii. 4) (d'JIN). Whether the wood in- 
tended is the cedar of Lebanon (Pinut 
cedrus, or Cedrut eoniferd), " tall " (Isa. ii. 
13; xxxvii. 24; Amos ii. 9), "widespread- 
ing " (Ezek. xxxi. 3), odoriferous, with very 
few knots, and wonderfully resisting decay, 
is considered by authorities on such subjects 
still uncertain. Gesenius, in bis ' Lexicon,' 
«m6 voo., may be consulted, and the various 
Bible dictionaries, especially Dr. Smith's, 
under "Cedar;"andDr. Ki tto's ' Cy clopsedia,' 
under "Bros." The writer in Dr. Smith's 
' Dictionary ' suggests that under the one 
word "cedar," the Pinus cedrus, Pinut 
deodara. Yew, Taxue baccata, and Pinut 
tylvettris (Scotch pine) were referred to 
popularly, and were employed when build- 
ing purposes are in question. That the said 
variety was employed is likely enough, but 
that we are intended to understand this 
when the word " cedar " is used seems unlikely 
(see for further indication of this unlikeliness, 
the instancing of "firs" occasionally with 
"cedars," 1 Kings v. 10; ix. 11; ch. ii. 8) 
Syeomore trees (cppB*). This word is found 
always in its present maso. plur. form ex- 
cept once, Ps. Ixxviii. 47, where the plur. 
fem. form is found. The Greek equivalent 
in the Septuagint is always trvKi/xivos ; but 
in the New Testament, and in the same 
treatise, i.e. the Gospel according to St. 
Luke, we find both avKdfitvos and a-vKofiapfa 
(Luke xvii. 6 and xix. 4 respectively). 
Now, the former of these trees is the well- 
known mulberry tree. But the latter 
is what is called the fig-mulberry, or the 
tycamoi-e-fig ; and this is the tree of the 
Old Testament. Its fruit resembles the fig, 
grows on sprigs shooting out of the thick 
stems themselves of the tree, and each fruit 
needs to be punctured a few days before 
gathering, if it is to be acceptable eating 



OH. 1. 1—17.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



(Amos Tii. 14; Isa. ix. 10). In the vale; 
i'.<. in the lowland country, called the 
Shefelah. This ia the middle one of the 
three divisions in which JudEea is Bome- 
times described — mountain, lowland, and 
▼alley. This lowland was really the low hills, 
between mountains and plain, near Lydda 
and Daroma (the "dry," i.q. Negeb, Dent, 
xxxir. 13), while the valley was the valley 
of Jordan, from Jericho to Engedi (Gender's 
'Handbook to the Bible,' pp. 302, 309, 
Jnd edit.). 

Vor. 16. — Scrses bronght . . . ont of Eg^t. 
Later on we read that horses were imported 
from other countries as well (oh. ix. 24, 28), 
as, for instance, from Arabia and Armenia 
(Ezek. xxvii. 14). Linen yam. The words 
are without doubt wrong here. But it is 
impossible to say with any certainty what 
should be in their place. The Vulgate 
shows here from Coa, presumably meaning 
Tekoa, a small place on the road from Egypt 
to Jerusalem. It might not have been easy 
to surmise, however, so much as this, but 
for the fact that the Septuagint shows in 
the parallel place, " And from Tekoa " 
(Amos i. 1). The Septuagint, however, 
has for the present place, Kai ii TipA) rHv i/i- 
w6pavTov fiairi\eus Tropeiecdat, Kal iiy6pa^oi'. 
The Hebrew word here translated "linen 
yam " is wfjo (».?. nipD niph. of njjj, " to be 
gathered together").' Gesenius, followed 
by De Wette (and others), and himself 



following Piscator (bom eiro. 1480) and 
Vatablus (bom aire. 1546), would translata 
the word " company," and read, " a company 
of the king's merchants took a company (of 
horses) at a price." Others would translate 
the word " import ; " and read, " the import 
of the king's merchants was an import at 
a price," i.e. in money. Neither of these 
renderings can be considered really satis- 
factory. Some slight cormption of text 
still mtnlks us, therefore. 

Ver. 17. — Six hundred shekels of ailver. 
Some add up in this amount the vehicle 
itself, harness, hor^e or horses necessary to 
it, and the expense of carriage of the whole. 
Whether or no horses are included may bo 
doubtful. The amount added up reaches, 
according to various estimates, £90 or £70. 
If we take the silver shekel at 3». id. 
according to one of the later authorities 
(Oonder'a ' Handbook to the Bible,' p. 81, 
2nd edit.), the amount will be £100 ; and so 
for a horse £25. For all the kings of tha 
Hittites, and the kings of Syria; see ch. 
viii. 7, 8 ; ix. 14, 23, 24, 26 ; 1 Kings iv. 21, 
24; 2 Kings vii. 6; which last place in 
particular suggests that Solomon would ba 
the more willing to assist neighbouring 
peoples in the purchase of horses, etc., who 
might be already tributary to him, or even 
vassals, or who might in future be in the 
better position to help him, when either 
requued or hired to do so. 



H0MILETIC8. 

Vers. 1 — 17. — Each highest need of life offers to turn into the first accepted and hat 
rewarded prayer of life. This chapter of seventeen verses might remind us of a picture 
and its mount and frame, a precious stone and its setting. In this sense it is a unitj. 
The first six verses are u.sed just to prepare us for the contents of the six that follow; 
and the last five summarily assure us that the fulfilment did not fall short of, nor halt 
long behind, promise. The now sole reign of Solomon, begun with the blessing that 
causeth to prosper, seemed (all too briefly, perhaps) to direct itself spontaneously to 
those religious observances that alike rightly acknowledged the past goodness of Gh)d, 
and augured the very best of auguries for the future. For Solomon acted promptly 
and religiously himself, and also taught and led a whole nation, his own nation, to do the 
same, when he sought and repaired to " the brazen altar " " before the tabernacle of the 
Lord " — that sacred and time-fao&oured tabernacle which " Moses the servant of the Lord 
had made in the wilderness." Since that date, oh, what journeys it had made 1 — what 
much more varied, stranger, wanderings and history it had representatively shared 1 
What a career that nation escaped from Egypt now just five centuries had already run I 
what a mark on the very world's history it had availed to make ! But to the picture 
itself, rather than its siuroundinga — picture, parable, solemn and sweet reality, all in 
one ! There are to be noticed and studied : (1) the appearance to Solomon ; (2) tht 
unhesitating prayer of Solomon ; (3) the answer and promise vouchsafed to Solomon. 

I. Tee appeakancb to Solomon. 1. The veritable fact in it ; i.e. that it was Ood 
who appeared. What we often vaguely call Providence ; or a happy thought ; or a sudden 
suggestion ; or an unaccountable impression ; or, worst of all, a chance of the waking 
mind or of the dream ; — should in devout language, and equally in devout truth, be called 
by the name that is Love, and that is also to be supremely feared. 2. The method of it. 
Probably enough in dream, in one or other of the kinds of dream, with which BcrijAuie 



THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHBONIGLBS. [oh. 1. 1—17. 



makes us familiar ; the deeper dream, or that which young Samuel's more resembled ; or 
thinking iu night's deep stillness, with all its unstinted retrospect of the day on which it 
had just closed. In brief, whatever the absolute fact was, it is not necessary to suppose 
that God appeared then any more literally or visibly than now sometimes to us, or 
that he appears any las really many a time to us. 3. The times ; i.e. immediately 
upon Solomon's practical conduct, right conduct, devout and religious conduct, and 
conduct that drew in with itself the nature, the idea, the fact of public worship, public 
service, the action of the combined Church. To human works no merit belongs. They 
claim no worthiness of this kind. They cannot earn or deserve anything of God. Yet 
is it to be most distinctly and unequivocally noted how often God appears to view tn 
connection with human works, interposes to aid and bless in the very crises or sequel 
of rightly intended human endeavour or bold deed. It is as though he would graciously 
ever associate his noblest, kindest, freest giving with our deeds, so that they be simple 
and sincere deeds, that these may be reacted upon at other times by the quickening, 
encotiraging memory thereof. It is not simply written that "God appeared" in the 
night, but emphatic^y "in that night." 4. The object, or very matter of it. Aston- 
ishing to say, it is not to hear a petition, not to answer a petition, but positively to ath 
for a petition — to ask to he asked fur some good gift. This, when projected upon the 
plain page of the Divine book, is recognized as amazing condescension ; hut it is nothing 
in excess of what is ever going on in God's dealings with us. It comes of the fulnesa 
of his overflowing goodness, of his natural liberality, and of hia unfeigned forgiving- 
ness of spirit, to his erring family. 5. The contradiction couched in it, to the idea of 
human life, character, action, being based on any fatalistic scheme emanating firom 
above. A man's own choice is here asked, elicited, challenged, acceded to, and granted I 
And herein, in all five particulars, we have but expressed in graphic parable the facta 
between God and human, individual life in all ages. 

II. The unhesitatino pbateb of Solomon. There cannot be held to be any 
doubt that this prayer was approved, divinely approved, in what it contained. It 
cannot, perhaps, be asserted as positively that it " lacked nothina," and was as unchal- 
lengeable in what it did not contain. When we have travelled many a mile with 
Solomon, and have come to the latter milestones of his journey, thoughts make themselves 
a voice, and we fear that the prayer erred by defect. Let us take note first of what was 
incontestably goixl in it. 1. It found its spring in the sense of genuine responsibility — 
responsibility that had come from father to son, and more sacred and venerable for this; 
responsibility that was heightened by the memory of its being in matter that had 
enlisted special Divine promise, and which promise must not be allowed to fall to the 
ground through lack of human co-operation ; and responsibility because of the intrinsic 
nature of tlie subject in hand. Prayer thus rising to the surface is earnest, sincere, 
deep ; and no doubt it was so now with Solomon. 2. It was prayer relatively high in 
its aim, by the expi^essed Divine admission and commendation here. " Wisdom and 
knowledge" were above "riches, wealth, honour, the life of enemies, or long life for 
self." 3. It was prayer fur means, strength, grace to do duly, to be equal to the requirft- 
ments of lofty duty, and duty that in its significance and its results looked far out- 
side individual interest or individual interest and honour combined. The standpoint 

of duty is equally graud and momentous I There may be prayer for high possessions 

possessions of knowledge and wisdom even, that have .selfishness and ambition in them, 
but not a grain of grace or an atom of sense and luve of duty, and acknowledging of 
•olemn responsibility. Solomon's prayer stands in vivid contrast to this sort of thing. 
He prayed for wisdom and knowledge that he might fill his father's place worthily, his 
own placearight — "serve his generation by the will of God," and in thusdoiiig "please 
God " himself I 4. It was prayer that failed to make provision for the highest, deepest, 
»^^reat needs of all ; viz. humility, personal, practical, preserving piety, ever " a clean 
heart " and the renewing ever of " a right spirit." Of these things, masked in the prayer, 
nothing is promised in its answer ; and the sad clue may lie herein to much in Solomon's 
subsequent life. Thinking heicof, may we not lay it to heart for our own timely warn- 
ing, when we are compelled to say of Solomon at this critical moment, " Ue left unprayed 
the things he ought to have prayed " ? 

III. The answeb with promise made by God to Solomon. 1. It expressly said 
to him, it reminds ourselves, how God knows the heart and measures prayer by the 



OH. 1.1—17.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 9 

heart. " Because," he says, " this was in thy heart." There is many a prayer of the 
lip, of memory, of habit, of superstitious sentiment, of some vague feeling of duty, but 
the heart is far away, aad from such prayers, so-called, God himself is equally far away. 
2. (iod granted that petition, not simply because it was a heart's true desire, but 
beciuse it was also " most expedient " — it was a true heart's true desire 1 It was " most 
expedient" for Solomon, for the high place he held, aud " all Israel" — "thy people" — over 
whom he reigned. 3. Otoi crowns the answer with promise as well. The precious 
thing granted by way of answer, incomparably the best thing by far, God wreathes 
with splendour — a splendour, he expressly says, unknown before, and hereafter never 
to be eclipsed ! So, bow often has it been that those who have with single eye, stead- 
fast heart, sought first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, have found all 
other things added to them I So, how often has it been that " those who feared God " 
have found they "lacked no good thing"! And even earthly honour, earthly wealth, 
eiirihly good, have been bestowed with overflowing cup on those who could safely 
receive it, because they had shown they desired first, prayed first, for purer, higher 
good — the real, the right, the true, the lasting. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. 1. — A bright beginning. It is far from being everything when we make a 
good beginning ; lor many a bright beginning has a very dark ending. Yet is it a very 
great advantage to start well on our course. Few men ever commenced their career 
under more favourable auspices than did Kin^^ Solomon, when " he sat on the throne 
of the Lord as king, instead of David his father" (1 Cbron. xxix. 23). He had much 
to sustain and to encourage him. 

I. The HGRiTAaB he had from uis father. It was much to him that he was 
" Solomon, the sun of David." He was known to be the favourite son and chosen 
heir of his illustrious father. All the strong attachment which the people felt for the 
late (or the dying) sovereign went to establish his son upon the throne. Solomon 
acceded to the gathering and deepening affection which his father David had been 
winning to himself through a long aud prosperous reign. All the influence which an 
honoured and beloved leader can convey to his successor was commuuicated to him : 
thus was he " strengthened in the kingdom." 

II. Considerable personal advantages. " The Lord magnified him exceedingly." 
Taking this with the same expression (and the words that accompany it) in 1 Chron. 
XXIX. 25, we may safely infer that God had given him : 1. A noble and commanding 
presence, such as attracts and affects those who behold it (see P». xlv. 2). 2. A 
winning address, a bearing and demeanour which drew men to him and called forth 
their good will. 3. A raind of unusual capacity, an intellectual su])eriority that 
enabled him to acquit himself honourably in private and in public affairs. Tlius was 
he " magnified exceedingly ; " he was held in high honour, was " made great " in the 
estimation of all the people. 

III. The favourinq presence or God. "The Lord his God was with him." How 
mnch is held and hidden in that simple phrase, " God was with him " (see Gen. xsi. 22 ; 
xxxix. 2; 1 Sim. xviii. 14)1 It meant that God was with him to shield him from 
harm, to direct him in difficulty, to inspire him with wisdom, to sustain him in trial, 
to enrich him witli every needful good. God was attending his steps and " laying his 
hand upon him." 

We may say that this was not only s bright, but even a brilliant, beginnii g of the 
king's career. We cannot hope for a commencement like that ; that is only granted to 
the few, to the very few indeeil. This is true, but it is also true that to most if not 
to all men, certainly to those of us who have a knowledge of God in Christ Jesus, there 
is possible a bright beginning of active life. In all or nearly all cases there is: 1. A 
heritage from those who have gone be/ore us. From our parents, trom our forefathers, 
from the toil and struggle and suffering of our race, there corner to us a heritage of 
good. This may be material wealth ; or, if not that, knowledge, iruth, wisdom, precious 
thought in striking and powerful language, inspiring examples of heroic deeds and 
noble lives. If not sons of such lathers as David, we are the children of privilege, 
we are " the heirs of all the ages." 2. Home personal advantage§i either in bodily skill 



10 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. i. 1—17. 

3r in address, or in mental equipment, or in strength of will, or in force of character. 
3. Qod's gracious and favouring presence. For if we are " reconciled to him by the 
death of his Son," we may most surely count on the promise that he will be " with us ; " 
with us not only to observe our course and mark our life, but to direct our ways, to 
"strengthen" us in our sphere, however humble our kingdom may be — to muke our 
life fruitful of good and blessing, to enrich us with much pure and elevating joy, to 
guide us to the goal and to the prize. Let us but yield ourselves to him whose we are, 
and to that service where our freedom and our duty alike are found, and ours will be a 
bright beginning that shall have promise of a still fairer and brighter ending. — 0. 

Vers. 3 — 5, — 2%e ark and the altar ; ohedience and sacrifice. How came it to pase 
that the ark was in one place, and the tabernacle and the brazen altar in another ? How 
did it happen that the ark was in Jerusalem, and the altar of sacriBce at Gibeon ? Surely 
they should have been together. So it was originally ordained; so it was at the 
beginning ; and that was the final disposition. There was something irregular and nut 
according to the commandment in the arrangement described in the text. It is difBcult 
to understand how such a departure from the Divine plan could exist in a dispensation 
in which careful and even minute conformity to detail was accounted a virtue. The 
connection and the disconnection of these two institutions may suggest to us — 

I. O0B TWOFOLD OBLIGATION AB SYMBOLIZED BY THE ARK AND THE ALTAB. 1. 01 

these one is worship or sacrifice. Men approached the altar of Jehovah with their 
gifts or sacrifices, and they then came consciously into his presence ; they brought tiieir 
oblations to him ; they made a direct appeal to him for his mercy and his blessing. This 
forms one part, and a large part, of the obligation under which we rest toward Gud. 
Jew or Gentile, under any dispensation whether old or new, we are sacredly bound to 
draw near to God in reverent worship, to bring to him our pure and our costly ofiferiuiis, 
to entreat of him his Divine favour, to pay unto him our vows. 2. The other is obedi- 
ence. The ark contained the sacred tables of the Law on which were written by the 
hand of Moses the ten commandments. This was the great treasure of the ark, and it 
was always associated with these two tables ; it was, therefore, the symbol of obedience. 
Both Jew and Gentile are under the very strongest bonds to " obey the voice of the 
Lord," " to keep his commandments," to do that which is right in his sight, and to shun 
all those things which he has condemned. 

II. OuB TEMPTATION. We are often tempted to do in life and in fact what was 
pictured here— to put a distance between the altar and the ark, between worship and 
obedience. Too often there is a very wide gap, even a deep gulf, between the two. One 
man makes everything of forms of devotion, and nothing of purity and excellence 
of conduct. Another makes everything of behaviour, and nothing of worship. We are 
led, either by the current of the time or by the inclination of our own individual tem- 
perament, to go off in one direction and to leave the highway of Divine wisdom ; to 
exaggerate one aspect of truth and to depreciate another; to put asunder what God hag 
joined together and meant to go together. And this exaggeration, this separation, ends 
in error, in faultiness, in serious departure from the mind and the will of God. 

ni. Cub wisdom. _ As, later on, the ark and the altar were reunited, as they both 
stood within the precincts of the temple, and spoke of the vital connection between 
sacrifice and obedience, so should we see to it that, if there has been any separation of 
these two elements of piety in our experience, there should be a reunion and, in future, 
the closest association. 1. The habit of obedience should include the act of worship ; for 
worship is one of those things which God has enjoined. 2. Each act of obedience should 
spring from the impulse which worship fosters — a desire to please and honour the 
present and observant Lord. 3. Worship should lead up to and end in obedience ; for 
" to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams." The devotion 
that ends in service, in purity, in truthfulness, in fidelity, in self-forgetting kindness, is 
after the mind of Jesus Christ. Let the ark never be far from the altar, but worship 
and obedience be always in close companionship. — C. 

Vera. 7 — 12. — J%« Divine responsiveness, etc. From the interesting scene described in 
these verses (more fully in 1 Kings lii.) we may glean some lasting truths. 
T. That w« hay conkiubntly beckon on the Divinb RKspoNsivrNEBs. Solomoa 



CH.1.1— 17.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 11 

went to Gibeon with "all the congregation," In very great state, to seek the Lord there, 
tnd there he offered abundant sacrifices (ver. 6). And God responded to his act of piety 

tr seeking him, by coming to him and making him a gracious and generous offer. 

Afithout any state, in lowliest obscurity, we may repair to the quiet and solitary place, 
and there seek God ; and there, too, he wilt seek us and manifest himself to us, and he 
will bless and enrich us also. There is an unfailing and a large responsiveness in " him 
with whom we have to do." 

II. That God has many ways op access to his chilbrbn. (Ver. 7.) In Gibeon 
the Lord appeared to Solomon " in a dream by night" (1 Kings iii. 5). At other timet 
he appeared to his servants in a vision in their wakeful hours (Exod. iii. 2 ; Isa. vi. 1). 
Our Lord was seen by the Apostle Paul under circumstances that were unique (Acts ix.), 
and subsequently he manifested himself in other ways to his servant. God has 
access to us — his cViildreii — in many ways. At any time he may " lay his hand upon 
us;" he may make known his wiU to us. It is our wisdom to expect it ; it is our duty 
to pray and to look for it. 

III. That Solomon showed a deeper wisdom than any he asked God to gith 
HIM. He asked for " wisdom and knowledge " (ver. 10) ; and the wisdom he asKed for 
was cleverness, penetration, political sagacity, subtlety of mind to read the thoughts of 
men, readiness to see at once what was the expedient policy to adopt, range of human 
learning. All this was valuable, and much to be desired ; but all of this together was 
not wisdom of so deep and precious a kind as that shown by Solomon in making the 
choice he made. To ask for that gift which would enable him to fili well the sphere in 
which Divine providence had placed him, — this was better than all possible intellectual 
equipments. No learning, no talent, no genins, is of such value and importance as the 
spirit of fidelity. Everything else without that will leave life a failure and make man 
a guilty being. But to be possessed with the spirit of faithfulness, to be sujiremely 
desirous of taking the part and doing the work to which God has called us, — this is the 
true success, and this will end in well-being of a pure and lasting kind. 

IV. That wb should be qoNCEENSD to maintain and even to enlakok thb 
HERITAGE WE HAVE RECEIVED. (Ver. 8.) Solomon evidently felt deeply impressed, if not 
oppressed, with the thought that his father, David, had left a very great and serious charge 
in his hands, and he was rightly anxious that it should be well maintained. It becomes 
us, as members of a family, as citizens of the nation, to consider what we have inheri wA 
from those who have gone before us — from their labours and sufferings and prayers, and 
to ask ourselves what we are about to do to guard and to strengthen, and, if it may be 
■0, to enlarge and enrich that precious legacy. 

V. That a wb seek the best wk shall find more than we seek. (Van. 
II, 12.) Solomon's happy experience of God's graciousness is very far indeed from 
being singular. We may all participate here. If we seek rightness of soul with liim 
we shall find it, and not only that, but a profound and most blessed peace of mmd 
as well. If we seek purity of heart, we shall find what we seek, and happiness beside. 
If we seek the good of others we shall secure that end, and we shall at the same time 
be building up our own Christian character. Pursue the very best, and with the best 
of all will come that which is good, that which is not the highest, but which we shall 
be Tery glad to have and to enjoy. — C. 

Ver. 7. — OocCa offer to the young. " What a splendid and enviable position ! ' we are 
inclined to say ; " one removed from ours by the whole breadth of fortune. How utterly 
nnlike the conditions under which we find ourselves to-day 1 " But is it so ? Is there 
not, on the other hand, quite as much of comparison as of contrast between the position 
of the young sovereign and our own, as we look forward to the future that awaits us T 
Does not God say to each one of us, " Ask what I shall give thee ? " 

I. Thbeb IS A noble future in front op us. Only a very small fraction of 
mankind may look for royalty or high rank, for large wealth or extensive power. But 
it is highly probable that if this were our lot, we should envy those who, in humbler 
spheres, were saved the many penalties of prominence and power. And, apart from 
this, there is a very true heritage which is open to us all. More or less at our command 
are — ^beginning at the bottom of the scale, and moving upwards: 1. Bodily comforts j 
*nd these lowest gratifications are the more worthy and lasting as they are more pupt 



la THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. 1. 1—17. 



and moderate. 2. Human friendship — domestic love, the sweet and sacred ties of the 
heart and the home. 3. Mental activity — the intellectual enjoyment which comes from 
the observation of the works of God and the mastery of the works of men ; all the keen, 
stiong, elevating delights of the active mind. 4. The service of God, the friendship of 
Jesus Christ ; thus realizing the end and attaining the true satisfaction of our being. 
5. Working with God; out-working with him the great redemptive scheme he has 
designed and is effecting. 6. A high and happy place in the heavenly kingdom. Such 
large and noble heritage God offers to give the children of men, whether bom in a palace 
or in a cotta^re. 

II. God makes this offer on conditions. His offer to Solomon was not absolutely 
unconditional ; he would not have been the wise or learned man he 'iiecame if he had not 
studied ; nor the rich man he became if he had been a mere spendthrift, etc, God ig 
tuo hind to any of his children to grant them his gifts without attaching conditions 
which must be fulfilled. He says, " Here is my gift, but you must ask me for it ; and 
the way to ask for it is to fulfil the conditions on which I bestow it. Shall I give 
you temporal pro-perity ? ask lor it by being diligent, temperate, civil, faithful. Shall 
1 give you human love, the esteem of those aroumi you ? ask for it by being virtuous, 
honourable, generous, amiable. Shall I give you knowledge, wisdom ? ask for it by 
being studious. Shall I give you eternal lite ? ask for it by fulfilling the conditions on 
which it is promised — repentance toward God, and faith in Jesus Christ. Ask what I 
shall give you ; take the course which you know is the one constant antecedent of my 
bestowal." 

III. EVEBTTHINO HANGS ON THE WISDOM OF OtTB CHOICE. 1. It IS Sad tO think 

that many go tlirough life without caring to accept God's challenge at all ; they pass 
throujih a life charged with precious opportunities, freighted with golden chances, 
never caring to inijuire how much they may make of the life that is slipping 
through their hands. 2. Others deliberately choose the lon-er good; they ask for 
comfort, for pleasure, for gratification, for abundance of earthly good, or for nothing 
liigher than human love. 3. Our wisdom is to ask God for the highest good ; for the 
diamond, and not the granite ; for the cup that heals, and not for that which soothes ; 
for the key that opens to the rich treasury, and not that which unlocks only a cabinet of 
curiosities ; for that which will make the heart pure and holy, and the life noble and 
useful, and which will make death to be lighted up with a glorious hope ; — to ask for 
heavenly wisdom and eternal life. AVe should ask for the best because it is the best 
and highest ; and also because, as with Solomon, it commands the lower good as well 
(vers. 11, 12). Let us seek first the kingdom of God, because that is the one good, the 
supreme thing to seek, and also because other and lower things are added to it (Matt, 
vi. 33).— C. 

Vers. 13 — 17. — From the altar to the throne. A great step was now taken. Solomon, 
tlie young man, mounted the throne of his father David ; in so doing he assumed the 
function of one who had behind him a large and varied experience, and who had above 
and around him the assured and proved loving-kindness of God. Solomon began his 
reign most promisingly. We gather — 

I. That he did well to step to the throne prom the altar. He came 
"from before the tabernacle . . . and reigned " (ver. 13). There could have been no 
place so suitable as that where Jehovah was worshipped from which to ascend to kingly 
power. There is no resort so good as the throne of grace, from which we can ascend any 
throne of authority or power to-day. It is well, indeed, to pass from intercourse with 
God to association with men and to the conduct of human affairs. The visit to the 
house of the Lord, fellowship with Christ at his table or in our own chamber, will give 
a calmness of spirit, an unselfishness of aim, and a steadfastness of principle which will 
go far to qualify us for the difficult duties and heavy burdens and (it may be) the serious 
battles of daily life. 

II. That one man mat hold is his hand the well-being of many. Solomon 
"reigned over Israel." In those days reigning meant governing. And though the 
Hebrew monarchy was not actually absolute, it was invested with great power. A 
good sovereign wrought great blessings, and a bad one caused terrible evils to his country. 
Great power, in the shape of royal authority, has passed or is passing away. But still 



OH. 1.1— 17.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 13 



men " reign " over others — lead, direct, nile, influence, mightily affect them for good or 
evil. Very great power has the statesman, the preacher, the poet, the principal, the 
teacher. The possession of power is usually esteemed a thing to be greatly coveted. 
But it is as full of solemn responsibility as it is of noble opportunity ; it calls for a deep 
sense of obligation and accountability ; also for peculiar prayerfulness of spirit and of 
habit. Humble and not proud, conscious of dependence on God and not self-sufficient, 
should be the man of high position and commanding influence. 

III. That affluence mat be a good sign, but it is a perilous condition. All 
those instances of national prosperity related in the text — the abundance of horses and 
chariots, and of gold and silver, the cultivation of choice trees, etc. — were signs that 
Jehovah was favouring the land, and that Solomon was fulfilling his early promise. But 
afiSuence, whether individual or national, is a dangerous condition. It tends to luxury ; 
and luxury leads only too often to sloth and self-indulgence ; and these lead straight to 
wrong-doing and impiety. It is " a slippery place," where a few can walk without 
stumbling, but where the many slip and fall. 1. Envy not the greatly prosperoiu; 
plenteousness of gold and silver may impoverish the soul while it enriches the treasury. 
2. Care much, care most, for the abundance of Christian truth, of sterling principle, of 
generous helpfulness. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — The heginning of a reign. I. The king's person magnified. 1. The 
owner of an auspicious name — Solomon, " Peace," equivalent to Friederich or Frederick 
Perhaps (1) alluding to the fact that when he was born his father was at peace with 
Grod (2 Sam. xii. 24). God's mercies, especially to the soul, are worthy of commemora- 
tion (Ps. ciii. 2). (2) Reflecting the peace which at that time prevailed in the land, 
his birth most likely not having taken place till after the capture of Kabbah, and the 
termination of the Ammonitish war (Keil). When David's greater son, the Prince of 
Peace, was born, "the (Roman) empire was peace." (3) Prognosticating the peaceful 
character of his rule (Ps. Ixxii. 7), and the undisturhed rest of his reign (1 Kings iv. 
24 ; 1 Chron. xxii. 9). 2. 2%e son of a distinguished father — David. Originally a 
Bethlehem shepherd-lad (1 Sam. xvi. 1), Jesse's youngest son climbed the giddy 
heights of fame with marvellous celerity and success, becoming in swift succession a 
brilliant warrior, a skilful harper, an agreeable courtier, a popular leader, a trusted sove- 
reign, a sweet singer, a devout psalmist, a far-seeing prophet. Possessed of almost 
every qualification requisite to render him the idol of his fellows, he found the pathway 
of greatness easier to tread than do men of smaller stature and less-gifted soul. To 
have been the son of such a sire was no mean honour to Solomon, though it entailed 
upon him correspondingly large responsibility ; while, if it multiplied his chances uf 
achieving in the future a similar distinction for himself, it no less certainly created for 
him difficulties from which otherwise he might have been exempt. 3. The heir of a 
prosperous empire — Israel. " The kingdom inherited by Solomon had been carved by 
the sword of David. The Philistines had been driven back to their plains, retaining, 
however, the strongholds of Gath and Gezer at the edge of the hill country. The capital 
of the Ammonites, Babbah, had been taken, and the census embraced all the Qoly 
Land iirom Beersheba to Sidon, ruled by the king at Jerusalem " (Conder, ' Handbook 
to the Bible,' p. 281). 4. The representative of a Divine Superior — Jehovah. Solomon 
ascended David's throne by Divine right, because by Divine grace and for Divine eudi 
(Ps. ii. 6). Solomon was Jehovah's vassal, and held his regal power only on conditio! 
of ruling in Jehovah's name and for Jehovah's glory (2 Sam. xxii. 3). If Solomon wai 
Israel's king, Jehovah was Solomon's. 

II. The king's throne established. 1. By the removal of his enemies. In par- 
ticular by the execution of three dangerous characters. (1) Joab, his cousin (1 Chron. 
ii. 16), a general of commanding abilities and restless ambition, who with the army at 
his back might soon have embroiled the land in war and prevented the hope of a peace- 
ful reign from being realized. (2) Shimei, a Benjamite, a personal enemy of David 
(2 Sam. xvi. 5 — 13), who, besides having broken his parole (1 Kings ii. 36—46), could 
not be trusted not to contrive mischief against David's son. (3) Adonijah, a half- 
brother of Solomon (2 Sam. iii. 4 ; 1 Chron. iii. 1), a formidable rival, who, in virtue 
of his right of primogeniture, pretended to the crown, and might have been the meani 
of itirring up civil faction in the land. Difficult to justify on grounds of Christiaa 



U THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. 1. 1—17. 

morality, these assassinations nevertheless contributed to the establishment of Solomon's 
throne. 2. By the union of his subjects. As yet the empire was undivided. The ten 
tribes still adhered to the house of Uavid. " All Israel obeyed him, and all the piincei 
and the mighty men, and all the sons likewise of King David, submitted themselvei 
unto Solomon the king " (1 Chron. xiix. 23, 24). 3. By the help of his God. " The 
Lord his God was with him, and magnified him exceedingly." As Divine grace set, so 
Divine power kept him on the throne. Without Heaven's favour and assistance kingl 
just as little as common men can prosper. As Jehovah giveth the kingdom to whom- 
soever he will (Dan. iv. 25), so through him alone can kings reign (Prov. viii. 15). He 
also removeth and setteth up kings (Dan. ii. 21) ; yea, the hearts of kings are in Ml 
hand (Prov. xxi. 1). Jehovah was with Solomon in virtue of the promise made to 
David (2 Sam. viL 12), and because of the piety which still distinguished himself (ver. 
6 ; of. ch. XV. 2). This was the true secret of Solomon's prosperity upon the throne no 
less than of Joseph's in the prison (Gen. xxxix. 2). 

IIL The kikg'b allbgianok tendered. 1. Before the tdbernade of th» Lord, 
This then at Gibeon, five miles north-west of Jerusalem. Originally a Canaanitish 
royal city (Josh. ix. 17 ; x. 2), and afterwards the scene of a clever fraud perpetrated 
\ipon Joshua by its inhabitants, as well as of a bloody battle in their defence (Josh. x. 1 
— 14), it latterly became in David's time, because of the presence of the tabernacle, a Levi- 
tical city with a high place presided over by Zadok and his brethren (1 Chron. xvL 39). 
Thither accordingly Solomon repaired to inaugurate his reign by professing fealty and 
submission to the King of kings. 2. With the offering of sacrifice. Within the taber- 
nacle court stood the brazen altar of Bezaleel (Exod. xxxviiL 1), upon which were 
offered a thousand burnt offerings — a magnificent service, even for a king, and symbolic 
of (1) the homage he presented to Jehovah, (2) the consecration he then made of him- 
self to the work to which Jehovah had called him, and (3) the desire he cherished that 
his reign might le begun and ended in Jehovah's favour and under Jehovah's protec- 
tion. 3. In the presence of his people. " All the congregation," in its representatives, 
" went with him to the high place at Gibeon." Not ashamed of his religion, Solomon 
acknowledged his dependence on and submission to Jehovah in the most public manner. 
So are kings, princes, subjects, all men, expected to confess God and Christ before men 
(Matt. X. 32). 

Learn : 1. The value of a good beginning, in business as In religion. 2. The need 
of Divine assistance in all undertakings. 3. The propriety of consecrating all to God 
in youth. 4. The possibility of declining from early faith. 5. The duty of never 
being ashamed of religion. 6. The melancholy fact that good men may do doubtful 
actions. 7. The beauty and propriety of social worship. — W. 

Vers. 7 — 12. — A young king's choice. I. The permission OBA^•TED to Solomon. 
" Ask what I shall give thee." Granted : 1. By whom t God (Etohim), the Giver 
par excellence, of whom David had said, " All things come of thee " (1 Chron. xxix. 
14) ; " The earth is full of the goodness of the Lord " (Ps. xxxiii. 5) ; and whom a New 
Testament writer describes as " the Father of lights, etc. (Jas. i. 5, 17). The invi- 
tation here accorded to Solomon, after the manner of Oriental monarchs (Esth. v. 6 ; ix. 
12 ; Matt. xiv. 7), was and is pre-eminently after the manner of the King of kings 
(Matt. vii. 7 ; Jas. i. 5). Christ extends the same to his followers : " If ye shall ask 
anything in my Name, I will do it " (John xiv. 14 ; of. xvi. 23, 24). 2. When f " In 
that night ; " i.e. after the day in which Solomon had been offering sacrifice — not without 
significance. God is not likely to appear at night, at least in grace, to them who have 
been unmindful of him throughout the day. 3. How J In a dream-vision (1 Kings 
iii. 5), which, however, warrants not the deduction that the incident had no solid basis 
of reality, and that here is only the record of a dream. Even were this correct, it 
would not be without value as showing the current and tenor of Solomon's thougtti 
»nd feelings durmg the preceding day. Men seldom have pleasant dreams of 
God upon their midnight couches who have not had him in their thoughts all theii 
waking hours. Yet that in Solomon's dream were a veritable manifestation of God tt 
his soul, and a bona fide transaction of asking and answering, of giving and receivine 
is proved by the fact that Solomon obtained what he asked. 4. Why t To prov 
what was in Solomon's heart, to test whether the ceremonies of the preceding day hmi 



m. 1. 1—17,] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 16 

been the outcome and expression of a genuinely devout soul, to ascertain whether he 
had ascended the throne with a clear grasp of the situation, whether he knew what he 
most required for the successful execution of his kingly office. So God still tests his 
people and men in general by extending to them a similar permission to that he gave 
Solomon (Matt. vii. 7), and by occasionally in his providence bringing them into situa- 
tions where they must choose, as Solomon was invited to do, what they shall have as 
their chief good. 

II. Thb bequest pbkfkrbed bt Solomon. " Give me now wisdom and knowledge." 
1. The purport of this request. If " wisdom " and " knowledge " are to be distinguished, 
which is doubtful, the former will be the general and the latter the particular, the 
former the principle the latter the application, the former the root the latter the fruit 
(of. ProT. viii. 12; Eph. i. 17); "wisdom," the soul's capacity for seeing truth and 
discerning its adaptations to the particular exigencies of life ; " knowledge," that truth 
as apprehended and possessed by the soul. Solomon craved the spirit of wisdom, that 
with clear and single vision he might " see " God's will concerning himself in every 
lituation in his future career, and the faculty of apprehension that he might always 
know what that will required him to do. No prayer could have been more appropriate 
in his lips at the important juncture in life at which he stood. No prayer coidd better 
befit any one at any juncture. The prime necessities of the soul are — ^an eye to see 
and light to see with, a capacity to find out and comprehend God's will concerning 
itself (Ps. cxliii. 8). The Gentiles walk in the vanity of their minds, through the 
Ignorance that is in them (Eph. iv. 18). God's people go astray mostly through defect 
of knowledge (Isa. v. 13 ; 1 Cor. xv. 34). 2. The reason of this reqiiest. Solomon, 
conscious of inexperience and inability to discharge the duties of the kingly ofBce, felt 
he could not rightly "go out and come in before" or "adequately judge" so great a 
people as Israel. A hopeful sign for Solomon it was that he knew and was willing to 
confess his want of wisdom and knowledge. As the first step towards holiness is to 
acknowledge sin, so the first genuine movement in the direction of self-improvement of 
any kind is the admission of defect. Solomon confessed himself a little child, who 
knew not how to go out or come in (1 Kings i. 7), and Tennyson in similar language 
depicts the natural condition of the race — 

** Behold, we know not anything ; 
« • ■ . • 

Bo runs my dream ; bat what am I ? 

An infant crying in the night, 

An infant crying for the light. 
And with no language bnt a cry." 

(' In Memoriam,' liv.) 

It Is doubtful, however, !f that expresses the mood of any but the loftier spirits. When 
Bouls begin to cry for light they are no longer absolutely blind, but have become con- 
scious of and are pained by the darkness. 3. The plea of this request. Not that he 
was a great man's son, and indeed a great man himself, at least in social position, oi 
that his youth had been virtuously spent, and that he was even then piously inclined ; 
but that God had graciously covenanted with David his father, promising to be a 
father to David's son, and to establish David's throne for ever (2 Sam. vii. 12 — 16). So 
with no plea but that of grace, and no argument but that of God's covenant with men 
on the ground of Christ's sacrifice, need suppliants on any errand approach the throne 
of God. 

III. Thk answbb eetubned to Solomon. " Wisdom and knowledge it granted 
unto thee J and I wiU give thee," etc. 1. What Solomon had asked was obtained. So 
God still gives to them that ask him for the higher blessings of his grace — gives uncon- 
ditionally, freely, and exactly as men ask. So Christ says to his disciples, " All things 
whatsoever ye desire in prayer, believing, ye shall receive " (Matt. xxi. 22). And even 
when they ask temporal or material blessings not inconsistent with their higher good, 
these are not withheld (Ps. Ixxxiv. 11). See the case of the blind men of Jericho who 
were cured (Matt. ix. 34). 2. What Solomon had not asked was superadded. He 
had not asked wealth, fame, power, or long life; and just because he had asked none of 
these things, lo 1 all these things were added. So Christ says, " Seek ye first the king- 
dom of God, and his righteousness ; and all these things [food, raiment, etc.] will bit 



16 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHE0FICLE8. [oh. L 1—17. 

added "—thrown into the bargain (Matt. vi. 33) ; and Paul adds that " God is able to 
do for ns exceeding abundantly above all we can ask or think " (Eph. lii. 20, 21). 

Learn : 1. The liberty God's people have in prayer. 2. The superiority of wisdom, 
i,e. of heavenly wisdom (Jas. iii. 17), over all earthly things (Prov. iv. 7). 3. The 
reality of answers to prayer. 4. The profit of sometimes limiting our request! at God's 
throne. — W. 

Vers. 13 — 17. — The glory of Solomon. I. His splendid equipage. "Solomon 
gathered chariots and horsemen." 1. A sign of great prosperity. Mentioned oq this 
account rather than as a proof of the expensiveness and burdensomeness of Solomon's 
reign (Ewald). (1) A discrepancy. Solomon had 40,000 stalls (1 Kings iv. 26; 
Josephus, ' Ant. Jud.,' viii. 2. 4) ; 12,000 horsemen and 1400 chariots (ver. 14 ; oh. 
X. 26); 4000 stalls and 12,000 horsemen (ch. ix. 25). (2) An explanation. The 
stalls probably were 4000, the horsemen 12,000, and the chariots 1400. The Israelitish 
war-chariot, like the Egyptian and Assyrian, may have been two-horsed, in which 
case 1400 chariots would represent 2800 horses. A reserve force of 1200 would bring 
the total number of horses to 4000, which would require 4000 stalls. That the horse- 
men should be 12,000 may be explained by supposing that, as Solomon's equestrian 
equipage was more for show than action, each horse may have had a rider as well as 
each chariot a charioteer ; or the term " horsemen " may have embraced all persons 
connected with the equestrian service. 2. An act of great wickedness. It' the Divine 
prohibition (Deut. xvii. 16) forbade not the actual possession of horses by Israelitish 
kings, it certainly condemned their indefinite multiplication. David respected this 
prohibition (2 Sam. viii. 4; 1 Chron. xviii. 4); Solomon overstepped its limits, coa- 
sequently what Moses had predicted ensued — first Solomoa sought a matrimonial 
alliance with (1 Kings iii. 1), and then the people put their trust in, Egypt (2 Kings 
xviii. 24 ; Isa. xxxi. 1 ; Hos. vii. 11). The glory of princes does not always harmonize 
with the commands of the King of kings. Solomon's horsemen and chariots were 
partly kept in Jerusalem to augment his magnificence, and partly distributed through 
chariot-cities, not so much to overawe the people as for convenience in providing fodder 
for the beasts, and meeting the state necessities of the king. 

II. His ENORMOUS WEALTH. The revenues of Solomon were : 1. Varied. Gold and 
silver and cedar wood ; the precious metals obtained from Ophir, in South Arabia 
(Ewald, Keil, Bahr, etc.), by means of Tarshish ships (cf. the modern expressions, "India- 
men," "Greenlanders"), which sailed from Ezion-geber, on the Red Sea (ch.ix. 21 ; 1 Kings 
ix. 26 — 28), and also from the numerous Eastern potentates — " all the kings of the earth " 
(ch. ix. 23), who came to hear his wisdom, and brought every man his present, vessels 
of silver and vessels of gold (ch. ix. 24) ; the timber purchased from Hiram of Tyre, 
•nd procured from Mount Lebanon (1 Kings v. 10). 2. Abundant. Making large 
allowance for rhetorical exaggeration, the crown wealth in Solomon's days was immense. 
Even if the gold and silver were barely as plentiful as stones (ver. 15), one may judge 
of its quantity by the statements that " the weight of gold that came to Solomon in 
one year was six hundred and sixty-six talents" (equivalent to £3,646,350, estimating 
the gold talent at £5475), besides that brought by chapmen, merchants, foreign kings, 
and provincial governors (ch. ix. 13, 14 ; 1 Kings x. 14, 15). This accumulation of 
wealth in the hands of the crown, more accordant with ancient than with modem 
practice, was likewise then more excusable than now for obvious religious as well as 
political reasons. 

m. His oommebcial bntbbpbise. 1. Sow far it extended. To Egypt. The first 
mention of commercial intercourse between Israel and Egypt, this is also one of the 
earliest indications of contact between these two peoples since the Exodus; and the 
silence of Scripture as to Egypt during the long interval between the Exodus and 
the age of Solomon receives a striking confirmation from the monuments, which show 
" no really great or conquering monarch between Eameses III. and Sheshonk I. " (Raw- 
linson, ' Egypt and Babylon,' p. 328). 2. In what it consisted. Horses and chariots. 
A native of Armenia and Media, whence it was fetched by the Jews to Pales^tine 
(Ezra ii. 66), the horse had been used in Egypt from the earliest times (Gen. xlL 43; 
zlviL 17), and in Solomon's time had been brought by the Egyptians to a high degree of 
tnltivation in respect both of swiftness and courage — two qu^ities highly serviceable for 



OH. n. 1—18.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHEONICLES. 



IT 



war. Hence Solomon naturally turned to the Nile valley when he thought of setting 
up an equestrian establishment. The manufacturing of war-chariots had also engaged 
the attention of the Pharaohs and their people ; and these likewise were imported by 
the Israelitish monarch. Taking the shekel at 3s. 4(2., the price of a horse was £25, 
and of a war-chariot (perhaps with two horses and harness) £100 sterling. 3. By whom 
it was conducted. By the king's merchants, who were so called, not because, as foreign 
borse-dealers settled in the country, they were required to contribute to the king's 
tieasury a portion of their gains in the shape of an income-tax (Bertheau), but because 
they traded for the king (Keil), acting as his agents, going down to Egypt, purchasing 
the animals in droves, and fetching them up for his use. So skilful did these merchants 
show themselves both in judging of the animals and in driving bargains with Egyptian 
dealers, and so far had their fame travelled, that their services were sought for by the 
Hittite and Syrian kings of the day. 

Lessons. 1. The criminality of disobedience. 2. The danger of wealth. 8. The 
advantages of trade and commerce. — ^W. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER n. 



Ver. I. — In the Hebrew text this verse 
Btands as the last of eh. 1. Setermined. 
The Hebrew word is the ordinary word for 
' said ; " as, e.g., in the expression of such 
frequent occurrence, " The Lord said." Its 
natural equivalent here might be, he gave 
the word, or issued the command, for the 
building of a house. For the Name of the 
Lord; better, to the Name of the Lord (1 
Kings V. 3; or in Hebrew text, v. 18; 1 
Chron. xxii. 7). The expression, " the Name 
of the Lord," is of very early date (Gen. iv. 
26). A name named upon a person at the first 
purported as far as possible to mark his 
nature, either its tout ensemble or some sti ik- 
ing attribute of it. Hence the changed 
name, sometimes of Divine interposition 
(Gen. xvil. 5, 15 ; xxxii. 28 ; xxiv. 10) ; 
and much more noticeably the alterations 
of the Divine Name, to serve and to mark the 
progressive development of the revelation of 
God to man (Gen. xvii. 1 ; Exod. iii. 14 ; 
vi. 3 ; xxxiv. 14). So the Name of the Lord 
stands ever — monogram most sacred — for 
himself. A house for his kingdom; i.e. a 
royal residence for Solomon hmiself. This 
is more clearly expressed as, "in his own 
house" (oh. vii. 11; viil. 1; 1 Kings ix. 
10, 15). The description of this house for 
himself is given in 1 Kings vii. 1 — 13. But 
no parallel account exists in Chronicles. 

Ver. 2. — The presence of this verse here, 
and the composition of it, may probably mark 
some corruptness of text or error of copyists, 
as the first two words of it axe the proper 
first two words of ver. 17, and the remainder 
of it shows the proper contents of ver. 18, 
which are not only in other aspects appa- 
rently in the right place there, but also by 
analogy of the parallel (1 Kings v. 15, 16). 
The contents of this verse wUl therefore be 
•onsidered with vers. 17, 18. 

U. CHKONICLES. 



Ver. 3. — Enram. 6o the name is spelt, 
whether of Tyrian king or Tyrian workman, 
in Chronicles, except, perhaps, in 1 Chron. 
xiv. 1. Elsewhere the name is written 
nyn, or sometimes dith, instead of ayfi, 
Gesenlus draws attention to Josephus's 
Greek rendering of the name, Etpm/itos, with 
whom agree Menander, an historian of 
Ephesus, in a fragment respecting Hiram 
(Josephus, 'Contra Apion,' i. 18); and 
Dius, a fragment of whose history of the 
Phoenioians telling of Solomon and Hiram, 
Josephus also is the means of preserving 
(' Contra Apion,' i. 17). The Septuagint 
write the name Xipd/j. ; the Alexandrian, 
XeipdiM ; the Vulgate, Hiram. The name of 
Hiram's father was Abibaal. Hiram him- 
self began to reign, according to Menander, 
when nineteen years of age, reigned thirty- 
four years (b.o. 1 023 — 990), and died therefore 
at the age of fifty-three. Of Hiram and his 
reign in Tyre very little is known beyond 
what is so familiar to us from the Bible 
history of David and Solomon. The city of 
Tyre is among the most ancient. Though it 
is not mentioned in Homer, yet the Sidonians, 
who lived in such close connection with the 
Tyrians, are mentioned there (' Iliad.,' vi. 290 ; 
xxiii. 743 ; ' Odys.,'iv. 84 ; xxii. 424), whilst 
Virgil calls Tyre the Sidonian city, Sidon 
being twenty miles distant (' Ma.' i. 12, 677 ; 
iv. 545). The modern name of Tyre is Sur. 
The city was situate on the east coast of th« 
Mediterranean, in Phoenicia, about seventy- 
four geographical miles north of Joppa, 
while the road distance &om Joppa to 
Jerusalem was thirty-two miles. The first 
Bible mention of Tyre is in Josh. xix. 29. 
After that the more characteristio mentions 
of it are 2 Sam. v. 11, with all its parallels ; 
xxiv. 7 ; Isa. xxiii. 1, ^7 ; Ezek. xxvi. 2 : 
xxvu. 1—8; Zeoh. ix. 2, 3. Tyre was 
celebrated for its working in copper and 
brass, and by no means only for its eedax 

o 



18 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHEONICLES. [ch. ii. 1— la 



and timber felling. The good terms and 
intimacy subsisting between Solomon and 
the King of Tyre speak themselTes rery 

Slainly in Bible history, without leaving us 
ependent on doubtful history, or tales of 
such as Josephus ('Ant.,' viii. 5. § 3 ; 'Contra 
Apisn,' i. 17). For the timber, metals, 
workmen, given by Hiram to Solomon, 
Solomon gave to Hiram corn and oil, ceded 
to him some cities, and the use of some 
ports on the Ked Sea (1 Kiugs ix. 11— 
14, 25—28; x. 21—23. See also 1 Kings 
xtI. 81). As thou didst deal with David 
. . . and didst send him oedars. To this 
vers. 7 and 8 are the apodosis manifestly, 
while vers. 4, 5, 6 should be enclosed in 
brackets. 

Ver. 4. — In the nine headings contained 
in this verse we may consider that the 
leading religious observances and services 
of the nation are summarized. To dedicate 
it. The more frequent rendering of the 
Hebrew word here used is " to hallow," or 
"to sanctify." (1) Sweet incense (see 
Exod. XXX. 1, 6—9, 34—38 ; xxxvii. 25— 
29; Ps. cxli. 2; Eev. v. 8; vi. 9; viii. 3— 
5). This sweet incense, compounded of the 
four ingredients staote, onycha, galbanum, 
pure frankincense, was to be burnt morning 
and evening, at the time of the morning 
and evening sacrifices on the altar made 
of shittim wood, overlaiil with gold, which 
stood in the holy place facing the ark. with 
the table of shewbread on the one hand, and 
the golden candlestick on the other. While 
the act of atonement was set forth by the 
offering of the victim on the brazen altar 
in the outer court, tlie aseeuding, acceptable, 
and accepted prayer and aspiration of the 
congregation were expressed by the sweet 
incense-buming. (2) The continual shew- 
bread (TDn npnpa). The elementary mean- 
ing of the word here rendered "shewbread" 
is "a ranging in order," whether the "order " 
might be, e.g., that of an army in battle 
array (1 Sam. iv. 16; ivii. 8, 22, 48), or of 
the lamps of the holy candlestick (Exod. 
xxxix. 37), or of pilings of wood to be 
burnt on the altar (Judg. vi. 26), or of cakes 
of bread, as presumably here and in some 
parallel passages (Lev. xxiv. 6). For the 
table which was to carry these cakns, see 
Exod. XXV. 23—30; xxxvii. 10— IS; the 
last verse of the former passage speaking 

of the shewbread under the name a^ cn^. 
(For the position of the table, see Exod. 
xxvi. 85.) The word employed in the text 
is first used to express the piles of cakes, 
called is our Authorized Version skewbread 
in Lev xxiv. 6, 7 ; then 1 Ohron. ix. 32 ; 
xxiii. 29; xxviii. 16; as also again in 
oh. xiii. 11 ; xxix. 18 ; and in Koh. x. 33. 
Where in these passages the word on^ is not 



expressed, that it is understood may b« 
gathered from the other passages (Numb. iv. 
7). The bread consisted of twelve 1 arge cakes 
of unleavened dough (Lev. xxiv. 5 — 9), 
ranged in two heaps, and with a golden oup 
of frankincense (Lev. xxiv. 7) to each pile. 
When on every seventh day new cakes were 
substituted, the old ones belonged to the 
priests (Lev. xxiv. 8, 9 ; viii. 31 ; Matt. xiL 
4 ; Exod. xxix. 33, 34). The twelve cake* 
pointed to the twelve tribes. Their size may 
be judged from the statement that ea«h 
cake contained two tenth deals, t.e. two- 
tenths of an ephah, equal to about six 
pounds and a quarter. The exact signifi- 
cance of this bread is not stated in Scripture. 
Fart of it lay plainly in the twelve cakes, 
part, perhaps, in their becoming priest* s food, 
found by the people (Lev. xxiv. 8), after 
having been presented seven days before the 
Lord. Much that is interesting but not 
finally satisfactory on the question may be 
found in the article "Shewbread" in Dr. 
Smith's 'Bible Dictionary,' iii. 1271. Our 
Authorized Version " shewbread " comes 
from Luther's Schauhrode. Wiokliffe, after 
the Vulgate panes propositionis, designates 
it "the loaves of proposition." The New 
Testament has, in Heb. ix. 2, ^ wpoSeais 
tSv &pTav; as also in the Gospels (Matt. xii. 
4 ; Luke vi. 4) ; while the Septuagint has 
aproi iydTTtoi (Exod. xxv. 30), and &pT0i 
Trjs itpoa<popas (1 Kings vii. 48). The ques- 
tion really turns on tlie significance of the 
designation of Exod. xxv. 30 (d'j^ on^). (3) 
The burnt offerings morning and evening. A 
succinct statement of tliese offerings, con- 
stituting the " daily offering," is given 
in Numb, xxviii. 3—8, according to its 
original institution (Exod. xxix. 38 — 42), 
except in the added mention of the " strong 
wine," or strong drink, spoken of in the 
latter part of ver. 7, which had probably 
originated as an incident of the wilderness- 
journey. The morning and evening offering 
were alike, viz. a lamb, a meal offering 
consisting of a tenth of an ephah of flour, 
mixed with the fourth part of a hin of beaten 
oil, and a drink offering consisting of the 
fourth part of a hin of " wine," or of " strong 
drink." (4) The burnt offering on the 
sabbath. The account of this is given in 
Numb, xxviii. 9, 10; and any previous 
institution of it is not recorded. The 
sabbath-day burnt offerings were the double 
of the daily offerings (Ezek. xlvi. 4). (5) 
The burnt offering on the new moons ; see 
Nnmb. xxvii. 11 — 15, where the phrase, 
" tlie beginnings of your months," is what is 
employed, i.e. the first day of each month 
(Lev. X. 10). No previous mention of this 
burnt offering is found. It consisted of two 
bullocks, one ram, seven lambs, (a) with 
meat offering consisting of (htes-tenths of 



OH. n. 1—18.] THE SECOND BOOK OF TEE CHRONICLES. 



19 



Ml epiiah of flour mixed witli oil for each 
bullock; two-tenthsofaneplialioffluurmixed 
with oil for the ram ; one-tenth of an ephah 
of flour similarly mixed for each lamb; (b) 
with drink ofiering, of half a hin of wine 
to each bullock ; the third part of a hin to 
the ram ; and the fourth part of a hin to each 
lamb. A kid of the goats for a sin offering, 
which in fact was offered before the burnt 
offering. And all these were to be addi- 
tional to the continual offering of the day, 
with its drink olfering (see also Isa. Ixvi. 
23 ; Ezek. xlvi. 3 ; Amos viii. 5). (6) The 
burnt offering on the solemn feasts of the 
Lord. These were the thiee great festivals 
of the year — the Passover (Exod. xii. 3 — 20, 
27, 43; Lev. xxiii. 4—8; Deut. xvi. 1—8); 
the t'east of Weehs (Exod. xxiii. 16 ; xxxiv. 
22 ; Lev. xxiii. 15—21 ; Numb, xxviii. 26 ; 
Deut. xvi. 8 — 12); the Feast of Tabernacles 
(Exod. xxiii. 16 ; Iiev. xxiii. 33 — 44; Numb. 
xxix. 13—40 ; Deut. xvi. 13—15). 

Vers. 5, 6. — Tlie contents of these verses 
beg some special observation, in the first 
place, as having been judged by the writer 
of Clironicles matter desirable to be retained 
and put in his work. To find a place 
for this subject amid his careful selection, 
and rejection in many cases, of the matter 
at his command, Is certainly a decision in 
harmony with his general design in this 
work. Then, again, they may be remarked 
on as spoken to another king, who, whether 
it were to be expected or no, was, it is plain, 
a sympathizing hearer of the piety and 
religious resolution of Solomon (ver. 12). 
This is one of the touches of history that 
does not diminish our regret that we do 
not know more of Hiram. He was no 
" proselyte," but he had the sympathy of a 
convert to the religion of the Jew. Perhaps 
the simplest and most natural explanation 
may just be the truest, that Hiram for some 
long time had seen " the rising " kingdom, 
and alike in David and Solomon in turn, 
" the coming " men. He had been more 
calmly and deliberately impressed than the 
Queen of Sheba afterwards, but not less 
effectually and operatively impressed. And 
once more the passage is noteworthy for 
the utterances of Solomon in themselves. As 
parenthetically testifying to a powerful 
man, who could be a powerful helper of 
Solomon's enterprise, his outburst of expla- 
nation, and of ardent religious purpose, and 
of humble godly awe, is natural. But that 
he should call the temple he purposed to 
build " so great," as we cannot put it down 
either to intentional exaggeration or to sober 
historio fact, must the rather be honestly 
let down to ench considerations as these, 
viz. that in point of fact, neither David nor 
Bolomon were " travelled men," as Joseph 
•ud MoBCS, for instance. Their measures of 



greatness were largely dependent upon the 
existing material and furnishing of their 
own little country. And further, Solomon 
speaks of the temple as great very probably 
from the point of view of its simple religious 
uses (note end of ver. 6) as the place of 
sacrifice in especial rather than as a place, 
for instance, of vast congregations and vast 
processions. Then, too, as compared with 
the tabernacle, it would loom "great," 
whether for size or for its enduring material. 
Meantime, though Solomon does indeed use 
the words (ver. 5), " The house ... is great," 
yet, throwing on the words the light of the 
remaining clause of tlie virse, and of 
David's words in 1 Chrun. xxix. 1, it is not 
very certain that the main thing present to 
his mind was not the size, but rather the clia- 
racter of the house, and the solemn character 
of the enterprise itself (1 Kings viii. 27; ch. 
vi. 18). Who am I . . . save only to bum 
sacrifice before him 1 The drift of Solomon'i 
thonght is plain— that nothing would justify 
mortal man, if he purported to build really 
a palace of residence for him whom the 
heaven of heavens could not contain, but 
that he is justified all the more in "not 
giving sleep to his eyes, nor slumber to his 
eyelid*, until he had found out a place " 
(Ps. cxxxii. 4, 5) where man might accept- 
ably, in God's appointed way, draw near to 
him. If "earth draw near to heaven," 
it may be confidently depended on that 
heaven will not be slow to bend down 
its glory, majesty, grace, to earth. 

Ver. 7. — Send me ... a man oanning to 
work, etc. The parenthesis is now ended. 
By comparison of ver. 3, it appears that 
Solomon makes of Hiram's services to David 
his father a very plea why his own requests 
addressed now to Hiram should be granted. 
If we may be guided by the form of the ex- 
pressions used in 1 Chron. xiv. 1 and 2 Sam. 
T. 11, 12, Hiram had in the first instance 
volunteered help to David, and bad not 
waited to be applied to by David. This 
would show UB more clearly the force of 
Solomon's plea. Further, if we note the 
language of 1 Kings v. 1, we may be dis- 
posed to think that it fills a gap in our pre- 
sent connection, and indicates that, though 
Solomon appears here to have had to take 
the initiative, an easy opportunity was 
opened, in the courteous embassy sent him 
in the persons of Hiram's " servants." That 
the king of this most privileged, separate, 
and exclusive people of Israel (and he the 
one who conducted that people to the very 
zenith of their f.ime) should have to apply 
and be permitted to apply to foreign and, so 
to say, heathen help, in so intrinsic a matter 
as the finding of the " cunning " and the 
" skill " of head and hand for the most saered 
and distinctive <-hef cPauvre of the said exi 



20 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. ii. 1— 1& 



elusive nation, is a grand instance of nature 
breaking all trammels, even when most 
diyinely purposed, and a grand token of the 
dawning comity of nations, of free-trade 
under the unlikeliest auspices, and of the 
brotherhood of humanity, never more broadly 
illustrated than when on an international 
scale. Tlie competence of the Phoenicians 
and the people of Sidon and those over wliom 
Hiram immediately reigned in the working 
of the metals, and furthermore in a very 
wide range of other subjects, is well sustained 
by the allusions of very various authoiities 
(already instanced under 1 Chron. xlv. 1, 
and passim ; Homer, ' Iliad,' vi. 289 — 294 ; 
xxiii. 743; 'Odys.,' iv. 614; xv. 415—426; 
Herod., iiu 19; vii. 23, 44, 96; Strabo, xvi. 
2. § 23). The man who was sent is de- 
scribed in vers. 13, 14, infra, as also 1 Kings 
vii. 13, 14. Purple, . . . crimson, . . . bine. It is 
not absolutely necessary to suppose that tlie 
same Hiram, so skilled in working of gold, 
silver, brass, and iron, was the authority sent 
for these matters of various coloured dyes 
for the oloths that would later on be required 
for curtains and other similar purposes in 
the temple. So far, indeed, as the literal 
construction of the words go, this would 
seem to be what is meant, and no doubt may 
have been the case, though unlikely. The 
purple (IJJ:!!*). a Chaldee form of this 
word ((^ijiiis) occurs three times in Dan. v. 
7, 16, 29, and appears in each of those cases 
in our Authorized Version as "scarlet." 
Neither of these words is the word used in 
the numerous passages of Exodus, Numbers, 
Judges, Esther, Proverbs, Canticles, Jere- 
miah, and Ezekiel, nor, indeed, in ver. 13, 
infra and ch. iii. 14. In all these plaees,num- 
bering nearly forty, the word is )3 jnt*. The 
purple was probably obtained from some 
shell-fish on the coast of the Mediterranean. 
The crimson (^<DnD). Gesenius says that this 
was a colour obtained from multitudinous 
insects that tenanted one kind of the ilex 
{fioccus ilicis), and that the word is from the 
Persian language. The Persian kerm, San- 
scrit krimi, Armenian karmir, German car- 
mesin, and our own "crimson," keep the 
same framework of letters or sound to a re- 
markable degree. This word is found only 
here, ver. 13, infra, and oh. iii. 14. The 
crimson of Isa. i. 18 and Jer. iv. 80, and the 
scarlet of some forty places in the Pentateuch 
and other books, come as the rendering of 
the word <}^. The hlue (n^sri). This is the 
same word as is used in some fifty other 

C sages in Exodus, Numbers, and in later 
ks. This colour was obtained from a 
shell-flsh (Hdix ianthina) found in the 
Mediterranean, the shell of which was blue. 
Can skill to grave. The word " to grave " 
is the piel conjugation of the very familiar 



Hebrew verb nnp, " to open." Out of twenty, 
nine times that the verb occurs in some 
part of the piel conjugation, it is trans- 
lated " grave " nine times, " loosed " eleven 
times, "put off" twice, "ungirded" once, 
"opened "four times, "appear" once, and 
"go free" once. Perhaps the "opening" 
the ground with the plough (Isa. xxviii. 
24) leads most easily on to the idea of "en- 
graving." Cunning men whom . . . David 
. . . did provide. As we read in 1 Chron. 
xiii. 15 ; xxviii. 21. 

Ver. 8. — Algum trees, ont of Lebanon. 
These trees are called algum in the three 
passages of Chronicles in which the tree is 
mentioned, viz. here and ch. ix. 10, 11 ; but 
in the three passages of Kings, almug, viz. 1 
Kings X. 11, 12 bis. As we read in 1 Kings 
X. 11 ; ch. ix. 10, 11, that they were exports 
from Ophir, we are arrested by the expres- 
sion, " out of Lebanon," here. If they were 
accessible in Lebanon, it is not on the face 
of it to be supposed they would be ordered 
from such a distance as Ophir. Lastly, there 
is very great diflFerenoe of opinion as to what 
the tree was in itself. In Smith's 'Bible 
Dictionary,' vol. iii. appendix, p. vi., the sub- 
ject is discussed more fully than it can be 
here, and with some of its scientific techni- 
calities. Celsius litis mentioned fifteen woods 
for which the honour has been claimed. 
More modern disputants have suggested five, 
of these the red sandalwood being considered, 
perhaps, the likeliest. So great an authority 
as Dr. Hooker pronounces that it is a ques- 
tion quite undetermined. But inasmuch as 
it is so undetermined, it woidd seem possible 
that, if it were a precious wood of the smaller 
kind (as e.g. ebony with us), and, so to say, of 
shy growth in Lebanon, it might be that it 
did grow in Lebanon, but that a very insuffi- 
cient supply of it there was customarily 
supplemented by the imports received from 
Ophir. Or, again, it may be that the words, 
"out of Lebanon," are simply misplaced (1 
Kings V. 8), and should follow the words, 
"fir trees." The rendering "pillars" in 

1 Kings X. 12 for "rails" or "props" is 
unfortunate, as the other quoted uses of the 
wood for " harps " and " psalteries " would 
all betoken a small as well as very hard 
wood. Lastly, it is a suggestion of Canon 
Bawlinson that, inasmuch as the almug 
wood of Ophir came via Phoenicia and Hiram, 
Solomon may very possibly have been igno- 
rant that " Lebanon " was not its proper 
habitat Thy servants can skill to cat tim- 
ber. This same testimony is expressed yet 
more strongly in 1 Kings v. 6, " There i* 
not any among ns that can skill to hew 
timber like the Sidoniana." Passages like 

2 Kings xix. 23 ; Isa. liv. 8 ; xxxvii. 24, go 
to show that the verb employed in our text 
is rightly rendered « hew," as referring to the 



OH. II. 1—18.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



21 



/eZKnij rather than to any subsequent dressing 
and sawing up of the timber. It is, there- 
fore, rather more a point of interest to learn 
in what the great skill consisted which so 
threw Israelites into the shade, while dis- 
tlnguishing Hiram's servants. It is, of 
course, quite possible that the " hewing," or 
" felling," may be taken to infer all the sub- 
lequent cutting, dressing, etc. Perhaps the 
•kill intended will have included the best 
selection of trees, as well as the neatest and 
quickest laying of them prostrate, and if 
beyond this it included the sawing and 
dressing and shaping of the wood, the room 
for superiority of skill would be ample. My 
servants (so vers. 2, 18 ; 1 Kings v. 15). 

Ver. 10. — Beaten wheat. In 1 Kings v. 
11 the language is " wheat /or food" (n^3D), 
while the Septuagint gives Ka\ luax^'p- ^^ 
our present passage the Septuagint gives els 
Ppd/iara, suggesting at once that our Hebrew 
niSD is an error for rh'sa. The former He- 
brew word is that constantly employed for 
" plagues," " strokes," etc., and it is nowhere 
but in this place rendered " beaten." I will 
give to thy servants, This passage is hard 
to reconcile with what is said in 1 Kings v. 
11; but meantime it is not certain that it 
needs to be reconciled with it. It is possible 
that the two passages are distinct. The con- 
tents of the present verse, at all events, need 
not be credited with any ambiguity, unless, 
indeed, we would wish it more definite, 
whether the expression, " I will give to thy 
servants," may not be quite as correctly un- 
derstood, "for thy servants," t.«. to thee as 
the hire of them. If this be so, it would 
enable us to give at once all the wheat, and 
two hundred out of the 20,000 baths of oil, 
for the consumption, not of the literal work- 
men, but of the royal household. Then this 
granted, the verse, though not identical with 
1 Kings V. 11, is brought into harmony with 
it. Keverting to the statement in 1 Kings 
y., what we learn is that Solomon, in his 
application to Hiram, offers payment for the 
hire of his servants such as he shall appoint 
(ver. 6). Hiram's reply is that he shall 
be satisfied to receive as payment "food 
for hit Jiouiehold " (ver. 9), the amount of 
it and the annual payment of it being spe- 
cified in ver. 11. This is the whole case, 
the discrepanoieB in which are plain, but 
they do not amount to contradictions. The 
appearance that is worn on the face of things 
is that the writer in Chronicles gives what 
came to be the final arrangement as to re- 
muneration, though confessedly it is placed 
as much as the account in Kinga in the 
draft of Solomon's original application to 
Hiram. Measures. These were cors, and 
the oor was the same as tlie homer. From 
a calculation of some doubtfulness, however, 
made under the suggestions of 1 Kings iv. 



22, it has been said that the consamption of 
the royal household of Solomon was above 
32,000 measures. The cor, or homer, was the 
largest of the five dry measures of capacity, 
being equal to 180 cabs, 100 omers, 30 aeahs, 
10 ephahi (see Dr. Smith's ' Bible Dic- 
tionary,' iii. 1741), though what was the 
exact value of any one of these in modem 
measures has only been uncei tainly Rnd very 
approximately arrived at. Baths. The bath 
was the largest of the three liquid measures of 
capacity, being equal to 6 hins and 72 logi 
(see same ' Dictionary,' iii. 1740). 

Ver. 11. — Huram . . . answered ia writ- 
ing. It is impossible to argue with »ny but 
superficial plausibility that Solomon had 
not used writing. In the parallel of Kings 
an identical expression is used for the com- 
munications of both: "Solomon sent to 
H ram " (ver. 2), and " Hiram sent to Solo- 
mon" (ver. 8). The productions of the 
fornis of this correspondence by Josephns 
('Ant. Jud.,' viii. 2) and Eupolemus ('Ap. 
Prsep. Evang.,' ix. 33) are, of course, merely 
mythical. Because the Lord hath loved ia» 
people. This beautiful expiession has paral- 
lels, not only in such passages as ch. ix. 8} 
1 Kings X. 9 ; but In such as Deut. vii. 13 ; 
X. 15; Ps. xlvii. 4; cxv. 12; Jer. xxxi. 3- 
Hos. xi. 1, 4. These were all precursors o* 
the fuller assertion and kinder demonstra- 
tion of God's love repeated so often and in 
such lender connections in the Epistles ol 
the New Testament. This verse and the 
following are also testimony to the indirect 
iLifluences on surrounding nations of tha 
knowledge of the one true Creator-God and 
Euler-God, that was domiciled by special 
revelation and oracle (Eom. iii. 2) with Is- 
rael. Where nations near were bitter foes, 
they often feared Israel's God, whereas now 
they were friends they could summon to 
their lips the highest of the outbursts ol 
praise, not to say of adoration. The very 
noteworthy sympathy of Hiram with Israel 
may have owed something to his personal 
predilection for David (1 Kings v. 1). And 
this again is convincing testimony to the 
worth and usefulness of individual charactei 
which here influenced the destiny of two 
whole nations. 

Ver. 13.— Of Huram my father's. Tha 
words of oh. iv. 11, 16 would invest these 
with suspicion, if nothing that occurred be- 
fore did, as e.g. the parallel passage (1 
Kings vii. 13, 14, 40). There can be no 
doubt from these passages that the name 
Huram of this verse is the name of the work- 
man sent (the lamed prefixed being only the 
objective sign), not the supposed name of 
King Hiram's father, which, as already seen, 
was Abibaal. But the following word trans- 
lated " my father " ('ni«) is less easily ex- 
plained ; ch. iv. 16 (" Ats father ") is quita 



22 



THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [ch. ii. 1—18. 



sufficient to negative the rendering " father ** 
altogether. In our text altogether inappro- 
priate, it may be called there altogether im- 
possible. It has been proposed to render ii 
as a proper name Abi, or aa an affix of 
honour, Ab, equal to " master." Howeyer, 
Gesenius (in' Lexicon,' 6u6i7oc. as* (6), which 
see) furnishes a signification, " chief coun- 
iellor," which (taking it to mcau chief 
counsellor, or as it were expert, chief re- 
feree, or even on\y forpman in such matters 
as might be in question) would well suit all 
She passages, and remove all difficulty. 

Ver. 14. — Son of a woman ... of Dan. 
Both this and the paniUel (1 Kings vii. 14) 
agree as to the father of this very clever 
workman, that he was "a man of Tyre." 
But the parallel gives the mother as a 
woman "of the tribe of Naphtali," and calls 
her a " widow." This must mean, either 
that she was a widow now, or that she was 
a widow when " the man of Tyre " married 
her. If this latter is the correct meaning, 
it has been suggested that, though the 
mother was really a woman of the daughters 
of Dan, yet the husband who, dying, left her 
a widow, was of the tribe of Naphtali, and 
that from tliis she became credited with 
belonging to that tribe. It would seem not 
altogether impossible that it may be intended 
to state, in a delicate way, that this remark- 
ably able man was the natural son of the 
widow in question, " the man of Tyre" (not 
called her husband) being the father. On 
the intermarriages of Danites and Phoeni- 
cians, see Blunt's ' Coincidences,' pt. 2. iv. 
Skilful ... to find out every device. (Fi ir 
the identical phrase, see Exod. xxxi. 4.) The 
present verse, exceeding in definiteness ver. 
7, supra, undoubtedly purports on the face 
of it to ascribe a very wide range of prac- 
tical skill, and not merely general adminis- 
trative and directing skill, to Hiram. Note, 
however, the significance couched in the 
last clauses of both verses. 

Ver. 15. — The contents of this verse can- 
not be supposed to imply that King Hiram 
is eager for the pay to be remembered, but 
•re equivalent to saving promptly that all 
things are ready to begin, and that therefore 
the commissariat must be rendy also. 

Ver. 16. — Joppa. Thia was one of the 



most ancient of towns, and is referred to by 
Pliny ('Hist. Nat.,' T. 13), as "Joppa PhflB- 
nicum, antiquior terrarum inundatione, ut 
ferunt." Its name (is;, " beauty ") is said to 
have been justified by the beautiful groves 
in its neighbourhood. It is mentioned Josh. 
xix. 46 as Japho, where also we learn the 
circumstances under which the Dan tribe 
were possessed of it. It is remarkable that 
it is not mentioned agaiu till our present 
verse, not even in the parallel (1 Kings v. 
9). But it appears again in Ezra iii. 7; 
Jonah i. 3, and in several places in the Acti 
of the Apostles. The modem name of it is 
Jaffa, and it is not reputed as a good port 
now. It was distant from Jerusalem some 
thirty-four miles. The carriage of the tim- 
ber this road-journey is nowhere described 
in detail, nor is the exact spot of the coast 
west of Lebanon mentioned where the flotea 
were made, and thence despatched. 

Ver. 17. — Strangers. By these are meant 
those of the former inhabitants and posses- 
sors of the land, who had not been extirpated 
or driven out. Special regulations respect- 
ing them are recorded in Judg. i.21 — 28,33 — 
36. But these liad largely lapsed till, as it 
appears, David revived them rather trench- 
antly, and David is now followed by Solo- 
mon (ch. viii. 7, 8 ; 1 Kings ix. 20, 21). The 
very much milder enforcement of labour 
upon the Israelites themselves is evident 
from 1 Kings v. 13—16. After the number- 
ing wherewith David his father had num- 
bered them. Of this transaction on the part 
of David we do not possess any absolutely 
distinct statement. But the place of it is 
sufficiently evident, as indicated in 1 Chron. 
xxii. 2. 

Ver. 18. — Three thousand and six hundred. 
Adding to these the 2,'JO of ch. viii. 10, infra, 
the total 3850 of 1 Kings v. 16 is exactly 
reached. That total, however, is reached by 
a somewhat different classification, the divi- 
sion being into 3300 " strangers," and 500 
" chief of the officers " (1 Kings ix. 23). 
The explanation probably is that of the 3600 
" strsnger " overseers, the small proportion 
of 800 were of much higher grade in office 
than the rest, and were ranked by the writer 
in Kings with those overseers (250) of Solo- 
mon, who were probably Israeliteg. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1—18. — This chapter, In a homiletio point of view, invites attention to thote 
methods (or some of them) of religious enterprise which go to ensure success and to inut 
in real usefulness. For we may notice here — 

I. The bepbated becobd, on the part of Solomon, of his eesolution oe 
DETBBMiNATiON. " Solomon determined." The enterprise "of building a house to 
the Name of the Lord " had been set before him. He knew it had been m his father's 
mind. He had heard it in the earnest tones of a father's prayer. He had listened to 
the urgent, loving, proud tones of a father's charge to a son. He had, no doubt, said 



OH. II. 1—18.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 23 

"Yes" with lip and heart. But now after coronation, vision, prayer, and gracioiu 
promise, he takes up the enterprise, and lifts up the responsibility, and makes the 
resolution all his own. 

II. The adding to kesoldtion the commbnoembnt of AcinAL work. Besolutions 
there have often been, and strong ones, determinations alike deliberate and enthusiastic, 
which nevertheless have gone the same way by which, to a proverb, mere good inten- 
tions so very frequently go! Solomon's immediate setting to work is by far the 
aimplest, surest safeguard. He makes the preparations nearest to hand, and that were 
within his own command. He seeks the help of others at a distance, both forecasting 
his own needs for the work, and also drawing upon memories of his father's doings and 
his father's experiences. 

III. Such beginning of aotual wobk as was peoof against that fertile sottroe 
OP failure that comes op stumbling on the threshold. Early disappointments 
go a long way toward disheartenment. And early disappointments originate most 
frequently in one or both of two causes — viz. in letting things drift, go by default, or take 
their own chance ; or, on the other hand, in a busy disorder. Many a promising work 
of a man of good intention has been wrecked in these ways. But here there was order 
in what Solomon did at home, and distinctness and order in what he asked for far 
away from home. And it all told. All helped him and his work to find favour with 
God and man. 

Lastly, TWO great tributaries to success in the moral qualities which 
Solomon exhibits, as shown in : 1. The great respect he has to " the ordinance for 
ever to Israel," which centred in "the house to the Name of the Lord," to be 
dedicated to him, with all its various services (ver. 4). 2. The humble estimate he 
rightly entertains of himself, in all comparison of the work which he had to do, and 
him for whom it was to be done (vers. 5, 6). 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. 1. — The three elements in human purpose. " And Solomon determined to build 
a house," etc. And whence came this purpose of the king's heart? Prom the depths 
of his own soul ; or were there not other elements besides that of his own volition ? 
This determination which is here chronicled as a simple act of one mind was, as most 
of our resolutions are, more complex in its character than it seemed. 

I. The outside human elements — the human element which is outside ourselves. 
In this case David's influence had much, very much to do with it. It was he who 
initiated the work (2 Sam. vii. 2). Moreover, he urged Solomon to proceed with it 
after his own death, and even laid by stores in partial preparation for it (I Chron. xxii. 
11, 14). Solomon, in " determining " to build a house, was really resolving to go on 
with an undertaking which he had already promised his father to carry out. Who 
shall tell how much the thought and the desire of other people influence the choices we 
are making, and consequently the course we are pursuing ? Perhaps it is very seldom 
indeed that we "determine" to enter a new path without owing much to the influence 
of others ; it may be, as in Solomon's case, to the action of a past generation, or it may 
be to that of our contemporaries and companions. Only he who searches the most 
secret chambers of the soul can tell how much of our best resolves is due to the influence 
of our best friends. 

II. The Divine element. God had already given his distinct sanction and 
encouragement to the proceeding (2 Sam. vii. 13). And this Divine decision, com- 
municated by the Prophet Nathan, must have had a very powerful weight in Solomon'i 
determination. It would seem to be enough, of itself, to decide the matter. How 
much God has to do with our decisions we do not know, but probably more than we 
ordinarily imagine. We often and earnestly ask him to affect our mind and will by 
the enlightenment and influence of his own Spirit ; we believe that he has access to 
us and power over us, and can touch and quicken us at his will. Why should we not 
believe that he is frequently, continually with us, acting upon us, controlling and 
directing us, powerfully and graciously affecting our determinations and our character ? 

III. The individual element. However much in Solomon's decision was due 
to the sources, Divine and human, outside himself, there was room left foi his own 



84 TUB SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. n. 1—18, 



mdividuality. Ee determined to proceed with the work. It was not under compulsion, 
but with the full consent of his own mind, that he began and continued and completed 
the noble task. He gave himself to it, he threw his strength into it ; so much had he to 
do with it that it could be said with truth that " Solomon built him a house." _ When 
all other influences are taken into the account, it still remains true that our actions are 
our own ; that ultimately we determine upon the course which honours or dishonours 
our Ufe, which makes or mars our character, which ensures or spoils our prospects. 

In view of these three elements in human purpose, there is ground for : 1. Oratitud* ; 
for we owe much of our most fruitful actions to the suggestion and counsel of our 
friends. 2. Humility ; for we owe more than we know or think to the inspiration of 
God. 3. A deep sense of responsibility ; for it is in the depths of our own natture we are 
determining the complexion of our life and the destiny of our soul. — 0. 

Tors. 2, 3, 7— 10.— Human laJxmr. Concerning the work in which we are engaged 
M men of action and production, we have here four suggestions. 

L ThK AMPLITtlDB OP MATEBIAIi WITH WHICH GOD HAS SUPPLIED US. Wc bave 

mention made (ver. 7) of different metals — gold, silver, brass, iron ; and this enumera- 
tion is far from being exhaustive. We have reference (ver. 8) to different trees ; and 
these are only a reminder of all the kinds of timber to be had in the forests of the earth. 
We have a statement of articles of food (ver. 10), representing various industries ; and 
these again are only suggestive of a large number at our command. The Divine Author 
of our nature and Builder of our home has given us many tastes and cravings ; he has 
also supplied us with the most ample material on which our skill and our labour can 
be expended, so that all our wants and even our wishes may be supplied. ' 

II. The necessity, divinely oedeebd, for coedial co-operation. Solomon had 
to negotiate with Hiram ; the skilled labour of Israel had to be supplemented with the 
more skilled labour of Tyre (vers. 3, 8). The servants of one sovereign had to " be with," 
to co-operate with, those of another, if the house was to be built. And not only had 
land to work with land, but citizen with citizen, according to individual culture ; some 
had to " bear burdens," others to " hew trees," others to overlook both of these work- 
men (ver. 2). As one. country produces valuable commodities which another lacks ; 
and as one man has a natural faculty of which another is devoid ; as the interchange 
of products and of industries is spreading comfort and acquisition ; — we are learning that 
God has so made this earth and so constituted us, his children, that we may work 
together, and make one another inheritors of the results of our thought and toil. Com- 
merce is not more human in its outworking than it is Divine in its origin. 

m. The gradations in labour. To overlook implies more trained intelligence 
than manual labour itself involves (ver. 2). And men " cunning to work " and men 
that had skill to hew (ver. 8) were superior workmen to those that did the labour of 
carrying. Work has its gradations ; it ascends in rank as it involves natural intelli- 
gence and sagacity, long and careful training, faithfulness and trustworthiness. 

IV. Thb advantage op integrity to those who comb aftbe us. (Ver. 3.) Solomon 
invited Hiram to treat with him " as thou didst deal with David my father." And 
Hiram responded; for we read (1 Kings v. 1), "Hiram was ever a lover of David." 
He found that he could trust the King of Israel — ^that with him piety meant truthful- 
ness and equity. Thus David's integrity made the path of Solomon smooth and easy ; 
it perhaps contributed as much to the work as the various materials he had so carefully 
stored up for his son. It is impossible to reckon how much thoroughness and upright- 
ness in our labour have to do with our own real success, and how much they do for 
those who come after us. In this way one generation truly serves another. 

V. The ewhteous claim op labour to a poll bbcompense. (Ver. 10.) " The 
workman is worthy of his hire" (see Jas. v. 4). 

VI. Oue duty to do oub best. " The house shall be wonderfully great " (ver. 9). 
Solomon meant to make it worthy, not only of himself and his kingdom, but even, as 
fer as that might be, of the Lord for whom it was to be erected. It should be con- 
structed of the best materials and with the greatest skill he could command. 1. What 
we do in the direct service of God has a distinct claim on our highest faculties, on our 
largest resources. What we do for Christ should be done at the full height of our 
capacity and opportunity. In his worship and service we should be at our very best. 



OB. n. 1—18.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. JU 

2. All work, ai rendered unto Gk>d, ghould bs done faithfully and heartily. Into all 
the labour of our hands we should put our mind and our strength, because every- 
thing M done in the presence of the Master, and shotdd be done with a view to hia 
approvaL — 0. 

Vers, 4 — 6. — ITie acceptablenesa of the imperfect. The letter which Solomon wrot« 
to Hiram was one that contained more than a business proposal; it was something 
beyond the opening of a negotiation ; it included some valuable truth which not only 
may have benefited the then King of Tyre, but may be of real value to us at this date 
and this distance. For it intimated — 

I. Thk inestimable advantage of the bevealbd belioion ovbb contbmpobabt 
FAITHS. '* Great is our God above all gods" (ver. 6). Great indeed; for he was 
the living God, and they were only imaginary ; he was the holy God, and they were (by 
■upposition) unholy ; he was just and kind, and they were capricious and cruel ; he 
could and did hear and answer prayer, and they were powerless and helpless. Who 
could estimate the priceless advantage to the nation of having for the object of its 
worship the Lord God of Israel ? It makes a dififerenoe which is simply incalculable 
to have as the Object of our worship a Being who is worthy of our devotion. What, 
then, is it to us to be worshipping the Divine Father revealed to us in and by Jesus 
Christ ? 1. It is to be seeking the favour of that Living One who holds us all in his 
mighty hand, and is able and is willing to confer upon us inestimable blessings, even 
unto eternal life. 2. It is to be drawing nigh unto, and to be drawn spiritually towards, 
the Holy One ; it is thus to be attracted in spirit, in sympathy, in character, in life, 
toward the Perfect One; it is to be gradually, unconsciously, eiiectually transformed 
into his likeness. For whom we reverence, we follow ; whom we love, we resemble ; 
and just as we worship the Divine Father and love the Divine Friend, so shall we 
breathe his spirit and bear his likeness. 

II. The impbepectness op the material and of the human, in view op thk 
Divine qebatness. 1. The material. " Who is able to build him a house, seeing the 
heaven . . . cannot contain him ? " The temple of a heathen dsity may be supposed by 
its ignorant devotees to be its residence ; it certainly contains its visible image, the 
idol. But the temple Solomon was about to build could in no true sense become the 
residence of Jehovati. No building could contain him ; " the heaven of heavens " could 
not do that : how much less an earthly house 1 There is no cathedral, no Christian 
sanctuary, that can be properly thought of as the residence or earthly home of Jesus 
Christ. The heaven where he dwells cannot contain Mm. 5J. The human. " Who am 
I, that I should build," etc? To be the principal agent in the construction of the one 
building with which the Name of Jehovah would be associated, and the only building 
where there would be (1) an abiding manifestation of his presence, and (2) the opportu- 
nity of approaching him by sacrifice, — this was an honour of which Solomon naturally 
and becomingly considered himself unworthy. And who among the holiest and the 
wisest of men, who among the most faithful servants of Jesus Christ, can consider him- 
self worthy to be (1) the spokesman of his brethren in drawing nigh to God in prayer; 
(2) the messenger to make known the love and grace of God as manifested in Jesus 
Christ his Son ; (3) the workman in even the humblest corner of that sacred and blessed 
field — the field of Christian service ? To be thus engaged for the Father of spirits, for the 
Redeemer of mankind, should be considered by us all an honour of which we are wholly 
unworthy. 

III. The acceptablbness op impbepect service. 1. Though the temple at Jerusalem 
could not contain God, yet it could render various valuable services (vers. 4, 6). It 
was a place where God met with and manifested himself to the people ; where they 
drew consciously near to him, and realized that he was very near to them ; where 
they communed with him and rejoiced before him ; where they sought and found forgive- 
ness of their sins ; where they made grateful acknowledgment of their indebtedness to 
him for all blessings; and where they dedicated themselves anew to his service. Imper- 
fect as it was, and utterly unable to constitute the residence of Deity, it yet answered 
most useful ends. 2. And thus wi h us who are the servants of God. Imperfection 
marks our character and our work ; we are not worthy to " build him a house," nor to 
do anything, however humble, in his name and cause. Yet God will bless us, Christ 



26 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. ii. 1— 1& 

will own and honour ns as his servants, if only we are loyal and true. " To the wicked 
(Jod says, What hast thou to do to declare my statutes ? " etc. (Ps. 1. 16). But to the 
upright in heart (including the penitent, see Ps. li. 12, 13), to all those who have 
returned in spirit to him, and who sincerely desire to extend his reign over the hearts 
of men, he is ever saying, " Gro, work in my vineyard ; go, build up my kingdom ; go, 
gather my erring sons and daughters, and lead them home to my heart." — 0. 

Ver. 11. — God's care/or fht country. "Because the Lord hath loved his people, he 
hath made thee king over them." We reach our subject by the remembrance of — 

I. God's attitude towabd Israel in bespect op the mokaechy up to SoLOMON'g 
TIME. It has to be considered : 1, That for a visible human sovereignty God held the people 
themselves responsible. He did not impose it ; nor did he suggest it ; nor did he desire 
it ; on the other hand, by the mouth of his servant Samuel, he strongly dissuaded from 
it (gee 1 Sam. viii.). 2. That, granting their request, God gave them a king on their own 
chosen principle. They demanded a sovereign they could see and hear, one that would 
be a king " after the flesh ; " and on this fleshly and material principle God selected one 
that had hodily advantages (see 1 Sam. x, 23, 24). 3. That, when Saul failed, God had 
pity upon them, and gave them a njan after his own choice — a man who had, truly, 
some serious defects — as who had not? — but who, by the fascination of his bearing, by 
the courage and capacity of his leadership, by his unswerving loyalty to hLs God, 
bound the nation together, overcame its numerous enemies, extended its borders, and 
held it fast to the service of Jehovah. And now God had given to the people David'i 
son, Solomon. And we look at — 

II. God's gift to Israel in peeferriko Solomon to the throne. It was a Divine 
appointment, that made for : 1. National piety. Solomon regarded as the great act of 
his reign the " building a house for the Name of the Lord." And the erection of the 
temple and the subsequent arrangement of its services did much to bind the people, not 
of Jerusalem only but of the entire kingdom, to the worship of Jehovah. It promoted 
national piety by securing the adherence of the people to the service of the true and 
living God. And this piety meant more than worship ; it meant purity alsn, a sound 
morality. For no man could be an acceptable worshipper of Jehovah who did not 
renounce iniquity and seek after righteousness and blamelessness of life. 2. National 
peace. Solomon, true to his name, was a man of peace. The nation had known enough 
of war under David j it required peace, and this Solomon gave it. In this matter 
almost everything then and there depended upon the character and spirit of the 
monarch. A war-like king would create national hostilities; a peace-loving king 
ensured national rest from strife. We know what war means; it may mean glory, 
enlargement, enrichment; it must mean cruelty, passion, pain, death, desolation in 
heart and home ; it must mean an arrest laid upon national industry and enterprise. 
But by the promotion of Solomon God was providing for : 3. National industry. During 
his reign a great stimulus was given to the industrial arts and to the commerce of the 
country. Israel opened its eyes to see what it had not had any glimpse of before, and 
an immense stride was taken in the path of civilization and production. 

Thus God cared for the country which he had especially made his own. Thus he 
cares for all countries, when he raises up men that seek the piety (and with that the 
morality), the peace, the industry, of the people. Thus shall we be truly working with 
God when we live to promote these great causes. It is in these things that a nation 
Inds its real prosperity ; and he is the faithful citizen of his native land who throws 
his influence, in every open way, into these scales ; it is he who truly loves and serres 
his country. — C. 

Vers. 13 — 18. — Lessons from the labourers. The interesting particulars we have 
of the labours of building the temple give us a variety of suggestions. 

I. The value of a wise interminqlino. 1. Of Hood. The principal architect 
and engineer supplied by King Hiram was a man of mixed blood ; his father was a 
man of Tyre, but his mother was a Jewess (see 1 Kings vii. 14), and he appears to have 
been a man of unusual ability. The mixture of races is proved to be of a very distinct 
advantage, and we may be very thankful that the discords and contentions of our early 
history resulted in the mingling ot the virtues of Saxon, Celt, and Roman in the English 



OK.n. 1— 18.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 27 

( OUT own time. 2. Of labour. " I have sent a cunning man ... to find out every 
%vice . . . with thy cunning men " (ver. 14). International exchange and co-opera> 
Jon are of immenee value, and will prove to he more and more so as the nations open 
«Beir doon, and all peoples meet and mingle together (see homily on vers. 2, 3, 7 — 10). 
n. A BENEFICENT APPEAL TO ouB iNTELLioENOB. (Vcf. 14.) In the Variety of 
material with which God has supplied us we find a striking instance of his creative 
kindness. It is conceivable that he might have placed us on a planet which had little 
elemental variety, and which did not therefore admit of many combinations. But on 
this earth there is practically no limit to the variety of productions, by the putting 
forth of our observation, ingenuity, and skill. Herein we have very much more, and 
very much better, than a provision for our comforts ; we have an effective appeal to 
our intelligence, a constant development of our intellectual powers, an elevation of our 
manhood. It is a rich and noble home, furnished with everything that meets the 
needs of our complex nature, in which our heavenly Father has placed us. 

III. The powbb we possess over the elements of natube. (Ver. 16.) At that 
time and in that country men had learned to hew down the tall trees, to cut and carve 
them into what size and shape they liked, to carry them across the land, and to employ 
the sea as a highway. " We will bring it to thee in flotes by sea." The sea, with its 
depth and breadth, with its swelling billows and its fearful storms, may well have been 
regarded at first as an impassable barrier between land and land, as a decisive limit put 
upon our progress. But we have made it a common highway on which to travel, by 
which to transport our treasures, and we can map our route and calculate our time 
with nearly as much regularity as on the still and solid land. Indeed, we can rule the 
elements of nature much more readily and constantly than we can govern the forces 
within our own breast. These too often balBe our skill and defeat our purpose. Our 
greatest difficulty and truest triumph is in turning to good account the elements of our 
own human nature. 

IV. An unconscious anticipation op gospel breadth. (Vers. 17, 18.) Solomon 
employed " the strangers " to do the triple work, here specified, in the temple-building. 
Moreover, he had recourse to the King of Tyre and to his " cunning workmen." So that 
we have Gentiles as well as Jews engaged in this work which we may regard as the 
work of the Lord. Between that event and the present time there was to come a long 
period of exclusiveness which manifested itself in most ungracious forms in the days of 
our Lord. But this co-operation of those without and those within the sacred pale is 
predictive of the glorious breadth of these later times, when, in Christ Jesus, there is 
neither Jew nor Gentile, barbarian nor Scythian, bond nor free. There is an absolutely 
open way to the kingdom of God, and an equally open gate into the broad field of holy 
usefulness. — 0. 

Vers. 1 — 10. — A great project : the huilding of a temple. I. The pbojeot con- 
ceived. (Ver. 1.) A [jroject : 1. Not new, hut old. Not taken up by Solomon for the 
first time, hut one his father David had years before meditated, though not permitted to 
execute it, because he had been "a man of war, and had shed hlood"(lChron. xxviii. 3). 
2. Not tetf-devised, hut delegated. Not assumed out of vanity or from purely political 
motives, but handed down to him in circumstances of great solemnity by his royal sire 
(1 Chron. xxviii. 1—10). 3. Not sinful, hut approved. Not " proceeding from the 
Bight of the temple service of the Phoenicians and Philistines and of their ostentatious 
cultus" (Duncker), but commanded by Jehovah, who indicated his wish that it 
should be carried forward to completion by David's son (2 Sam. vii. 13). 4. Not 
subordinate, hut principal. Not after he had built a palace for himself, " a house for 
his kingdom," but before, so giving God and religion the chief and foremost place in 
the thoughts of his mind and the activities of his reign. " Seek ye first the kingdom 
of God," etc. (Matt. vi. 33). 

II. The project announced. (Ver. 4.) 1. The person informed. Huram, 
Hiram (1 Kings v. 1), Hirom (1 Kings vii. 40) — probably the original (Schrader), 
eipufiios (Josephus, ' Contra Apion,' i. 17), Hirummu (Assyrian), Chirom (Phoenician). 
The name, probably equivalent to Achirom, signifies " Brother or Friend of the high- 
ness " (s.c. of Baal). Wtiether this was David's fi iend (1 Chron. xiv. 1), who had nego- 
tiations with him prior to the building of his palace (2 Sam. v. 11), and therefore 



28 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. n. 1—18. 

before the birth of Solomon (2 Sam. xi. 2), is disputed, chiefly on the ground that he 
must then have reigned considerably over forty years, whereas Menander (Josephus, 
' Contra Apion,' i. 18) assigns to Solomon's friend a reign of thirty-four years. But a reign 
of fifty years was not impossible either then (Uzziah, ch. xxvi. 3 ; Manasseh, ch. xxxiii. 1) 
or now (George III., Queen Victoria). The proposal to regard Solomon's friend as the son 
of David's (Thenius, Bertheau) is exposed to the difficulty that the father of Solomon's 
friend was Abibaal (Josephus) — a difficulty which may be removed by supposing that 
Abibaal was a surname of the first Hiram, or that the first Hiram was the father of 
Abibaal. There is, however, no sufficient ground for challenging the identity of the 
two Hirams ; and upon the whole it is as likely that Menander and Josephus have 
erred as to the length of Hiram's reign, as it is that the Hebrew writers have confounded 
father and son. 2. The communication made. "I build an house," etc. Ancient 
kings were wont to erect temples to their tutelar divinities. Urukh of Chaldea founded 
temples — of the moon at TJr, of the sun at Larsa, of Venus at Ereoh (' Eeoords,' iii. 9) ; 
while the magnificent shrines of Memphis, Thebes (Karnack), and Edfou were con- 
structed by Egyptian Pharaohs "for the houses of the gods whose existence is for 
endless years " (Brugsch, ' Egypt under the Pharaohs,' i. 322). These may be used to 
illustrate the nature of Solomon's project. 

III. The project explained. (Vers. 5, 6.) Solomon's temple was to he " great," 
" exceeding magnifical, of fame and of glory throughout all countries " (1 Chron. xxii. 
5). A resplendent edifice, designed : 1. For a lofty purpose. For the honour of a great 
God. (1) An absolutely supreme God : " Great is our God above all gods " (Deut. iv. 
39 ; 1 Kings viii. 23). (2) An infinitely exalted God : " The heaven of heavens cannot 
contain him " (1 Kings viii. 27 ; Jer. xxiii. 24). (3) A personally accepted God. 
Solomon called him " the Lord my God " (Bxod. ix. 3). Theoretical theism is value- 
less; theismjike David's (Ps. Ixiii. 1) alone profitable. (4) A profoundly revered 
God : " Who is able to build him a house ? " " Who am I, that I should build him 
a house ? " God should be feared by all who approach him (Deut. xxviii. 58 ; Josh, 
xxiv. 14 ; 2 Kings xvii. 36 ; Ps. xxxiii. 8 ; Matt. x. 28 ; 2 Cor. vii. 1 ; Heb. xii. 28). 
Man never knows his own littleness till he examines himself in the light of God's 
greatness. (6) A truly national God : " The Lord our God." Solomon conjoined his 
people with himself. Christ taught his disciples to pray, " Our Father " (Matt. vi. 9). 
2. For a noble use. Not to contain this immeasurably great and glorious Divinity (ch. vi. 
18), seeing that Jehovah dwelleth not in temples made with hands (Isa. Ixvi. 1 ; Acts 
vii. 47), but inhabiteth eternity (Isa. Ivii. 15), and fiileth heaven and earth with his 
presence (Jer. xxiii. 24); but to be a visible centre for his worship, to be dedicated to 
him for the burning before him of sweet incense, etc. Hitherto the people had sacri- 
ficed in local sanctuaries (1 Kings iii. 2), Solomon himself being no exception (ch. i. 3 ; 
1 Kings iii. 4) ; henceforth the nation's sacrificial worship was to be concentrated in 
the capital and to circulate round the temple. The different parts of that worship here 
mentioned are those specified by Moses in connection with the tabernacle. (1) The 
burning of sweet incense (Exod. xxv. 6), which Aaron was directed to do every morning 
and evening in the holy place (Exod. xxx. 7) ; (2) the presentation of the shewbread 
(Exod. xxv. 30) ; and (3) the offering day by day continually of the burnt offering 
(Exod. xxix. 39). The first symbolized the adorations presented to Jehovah by his 
worshippers (Rev. v. 18) ; the second, the spiritual sustenance Jehovah provided for 
his servants (Ps. cxxxii. 15) ; the third, the self-consecration expected by Jehovah of 
all whose sins were covered by sacrificial blood (Rom. xii. 1). The assertion that in 
the first temple the evening offering was purely cereal (Robertson Smith, ' The Old 
Testament in the Jewish Church,' p. 421) is without foundation (Thenius, on 2 Kings 
ivi. 15). ' 

IV. The pkojeot prepared for. (Vers. 2, 18.) 1. The furnishing of workmen. 
(Vers. 2, 18.) (1) Their number : 70,000 burden-bearers or labourers, 80,000 timber- 
hewers or skilled woodmen, 3600 overseers or superintendents, in all 153,600, quite an 
army of workmen. The discrepancy between 1 Kings v. 16 and this account vanishes 
by observing that to the 3300 overseers in Kings falls to be added 550 chief officers 
(1 Kings ix. 53), while the 3600 of Chronicles require to be supplemented by 250 chief 
officers (ch. viii. 10), thus making both totals equal 3850. A gang of 100,000 men, 
changed every three months, laboured for ten years in building a causeway along 



CH. II. 1—18.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 29 

which to convey the stones for Cheops' pyramid ; and seven millions more men were 
needed to build the pyramid itself (Birch, ' Egypt/ p. 35 ; Budge, ' The Dwellers on 
the Nile,' p. 58). (2) Their orders — laboureis, wood-cutters, overseers, chief officen. 
So society on a larger scale is organized. The principle of division of labour i» of end- 
less application. 

" Bo work the honey bees ; 
Creatnies that by a role in nature teaflh 
The act of order to a peopled kingdom." 

(' King Henry V.,' act 1. so. J.) 
(3) Their station: "strangers in the land" (ver. 17); i.e. descendants of the unexter- 
minated Canaanites (ch. viii. 7, 8; 1 Kings ix. 20—22). These had David also 
appointed to be stone-cutters (1 Chron. xxii. 2). 2. The securing of materiaU. In 
addition to the stores gathered and givea by his lately deceased father — gold, silver, 
brass, iron, woo(i, precious stones (1 Chron. xxix. 2—5) — Solomon required cedar, fir, 
and algum trees out of Lebanon. Povmd nowhere in Palestine except Lebanon, the 
cedar was a rapidly growing, high-reaching, widespreading, and long-living tree, 
whose beautiful white wood was much prized for architectural purposes (ch. iii. 6 ; 1 
Kings vi. 15 ; Jer. xxii. 14). The fir, often mentioned in connectiou with the cedar 
risa. xiv. 8 ; xxxvii. 24), was a " choice " and " goodly " tree, whose wood was used 
for building ships (Ezek. vii. 5) and making musical instruments (2 Sam. vi. 5), and 
was now to be employed for flooring, ceiling, and doors in the temple (1 Kings vi. 15, 
34). The algum, probably the red sandalwood, fetched along with gold and precious 
stones from Ophir (ch. ix. 10, 11 ; 1 Kings i. 11) by Solomon's and Hiram's fleets, and 
here inaccurately said to have grown in Lebanon, was used by Solomon for making 
pillars for the temple and the palace, as well as harps and psalteries for singers. These 
different sorts of timber accordingly Solomon sent for from Hiram, his father's friend 
and his own (ver. 3). 3. The obtaining of a skilled artificer. This also he courteously 
solicited from Hiram, whose subjects were the " artists " of the day (see homily on 
' The two Hirams '). Both requests were accompanied with a promise of generous 
support to the workmen and the artist (ver. 10), and both were frankly honoured. 

Learn: 1. The highest glory of a king (or private person) is to seek the glory of 
God (John viii. 50). 2. Great undertakings, especially in religion and the Church, 
should be gone about with deliberation, and only after due preparation (Luke xiv. 28), 

3. The meanest service in connection with God's house is honourable (Ps. Ixxxiv. 10). 

4. The value of friendship (Prov. xxvii. 10). 5. Humble thoughts of self the best 
preparation for acceptable service of God (2 Cor. iii. 5). 6. The talents of unbelievers 
may be legitimately employed in the service of the Church, seeing that " gifts " are 
from God, no less than " graces " (Job xxxii. 8). 7. The Church should honourably 
requite those who aid in her undertakings, since "the labourer is worthy of his hire" 
(Luke X. 7 ; 1 Tim. v. 18).— W. 

Ver. 9. — " A wonderjul great house." L Its buildeb. The temple of Solomon was 
constructed by Solomon the son of David ; the temple of the Christian Church by Jesus, 
David's Son, but also David's Lord, the Only-Begotten of the Father, whose name it 
« Wonderful, Counsellor, the Mighty God, the Prince of Peace " (Isa. xiv. 13 ; Heb» 
iii. 3). 

II. Itb hatebialb. The temple of Solomon was fashioned out of gold, silver, 
precious stones, etc. ; the temple of the Christian Church out of lively stones, or 
believing and regenerated souls (1 Pet. ii. 5). 

III. Its 8ITB. The temple of Solomon stood on Mount Moriah, where Jehovah had 
appeared to Abraham and afterwards to David, its walla reaching down to and rising 
up from the solid rock ; the temple of the Christian Church rests upon the immovable 
rock of Christ's Person (Matt. xvi. 18 ; Bph. ii. 20), in whom the clearest and fullest 
revelation of the Father has been made to men (John i. 18 ; xiv. 9). 

IV. Its ooNSTBiroTiON. The temple of Solomon had two apartments — a holy place 
and a holy of holies, the former for the worshipping priests, the latter for the wor- 
shipped God; the Church of Jesus Christ has only one chamber, the separating veil 
being done away, in fact rent in twain, by the sacrifice of the cross (Matt, xxvii, 61 ; 
Heb. X. 20). 



30 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [en. ii. 1—18. 

V. Its adornments. The temple of Solomon was radiant with gold and silver and 
daoorations of carved work ; the Church of Jesus Christ is rendered beautiful by the 
inward graces of the Spirit (Ps. cilix. 4 ; 1 Pet. iii. 3). 

VI. Its peopobtions. The temple of Solomon was, after all, but a small structure ; 
the temple of the Christiaa Church is a spacious house of many mansions (John 
liT. 1). 

VII. Its uses. The temple of Solomon was designed as a habitation for Jehovah's 
■ymbolic presence; the Church of Jesus Christ is a habitation for Jehovah himself 
through the Spirit (Bph. ii. 22). 

Learn : 1. The glory of the Christian Church. 2. The superiority of the gospel di»- 
pensation. 3. The nobler privilege of New Testament believers. — W. 

Vers. 11 — 15. — Tht two Hirams. I. Hiram the kino. 1. Eii kingdom. Phoe- 
nicia. Variously explained as " the land of palms," " the land of purple-dyeing," " the 
land of the brown-red," with reference to the colour of the skin of its inhabitants, 
Phoenicia in Solomon's time was bounded on the west by the Mediterranean, on the 
east by Lebanon, on the south by the kingdom of Israel, while towards the north the 
limit was uncertain, though usually fixed about Arvad, thus making in all a territory • 
hundred and twenty miles long and twenty miles broad. " It is a liberal estimate for 
the area to reckon it at four thousand square miles, which is less than that of at Uast 
one English county " (Rawlinson, ' Phoenicia : Story of the Nations,' p. 2). Well 
watered by streams from Lebanon, the country was extremely fertile. In addition to 
cedars on the heights of Lebanon, fruit trees and vines clothed its slopes, whilst the 
valleys yielded an abundance of palms, fat pasture, garden produce, and corn. Silicious 
earth for making glass was found upon the coast, which also furnished the purple shells 
necessary for dyeing. Iron and probably copper were obtained at Sarepta and else- 
where (Riehm, ' Handworterbuch,' art. " Phoenicien "). 2. His capital. Tyre — in 
Hebrew Sor, in Assyrian Surru, in Old Latin Sarra. The city is supposed to have been 
so called because of its having been built — at least the insular part of it — upon a rock. 
Most likely younger than Sidon, it was yet a city " whose antiquity was of ancient 
days " (Jer. xxiii. 7). Founded two hundred and forty years before the building of 
Solomon's temple (Josephus, ' Ant.,' viii. 3. 1), it was greatly celebrated for its natural 
and artificial splendour (Ezek. xxvii. 3). Planted in a pleasant place (Hos. ix. 13), it 
was afterwards compared to " a virgin bathing in the sea, a Tartessus ship swimming 
upon the ocean, an island on shore, and a city in the sea " (Kitto's ' Cyclopaedia,' art. 
" Tyre "). 3. Ms subjects. The men of Tyre. Renowned as wood-cutters and artists, 
" skilful to work in gold, and in silver, in brass, in iron, in stone, and in timber, in 
purple, in blue, and in fine linen, and in crimson," they were likewise merchants who 
traded with all parts of the then known world (Ezek. xxvii. 1 — 36). As to physical 
characteristics, on the whole " the Phoenicians probably, both in form and feature, very 
much resembled the Jews who were their near neighbours, and who occasionally inter, 
married with them (1 Kings xi. 1 ; xvi. 31 ; ch. ii. 14)," while as to moral characteris- 
tics, they .shared those of the Western Semites generally — " first, pliability combined with 
iron fixedness of purpose ; secondly, depth and force; thirdly, a yearning for dreamy 
ease, together with a capacity for the hardest work; fourthly, a love of abstract 
thought ; and fifthly, religiousness, together with an intensely spiritual conception of 
the Deity " (Rawlinson, ' Phoenicia,' p. 25). 4. Eis history. A son of Abibaal, the first 
King of Tyre, and a contemporary as well as friend of both David and Solomon (see 
preceding homily), he was clearly a man of culture. He could write, and in that 
accomplishment many later kings, even in Christian times and in our own land, hare 
been deficient. Withred, King of Kent, a.d. 700, thus concluded a charter to secure 
the liberties of the Church : " All the above dictated by myself I have confirmed, and, 
because I cannot write, I have with mine own hand expressed this by putting the sign 
of the holy cross + " (Adam Clarke). Writing, however, had been introduced into 
Phoenicia from Egypt long before the days of Hiram (Rawlinson, ' Phoenicia,' p. 328). 
Whether copies of the epistolary correspondence of Hiram and Solomon were preserved 
in " the public records of Tyre " (Josephus, ' Ant.,' viii. 2. 8) may be doubtful, but n* 
ground exists for challenging the accuracy of the biblical account that both Solomof 
and Hiram could write. 6. Eis character. Originally a worshipper of Baal, and a 



OH. m. 1—17.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



81 



restorer of the temple of the sun-god, he appears to have become an enlightened and 
sincere follower of Jehovah, whom he recognizes as not merely the national Divinity of 
Israel, bat also as the Maker of heaven and earth (ver. 12). That he was courteous 
and kind, his intercourse both with David and Solomon attests. That he was a shrewd 
mui of business, who could look well after his own interest, shines out by no means 
dimly in the hint given to Solomon to forward " the wheat and the barley, the oil and 
the wine, which my lord had spoken of," when he would see to the felling of the timber 
(vers. 15, 16). 

II. HIRA.U THE AKTisT. 1. Eis parentage. The son of a Tyrian brass-worker, and 
of a Danite widow belonging to the tribe of Naphtali (ver. 14 ; 1 Kings viL 14), he 
was probably on this account selected by the aged sovereign as one likely to be accept- 
able to the Hebrew monarch and his people. The discrepancy as to the tribe from 
which Hiram's mother proceeded may be removed by supposing that she was originally 
a Danite maiden, whose first husband belonged to the tribe of Naphtali, and whose 
second was a Tyrian. 2. His profession. A sort of universal genius, who had skill 
and understanding to find out every device put before him — ^like the artist Harmon, of 
whom Homer (' Iliad,' v. 59, 60) says that he " knew how to form with his hands all 
ingenious things." " As 'i'heodore of Samos was an architect, a caster of works in 
bronze, an engraver of signets, and a maker of minute works in the precious metals, 
as Michael Angelo Buonarotti was at once a painter, a sculptor, an architect, and a 
worker in bronze " (Rawlinson, ' Phcenicia,' p. 97), so Hiram of Tyre, like Bezaleel 
(Exod. xxzi. 4), was goldsmith, silversmith, brazier, iron-worker, stone-carver, wood- 
engraver, linen-weaver, all in one. 3. His renown. On account of professional eminence 
the king had dignified him with the title Aii, " my father," which meant " master," in 
the sense that he was both master of his work and master of works for the king, as 
afterwards he is styled Solomon's father (ch. iv. 16), because he manufactured for Bolo- 
men the vessels for the house of the Lord. Compare Joseph's calling himself " a 
fiather, " i.e. a master or manager, " to Pharaoh " (Gen. xlv. 8). 

Learn : 1. The highest office of a king — to promote the material, intellectual, and 
religious prosperity of his people. 2. The proper duty of friendship — to rejoice in the 
welfare, co-operate in the undertakings, and reciprocate the courtesies of others. 3. 
The noblest service of art — to consecrate its genius to the glory of God and the advance- 
ment of true religion. — W. 



EXPOSITION. 



OHAPTEE m. 



Ver. 1. — Uonnt Horiah. This name nnto 
occurs twice in the Old Testament, viz. here 
and Gen. xxii. 2, in which latter reference 
it is alluded to as "the land of Moriah," 
and " one of the mountains " in it is spoken 
of. Whether the name designates the same 
place in each instance is more than doubtful. 
In the present passage the connectioa of the 
place with David is marked. Had it been the 
spot connected with Abraham and the pro- 
posed sacrifice of Isaac, it is at least probable 
that this also would have been emphasized, 
and not here only, but in 2 Sam. xxiv. 17 — 
25 and 1 Chron. xxi. 1 6 — 26 ; but in neither of 
these places is there the remotest suggestion 
of such fame of old belonging to it. Nor 
in later passages of history (e.g. Nehemiah's 
rebuilding, and in the prophets, and the 
New Testament), where the opportunities 
would have been of the most tempting, is 
there fonnd one single suggestion of the kind. 
There are also at fewest two reasons of a 
positive and intrinsic charaoter against 



Solomon's Moriah being Abraham's — ^in that 
this latter was a specially conspicuous height 
(Gen. xxii. 4), and was a secluded and com- 
paratively desolate place, neither of which 
features attach to Solomon's Moriah. Never- 
theless the identity theory is stoutly main- 
tained bynames as good as those of Thomson 
(' Laud and the Book,' p. 475) ; Tristram 
('Land of Israel,' p. 152); Hengstenberg 
(' Genuineness of Pentateuch,' ii. 162, Ey- 
land's tr.) ; Kurtz (' History of 0. 0.,' i. 271) ; 
and Enobel and Ealisoh under the passage 
in Genesis — against Grove (in Dr. Smith's 
'Bible Dictionary'); Stanley ('Sinai and 
Palestine,' p. 251 ; 'Jewish Church.'i. 49) ; De 
Wette, Bleek, and Tisohendorf [see ' Speaker's 
Commentary,' under Gen. xxii. 2]. Though 
there is some uncertainty as to the more exact 
form of the derivation of the name Moriah, it 
seems most probable that the meaning of it 
may be " the sight of Jehovah." Where the 
Lord appeared unto David his father. The 
clause is no doubt elliptical, and probably it 
is not to be mended by the inserting of the 
words, " the Lord," as in our Authorized Ver 



32 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. in. 1—17. 



lion. We do not read anywhere that the Lord 
did then and there appear to David, though 
we do read that "the angel of the Lord" 
appeared to him (2 Sam. xxiv. 16, passim ; 
1 Ohron. xxi. 15, 19. passim). Nor is it 
desirable to force the niph. preterite of the 
verb here, rightly rendered " appeared " or 
" was seen," into " was shown." We should 
prefer to solve the difiBculty occasioned by 
the somewhat unfimshed shape of the 
olanae (or clauses) by reading it in close 
relation to 1 Ohron. xxii. 1. Then the vivid 
impressions that had been made both by 
works and words of the angel of the Lord 
caused David to feel and to say with 
emphasis, " This is the (destined) house of 
the Lord God," etc. In this light our present 
passnge would read, in a parenthetic manner, 
" which (i.e. the house, its Moriah position 
and all) was seen of David ; " or with some- 
what more of ease, " as was seen of David ; " 
»nd the following " in the place," etc., will 
read in a breath with the preceding " began 
to build the house of the Lord at Jerusalem 
... in the place," etc. David had prepared 
(bo 1 Ohron. xxii. 2 — 4). In the threshing- 
floor of Oman (so 2 Pam. xxiv. 18 ; 1 Ohron. 
xxi. 15, 16, 18, 21—28). 

Ver. 2. — In the second day. The word 
" day" as italicized in our Authorized Version 
type is of course not found in the Hebrew 
text. Several manuscripts fail also to show 
the other words of this clause, viz. " In the 
second ; " and that they are probably spurious 
derives confirmation from the fact that 
neither the Arabic nor Syriao Versions, nor 
the Septuagint nor Vulgate translations, 
produce them. In the second month, in tho 
fourth year. Reading the verse, therefore, 
as though it began thus, the most interesting 
but doubtful question of fixing an exact 
chronology for what preceded Solomon's 
reign is opened. In our present text there 
ia little sign of anything to satisfy the 
question; but the parallel, 1 Kings vi. 1, 
offers to do bo, if only again to disappoint 
the more grievously. There we read of " four 
hundred and eighty years " from the Exodus 
to this beginning of the building of Solomon's 
temple. Now, this latter date can be deter- 
mined with tolerable accuracy (viz. as some 
twenty years before B.C. 1000) by travellin°: 
backwards from the date (b.o. 536) of Cyrus 
taking Babylon, and the beginning of the 
return from the Captivity (b.o. 535), making 
•llowance for the seventy years of the Cap- 
tivity, the duration of the line of separate 
Jndah-kings, and the remanet, a large one, of 
the years of Solomon's reign. AH this, how- 
ever, helps nothing at all the period stretching 
from the Exodus to the beginning of the 
bnilding of the temple. And the events of 
this period, strongly corroborated by other 
testimony (see Canon Eawlinson, ' Speaker's 



Commentary,' vol. ii. pp. 575, 576), seem to 
show convincingly that no faith can be 
reposed in the authenticity of the chrono- 
logical statement of our parallel. 

Ver. 3. — Now these. Perhaps the easiest 
predicate to supply to this elliptical clause 
is are the measures, or the cubits. Was 
instructed. The verb is hoph. conjugation 
of id; to " found ; " and the purport of the 
clause is that Solomon caused the founda- 
tions of the building to be laid of such dimen- 
sions by cubit. Ezra iii. 11 and Isa. xxviii. 
16 give the only other occurrences of the 
hopli. conjugation of tliis verb. Cubits 
after the first measure. This possibly means 
the cubit of pre-Captivity times, but at all 
events the Israelites' own ancient cubit — 
perhaps a hand-breadth (Ezek. xliii. 13) 
longer than the present, or seven in place 
of six. The cubit (divided into six palms, 
and a palm into four finger-breadths) was 
the unit of Hebrew lineal measure. It 
stands for the length from the elbow to the 
wrist, the knuckle, or the tip of the longest 
finger. There is still considerable variation 
in opinion as to the number of inches that the 
cubit represents, and considerable perplexity 
as to the two or three different cubits (Deut. 
iii. 11 ; Ezek. xl. 5 ; xliii. 13) mentioned in 
Scripture. One of the latest authorities, 
Conder (' Handbook to the Bible,' 2nd edit., 
pp. 56—59, 371, 386), gives what seem to 
be reasons of almost decisive character for 
regarding the cubit of tho temple buildings 
as one of sixteen inches. The subject ia 
also discussed at length in Smith's ' Bible 
Dictionary,' iii. 1736 — 1739. And the 
writer finally concludes to accept, under 
protest, Thenius's calculations, which give 
the cubit as rather over nineteen inches. 

Yer. 4. — The porch ... an hundred and 

twenty. The " porch •* (d^in, Greek, i 
Tp6i>aos). It is out of the question that the 
porch should be of this height in itself. 
And almost as mnch out of the question 
that, if it could be so, this should be the 
only place to mention it by word or descrip- 
tion. There can be no doubt that the text 
is here slightly corrupt, and perhaps it is a 
further indication of this that, while the 
parallel contains nothing of the height, thii 
place fails (but comp. our ver. 8) to give 
the breadth ("ten cubits"), which the 
parallel does give. The words for " bundled " 
and for " cubit " easily confuse with one 
another. And onr present Hebrew text, 
Dntoy.i n^n, read ontojl nioy,, will make good 
Hebrew syntax, and be in liarmony with the 
Septuagint (Alexandrian), and with the 
Syriao and Arabic Versions. This gives 
the height of the porch as 20 cubits, which 
will be in harmony with the general height 
of the building, which was 30 cubits. Thua 



OH. m. 1—17.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 



33 



far, then, the plan of the temple is plain. 
The house is 60 cubits long, t'.e. 20 for the 
holy of holies (Tap or O't^^p^ Kinp) ; 40 for 

the holy place ('?3'iT); and for breadth 20 
cubits. The porch was in length the same 
as the breadth of the houee, viz. 20 cubits, 
but in breadth it was 10 cubits (1 Kings Ti. 
S) only, whUe its height was 20 cubits, 
against a height of 30 cubits for the "house " 
(1 Kings Ti. 2). Overlaid it within with 
pure gold ; i.e. covered the planks with gold 
leaf, or sometimes with plates of gold (Ovid., 
• L Epp. ex. Pont,' i. 37, 38, 41, 42 ; Herod., i. 
98 ; Polyb., x. 27. § 10). The appreciation, 
as well as bare knowledge, of gold belonged 
to a very early date (Gen. ii. 12). The days 
when it was used in ring or lump (though 
not in coin) for sign of wealth and for 
purposes of exchange, and also for ornament 
(Gen. xiii. 2; xxiv. 22 ; xlii. 21), indicate how 
early were the beginnings of metallurgy as 
regards it, though much more developed 
afterwards (Judg. xvii. 4 ; Prov. xvii. 3 ; Isa. 
xl. 19 ; xlvi. 9) ; and show it in the time of 
David and Solomon no rare art, even tliough 
foreign workmen, for obvious reasons, were 
the most skilful workers with it. There are 
four verbs used to express the idea of over- 
laying, viz. (a) n|iri, in hiph. This occurs 
only in this chapter, vers. 5, 7, 8, 9 ; but in 
niph. Ps. Ixviii. 13 may be compared. 
(&) n^JJ in hiph. This occurs in the present 
sense, though not necessarily staying very 
closely by it; in ch. ix. 15, 16, and its 
parallel (1 Kings x. 16, 17) ; and perhaps in 
2 Sam. i. 24. The meaning of the word, 
however, is evidently so generic that it 
scarcely postulates the rendering " overlay." 
(«) n§? in piel. This occurs in our present 
verse, as also in a multitude of other places 
in Chronicles, Kings, Samuel, and Exodus. 
The radical idea of the verb (kal) is " to be 
bright." (d) "jng in hiph. This occurs only 
once (1 Kings vi. 32). No one of these verbs 
in itself bespeaks certainly of which or what 
kind the overlaying might be, unless it be 
the last, the analogy of which certainly 
points to the sense of a thin spreading. 

Ver. 5. — The greater house ; t.«. the holy 
place. He oeiled. This rendering is wrong. 
The verb is (a), given above (ver. 4). It is 
repeated in the next clause of this very 
verse as " overlaid," as also in vers. 7, 8, 9. 
The generic word " covered " would serve 
all the occasions on which the word occurs 
here. From a comparison of the parallel it 
becomes plain that the meaning is that the 
■tone structure of floor and walls was 
covered over with wood (1 Kings vi. 7, 15, 
18). That wood for the floor was fir (I 
Kings vi. 15), probably also for the walls, 
which musf depend partly on the translation 
of this ver. 1 5. It would seem to say that 

n. CHUONICI.KS. 



(beside the stone) there was an inner 
stratum, both to walls and floor, of cedar 
(reason for which would be easy of conjec- 
ture). But another translation obviates the 
necessity of this inner stratum supposition, 
rendering "from the floor to the top of the 
wall" According to this, while the over- 
laying gold was on cedar for walls and 
ceiling (1 Kings vi. 9), it was on fir for the 
floor, which does not seem what our present 
verse purports, unless, according to the 
suggestion of some, " fir " be interpreted to 
include cedar. Set thereon palm trees and 
chains. These were, of course, camngis. The 
chains, not mentioned in the parallel (1 
Kings vi. 29 ; but see vii. 17), were probably 
wreaths of chain design or pattern. Easier 
modern English would read " pnt thereon." 

Ver. 6. — He garnished. The verb em- 
ployed is (o) of ver. 4, supra (Eev. xxi. 19). 
Freoious stones. The exact manner in 
which these were applied or fixed is not 
stated. What the precious stones were, how- 
ever, need not be doubtful (1 Chron. xxix. 
2 ; the obvious references for which passage, 
Isa. liv. 11, 12 and Eev. xxi. 18 — 21, can- 
not be forgotten. See also Ezek. xxvii. 
16; Cant. v. 14; Lam. iv. 7). For beauty; 
i.e. to ad<i beauty to the house. Farvaim. 
What this word designates, or, if a place, 
where the place was, is not known. Gesenius 
(' Lexicon,' svb »oe.) would derive it from 
a Sanskrit word, pvrva, meaning " oriental." 
Hitzig suggests anotlier Sanskrit word, paru, 
meaning "hill," and indicating the "twin 
hills" of Arabia (Ptol., vi. 7. § 11) as the 
derivation. And Knobel suggests that it 
is u, form of Sepharvaim, the Syriac and 
Jonathan Targum version of Sephar (Gen. 
X. 30). The word does not occur in any 
other Bible passage (see Dr. Smith's ' Bible 
Dictionary,' vol. ii. p. 711). 

Ver. 7. — And graved cherubim. In the 
parallel this statement is placed in company 
with that respecting the " palms and 
flowers." Layard tells us that all the 
present description of decoration bears 
strong resemblance to the Assyrian. There 
can be no difficulty in imagining this, both 
in other respects, and in connection with 
the fact that foreigners, headed by the chief 
designer Hiram, had so large a share in 
planning the details of temple workmanship. 

Ver. 8. — The most holy house. The writer 
proceeds from speaking of "the greater 
house " (ver, 5), or holy place, to the " holy 
of holies." The parallel (1 Kings vi. 20) 
adds the height, as also 20 cubits. Six hundred 
talents. It is impossible to assert with any 
accuracy the money value intended heiak 
Six hundred talents of gold is an amazi 
proportion of the yearly revenue of I 
talents of gold, spoken of in 1 Kings X. 
Tij is latter amount is worth, in Kei I's esti 



84 



THK SECOND BOOK OF THE GHKONICLES. [oh. m. 1—17. 



about three million and three quarters of 
our money, but in Poole's estimate nearer 
double that I The Hebrew, Fljoeuician, and 
Assyrian unit of weight is the same, and 
one quite different from the Egyptian. The 
tilver talent (Hebrew, eieear, n^s) contained 
60 manehs, each maneh being equal to 50 
shekels, and a shekel being worth 220 grains ; 
I.e. there were 3000 shekels, or 660,000 grains, 
in such talent. But the gold talent con- 
tained 100 manehs, the maneh 100 shekels, 
and the shekel 132 grains, making this gold 
talent the equivalent of 10,000 shekels, or 
1,320,000 grains. The "holy shekel," or 
" shekel of the sanctuary," could be either 
of gold or silver (Ezod. xxxviii. 4, 5). (For 
some treatment of this still unsatisfactory 
subject, see Dr. Smith's ' Bible Dictionary,' 
iii. 1727—1736; and Oonder's 'Handbook 
to the Bible,' 2nd edit., pp. 64—78, 81,) 

Ver. 9. — The weight of the nails, fifty 
shekels of gold. According to the above 
scale, therefore, thia weight would be a 
twelve-thousandth part for the nails of all 
the weight of the overlaying plates of gold. 
The upper chambers. This is the first men- 
tion of these "chambers" in the present 
desciiption, but they have been alluded to 
by tlie Chronicle writer before, in 1 Chron. 
ixviii. 11. What or where they were is as 
yet not certainly ascertained. Presumably 
they were the highest tier of those cham- 
berd which surrounded three sides of the 
main building. But some think they were 
a superstructure to tlie holy of holies; others, 
high chambers in the supposed very lofty 
superstructure of the porch. Both of these 
suppositions seem to us of the unlikeliest. 
It would, however, be much moru satisfactory, 
oonsidering that all the subject before and 
after treats of the most holy place, to be 
able to connect this expression in some way 
with it, nor is there any reason evident for 
overlaying richly with gold the aforesaid 
chambers (ch. ix. 4 compared with xxii. 
11) of the third tier. 

Ver. 10. — Image work. The word in the 
Hebrew text (D'JIJiJIS) translated thus in our 
Authorized Version is a word unknown, 
Oeseoius traces it to " an unused " Hebrew 
root J)1S, of Arabic derivation (meaning 
"to carry on the trade of a goldsmith"), 
and offers to translate it "statuary" work 
with the Vulgate (opiu ittUuarium). The 
parallel (1 Kings vi. 23) gives simply " wood 
of oil " (not " olive," Neh. viii. 15), «'.e. the 
oleaster tree wood. It is obvious that some 
of the characters of these words would go 
some way to make the other unknown word. 
But it must be confessed that our text shows 
no external indications of a corrupt reading. 

Ver. 11.— Twenty onbits. This, like all 
the preceding cnbit measurings of tlie temple 
foundations aud heights, and with all the 



succeeding cherubim measurings, ia the 
exact double of that observed by Mosea 
(Exod. ixxvii. 6—9). The height of the 
oherubim, ten cubits, not mentioned in our 
text, is given in the parallel (1 Kings 
vi. 26). 

Ver. 13. — Their faces were inward ; 
Hebrew, " were to the house," viz. to the 
holy plaoe. The position of these chembim, 
both as to wings and faces, was clearly 
different from that of those for the taber- 
nacle of Moses. There they "cover the 
mercy-seat with their wings, and their faces 
are one to another . . . toward the mercy- 
seat were the faces of the cherubim" 
(Exod. XXV. 20; xxxvii. 9). May thia 
alteration in the time of Solomon indicate 
possibly one more advance in the develop- 
ing outlook of Divine mercy to a whole 
world? Neither this place nor the parallel 
makes it certain whether the cherubim, that 
are here said to stand on their feet, stood 
on the ground, as some say they did. Aa 
regards those of the tabernacle, the preposi- 
tions used in Exod. xxv. 18, 19 and xxxvii. 
7, 8 appear to lay stress on their position 
being a fixture at and on each extremity of 
the mercy-seat. 

Ver. 14. — The veil of blue, and purple, and 
crimson, aud fine linen (so Exod. xxvi. 31, 
33, 35; xxxvi. 35 ; xl. 3, 21). It is remark- 
able that our parallel (1 Kings vi.) does 
not make mention of the veil, though a 
feature of which so much was always made 
(Matt, xxvii. 51 ; Mark xv. 38 ; Luke xxiii. 
45 ; Heb. vi. 19 ; ix. 3). On the other hand, 
it is remarkable that our present passage 
does not make mention of the folding " doors 
of olive tree," which, with "the veil," inter- 
cepted the approach to the oracle (1 Kings 
vi. 31, 32), nor of the partition walls (1 
Kings vi. 16) in which they were situate, 
nor of the " partition chains [1 Kings vi. 21] 
of gold before the oracle." 

Ver. 15.— Thirty and five cubits. The 
height of these pillars is attested in three 
places to have been 18 cubits (1 Kings vii. 
15 ; 2 Kings xxv. 17 ; Jer. Iii. 21). Some 
therefore think that the height given in 
our text describes rather the distance of 
the one pillar from the other, which would 
be just 35 cubits, if they stood at the ex- 
treme points of the line of the porch front ; 
since the wings on each side (5 onbits for 
the lowest chamber, and 2^ cubits for the 
thickness of the walls) would make up this 
amount. It is further noticed with thia 
explanation that their height (18 cubits) 
with the chapiters (5 cubits) added, would 
bring them to the same height as the porch, 
and that their ornamentation agrees with 
that of the porch (1 Kings vii. 19). All thia 
may be the case. Yet considering other 
indications of uncertainty about our text. 



oH.m. 1— 17.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



86 



and the fact that the characters yod kheth 
(18) are easily superseded by lamed he (35), 
it is perhaps likelier that we have here 
simply a clerical error. The parallel place 
tells us that these pillars and the chapiters 
were oast of brass ; that " a line [1 Kings Tii. 
15 ; Jer. Hi. 41] of twelve cubits [not seven] 
did jompass either of them about;" that 
the ornamentation of each chapiter was " a 
net of ohecker-work, and a wreath of chain- 
work ; " that upon the five cubits of chapiter 
there was another " four cubits of lily-work," 
etc. If this last feature apply to the two 
pillars, and not (as some tliink) to the 
porch only, the pillars would reach a height 
of 27 cubits, and if it be supposed that they 
stood on some stone or other superstructure, 
it may still be that our "thirty-five cubits" 
has its meaning. Meantime the passage in 
Jeremiah (lii. 41) tells us that the pillars 
were hollow, and that the thickness of the 
metal was " four fingers." 

Yer. 16. — Chains, as in the oracle. 
Tliough the writer of Chronicles has not in 
tijis description mentioned any chains as 
appertaining to the oracle, yet they are 



mentioned in the parallel. The selection 
of what is said has in our present text so 
much the appearance of haste, that this 
may account for the abrupt appearance of 
the allusion here. Otherwise the words, 
"in the oracle," tempt us to fear some 
corruptness of text, scarcely safely removed 
by Bertheau's suggestion to substitute ts'^ 
(" ring ") for Tai (" oracle "). An. hundred 
pomegranates (comp. ch. iv. 13; 1 Kings 
vii. 15, 18, 20). These passages indicate 
that the total number of pomegranates was 
two hundred for each pillar. 

Yer. 17. — Jachin . . . Boaz. The margin 
of our Authorized Yersion gives with 
sufficient correctness the meaning of these 
names of the pillars, which purport to set 
forth the safety and sure strength that 
belong to those who wait on, and who 
calmly and constantly abide by, the Divine 
leading. The latter, however, is one word, 
a substantive, not a compound of preposition, 
pronoun, and substantive; and the former, 
though by derivation the future of the hiph. 
conjugation of the verb pn, is established 
as a substantive in its own right 



HOMILBTICS. 

Ver. 1 — ch. iv. 22 (see also on ch. iv, in its proper place). — These two chapters are 
occupied with the subject of the preparation for the huilding of the temple ; its site, 
its exact proportions and measures, its contents and furniture, vessels and instruments. 
Upon the first glance, and merely superficial reading of these, it may seem that they 
bear little relation to us, address no special messages to us, and proffer bat little 
instruction adapted to our light, our time of day, our confessedly more spiritual form 
of religion. A little longer thought, more patient inquiry, and deeper consideration 
will go far to correct, or, at any rate, to modify, an estimate of this kind. Perhaps no 
^ievout mind, in a healthy state, unsophisticated and unvitiated by special freak of 
education, will fail to feel, free of argument, that the principles underlying the direc- 
tions of minutest detail of outward work once, find their use and application now within 
the domain of motive, of purity of motive, and exactitude in judging, not the motives of 
others, but our own ; within the domain, again, of cheerful, ungrudging giving to Christ 
and to his living Church ; and within the domain of that exalted but perfectly simple 
law of giving, not the lame, the blind, the blemished, and the utter superfluity of our 
own possessions, but the first and the best, and of what may call for some self-denial, 
some self-sacrifice. Add to these considerations the hard fact that, in the name of 
Christianity, in the purer name of Christ himself, and for the love of him, now for 
fifteen centuries (repudiating that narrowest of all things, a narrow construction of the 
spirituality of the simplest and purest religion possible) the instinct of the disciples 
and followers of Christ has expended on the art of ecclesiastical architecture, the art of 
ecclesiastical painting, the art of ecclesiastical music — ail things of the outside, if so 
they must be called — an amount of care, time, skill, devotion, exactness, and wealth of 
precious things, exceeding by millionfolds all devoted to the temple of Solomon and 
all its successors, and required for them, even by highest inspiration of the pattern 
showed on the mount. It is, therefore, a great historic mistake, and a blinded or 
oblivious readiug of history, when any presume to suppose that the detail, exactness, 
material grandeur, and contribution of aU costly things commanded for the temple of 
the ancient Jew are not paralleled by their almost identical likes in the Church of the 
Christian I For such reasons as these it is interesting, and it is useful, to review the 
injunctions and the methods and tne accomplished results of Solomon's work aa 



36 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. in. I— 17. 

rehearsed in these chapters. They contain the seminal principles which Christian 
work still demaods, and by which the Christian Church should be guided. Far, then, 
from alighting and underrating the significance of the sacred principles that underlay 
the religion of elder days, and of that chosen people, to whom it was conveyed in all 
its outer detail by special revelation, let us be encouraged to consider it attentively, 
noWjin respect of that holy house, the temple, which stood for so much in the minds of 
a great and remarkable nation, and which was a manifestation of so much of the mind 
and will of God to them first, and through them and after them to the world. For we 
are her« reminded of — 

I. ThB stress laid upon the very flags where the FOnHDATIONB OF THE 

TEMPLE SHOULD BE PLANTED. It was the place: 1. Where sin had been sternly 
reminded of its just punishment (1 Chron. xxi. 15 — 17), and had grievously felt it. 2. 
Where the interposing angel of the Lord appeared, and spoke and stayed the destruction 
and pestilence (1 Chron. xxi. 27), in answer to confession, repentance, and sacrifice. 3. 
Where that same sacrifice was offered on the new-builded altar, which was paid for, and 
everything necessary to the sacrifice upon it paid for by David, that it might as far as 
possible be the perfect offering of self. The house and the altar were almost synony- 
mous (1 Chron. xxii. 1). And we are reminded of the greatest fact, the central fact, 
that there is no such thing as a true Church without altar. The one, only true and 
ever-abiding Church of the living G-od on earth is the sacred environment of the solemn 
altar, is founded one with it, built up round about it, grows out of it, commences, as 
did the temple of David (1 Chron. xxii. 2) and Solomon, from it, and ever must have 
it for its centre. 

II. The fact op the Divine instbuction given poe the buildino of the 
TEMPLE IN ALL ITS PARTS. This fact, per se, may be justly regarded as marking : 1. 
The Divine estimate as to human need. o{ revelation /or all that pertains to real religion. 
There is something that inevitably and invariably differences natural religion from 
revealed religion. It lacks direction, stability, and a real living connection between the 
worshipped and the worshipper, the great Adorable and the humble sinful adorer. 
This is supplied by revelation, which is by most deliberate preference not partial, not 
fitful, not a thing to be taken or left, but uniform, spreading everywhere and penetrating 
to each detail. 2. The reverence touards all that affects our spiritual and eternal 
weal, which Heaven would help us to feel and earnestly to believe in. 3. The kind 
sympathetic interest with which the August Majesty himself would wish to help us 
assure ourselves that he tends even the human side of religious institutions. He " dwells 
in light unapproachable," and yet himself is not inaccessible, is not afar off, is nigh to 
us. What a welcome thought, inspiring thought, that he helps us build our very 
place of worship 1 Notice — 

HI. The carefulness and exactitude which that Divinb instruction 
modelled fob our imitation. After the tabernacle, in time indeed, but second to 
it in no other sense, nor strictly separable from it, here was the beginning of corporate 
Church life and institution and building. All things must be done " decently and in 
order; " " as to the Lord, and not to men," alone ; " not with eye-service." And as real 
religion is the only reaHife, how sure were all the carefulness and exactitude now pre- 
scribed and exemplified to draw up, and constantly to tend to draw up, lesser life, home 
life, and individual life 1 The individual life (time and illustrations without number have 
shown it) will grow more divinely ordered for that man whose taste, whose knowledge, 
but, above all, whose deep principle reverences, observes, and "observes to do " all the 
words of such commandments, with those that correspond with them, and are their 
heirs and successors, as are contained in these chapters. 

rV. The principle involved in the materials and contents of the temple, 
IN their being sufficient in all smallest details, beautiful in debion and 
make, genuine and solid, and costly. 

V. The things in ob before the temple, which were gbeateb than it. 
Beside the many lesser vessels and instruments, each of which had its ancillary (and 
therefore not unimportant) relation to the greater vessels, or to the worship, service, and 
sacrifices for which those greater were ordained, there were some of special, marked, 
leading importance ; while the distinguishing importance of some others lay strictly in 
their import. Call attention to just the things which ai-e said of : 1. TTie greater house ; 



OH. in. 1-17.J THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHEONICLES. 37 

its gold ; its ceiling, with fine gold, palm-tree figures and chains ; its walls, with graven 
cherubim. 2. The most holy house ; its fine gold ; its two symbolic cherubim ; its veil, 
with wrought cherubim. 3. The two pillars ; their height ; their chapiters, with chains 
and pomegranates ; their names and respective positions. 

[The general homiletics of ch. iii. and iy. combined close here, and the more par- 
ticular homiletics appropriate to oh. iv. separately, follow that chapter.] 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1, 2. — Beginning to huild. " Solomon began to build' the house of the Lord." 
We are frequently in a similar position; we are starting some sacred enterprise, 
which, directly or indirectly, affects the Church of Christ, the kingdom of God. What 
are the sentiments and what is the spirit appropriate to such an occasion? But we 
may first learn from the text — 

I. That, to a large extent, otjb possession is our heritage. It was a very 
great privilege Solomon was now enjoying, and it must have been felt by him to be a 
high honour and a keen gratification. How much of it he owed to his father 1 It was 
David who conceived the idea; it was he who gained the sanction of Jehovah; it was 
he who had practically gained the valuable co-operation of Hiram (1 Kings v. 1) ; it 
was he, also, who had secured an admirable and acceptable site for the building (1 
Chron. xxi. 18 ; xxii. 1). If we examine we shall find that a very large part of our 
acquisition, whether it be property (in the usual sense of that word), or knowledge and 
intellectual power, or honour, or affection, or even character, is due to that which we 
have inherited from those who came before us. 

II. That greater work demands fuller preparation. The building of the 
temple was certainly one of the very first things that Solomon considered and deter- 
mined upon when he came to the throne. Yet it was not until " the second month, in 
the fourth year of his reign," that the erection actually commenced. So great a work 
took large preparation. We show our sense of the real seriousness and magnitude of 
the work we do for God when we take time and spend strength in its preparation. To 
go with haste and heedlessness to any sacred work, even though the " house of the 
Lord " we are building is not one of magnificence (1 Chron. xxii. 5), is a spiritual mis- 
demeanour ; to enter upon any great undertaking in the name and cause of Jesus 
Christ without much patient thought and earnest effort in the way of preparation is 
wholly wrong. 

III. That the commencement op a great work is a memorable moment. It 
was fitting that the very day when this great work began should he recorded, as it is 
in Holy Writ (ver. 2). It was a memorable moment in Solomon's reign and in the history 
of the Jews. For then began to rise a building which had an immense and, indeed, an 
incalculable influence on the nation, and bo upon mankind. Such times are sacred. Of 
all those days to which, in later years, we look back with interest and joy, none will 
stand out so clearly, and none will give us such pure and strong gratification, as the 
days when we instituted some movement in the cause of Christ, in the service of our 
fellow-men. 

IV. That this hotjb of commencement should be a vebt sacred time to oub 
souls. It may well be one of : 1. Joyful eagerness ; for there is something very inspir- 
ing in the act of commencing a truly noble work — it exhilarates and animates the soul. 
It should also be one of : 2. Special prayerftdnest ; for then we urgently need the guid- 
ing and guarding hand of our God to be upon us. 3. Steadfast purpose ; for there will 
be unanticipated difficulties and disheartening delays, possibly much temporary disap- 
pointment and partial failure, and a strong, resolute purpose will be needed to carry us 
through to the end. 4. Unselfish devotedness. We must ever keep in mind that the 
" house " we are erecting, of whatever kind it be, is the house " of the Lord." If we 
fail to realize that it iifor Christ that we are working, our labour will lose its excellency, 
its inspiration, and its reward. — 0. 

Vers. 3 — 9. — Four elements of faithful service. These are— 

I. Obbdibnob ; the intelligent carrying out of Divine direction. Close and careful 
correspondence with the coramandmi-nt wsa more particularly enforced utder the 



38 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHROmCLBS. [oh. iii. 1— 17. 

MoBaio dispensation (Heb. viii. 6). Solomon was careful to do as he was " instructed 
for the building " (ver. 3) ; the dimensions were determined " by the first measure " 
(yer. 3) ; he was concerned to act obediently. In the service of Christ, while there is 
very little indeed of prescription or proscription as to the details of devotion or the par- 
ticulars of Divine service, we shall be careful to consult the will of Christ in everything. 
The mind of our Master, and not our own individual preference, should be the main 
consideration in all Christian effort : we shall gain a knowledge of his mind by a devout 
and intelligent study of his life and of his words, and of those of bis apostles. 

II. Spontaneity. This is not any wise inconsistent with obedience, and it was not 
absent even from the building of the temple, in which there was, necessarily, so much of 
careful and detailed prescription. Solomon " garnished the house with precious stones " 
(ver. 6), and these had been furnished by the spontaneous liberality of David and of 
his people (1 Chron. xxix. 2, 8). In the service of our Saviour there is ample room for 
the play of spontaneous devotion. We may bring to his sacred cause the " precious 
stones " of our most reverent and earnest thought, of our most fervent feeling, of our 
most eloquent and convincing speech, of our most self-denying labour, all nncom- 
manded and unconstrained, all prompted by a pure and keen desire to serve our Lord 
and bless our brethren. 

III. Beauty. These precious stones were " for beauty " (ver. 6), and the abundance 
of gold would also add to the beauty of the building, as seen from the inside. Every 
" house of the Lord " which we build should be fair and comely as well as strong. 
Happily for us, the beauty in which God delights is not pecuniarily costly ; it is that 
which the poorest may bring to the sanctuary and the service of bis Lord. It is not 
found in precious stones which only the wealthy can secure ; it is found in " a meek 
and quiet spirit " (1 Pet. iii. 3), in the spirit of true reverence and pure devotion 
(John iv. 23), in patient endurance under wrong (1 Pet. iL 19, 20), in patient con- 
tinuance in well-doing (Rom, ii. 7), in a broad and deep Christian charity (1 Cor. ziii.). 
These are the beauties which adorn our character and make our service well-pleasing in 
the sight of God our Saviour. 

IV. TnoRonoHNESs. The strong timber which Solomon used was " overlaid with 
pure gold" — with the precious metal, and that of the best kind. Nothing was spared 
that could give strength, solidity, perfectness to the building now erected. It was 
built, not for a few years, or for a geueration, but for long centuries ; to stand the force 
of the elements of nature; to remain strong and fair when children's children in distant 
times should come up to Zion to see the house of the Lord and to enter into its courts. 
All work that we do for our Divine Redeemer should partake of this character. It 
should be thorough; it should be of the very best that we can offer; it should be of 
" pure gold." Not our weakness, but our strength ; not our exhaustion, but our fresh- 
ness; not our crudeness, but our culture; not our ignorance, but our information and 
acquisition — our very best self should we bring to our Lord who gave himself for us. 
With the choicest materials we can furnish, in the exercise of our faculties at their 
fullest, should we build up his sacred cause who lavished his strength and laid down 
his life on our behalf. — C. 

Vers. 10 — 13. — Life at its highest. These cherubim were, of course, symbolic ; but 
what did they symbolize 1 1. Certainly not the Divine. Nothing is more improbable, 
indeed nothing is more incredible, thaa that in the holy place of the temple there 
should be anything artistic intended to portray or represent the Deity. That would 
have gone far to unteach the very truth which was so carefully taught by every Mosaic 
institution. 2. As certainly not the animal and irrational. Part of these creatures 
may have belonged to the uaintelligent world ; but if it were so, it would only be to 
represent some virtue or power of which that particular animal was suggestive. 3. 
Probably the highest form of cre'iturt-Ufe, human or angelic; either man at his best, 
when endowed with nobler powers than he possesses here, or else the holy and pure 
intelligences which belong to that great realm that intervenes between the human and 
Divine. And the idea is that, as we reach the very noblest forms of life, we find these 
in the near presence of God and engaged in his study and service. To what shall we do 
well to aspire ? Where shall we dwell when we touch our culminating point? In what 
activities shall we be then engaged ? To these questions the cherubim provide the answer. 



OH. in. 1—17.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 39 

I. In the nbak pbesbnob of God. The cherubim were, day and night, in th« 
most holy place, close to the sacred ark, very near to the manifested presence of God. 
Life, at its very highest, is life that is spent with God; in which the spirit is conscious 
of his nearness to itself. God was not more truly present at Bethel than elsewhere ; 
but to Jacob that was the very " house of God," because there he felt himself to be in 
the very presence of the Holy One. And it is just as we realize that, step by step 
along all our earthly course, moment by moment through all our earthly life, God U 
truly with us and we are the objects of his thought and his love— it is in that proportion 
that our life rises to its true stature, and we are not only men, we are sons of God, w« 
are "living ones " whose home is on the eartb, but whose citizenship is in heaven. 

II. In the sustained study of God. The faces of these cherubim were "inward" 
(ver. 13). They turned toward the manifested presence; they gazed continually on 
God. God was the Object of their ceaseless thought, of their fixed and settled study. 
Just as we truly live, this will be so with us. We shall wish to know ourselves, and 
shall study our human nature in all its varied manifestations ; we shall wish to know 
all we can learn of the visible universe, and shall delight to search its secret stores, its 
beauties, and its marvels. But we shall feel that the one object that is, far above all 
others, worthy of our most earnest and patient study, is the character, the life, the will, 
the working of our heavenly Father. The noblest and truest study of mankind is God, 
and our life is life indeed as we are engaged in the reverent and the intelligent study of 
his mind and spirit. To us who " have the mind of Christ," and know the Father by 
our knowledge of his Son, this grand privilege is open. 

III. In the active service of God. A full description is given of the wings ot 
the cherubim. Why? Is it not to indicate that they stand ready, with their full 
powers outstretched, to do the bidding of Jehovah ? The highest life is in the fullest 
service. As we serve we live. Even the " living ones " of the celestial kingdom find 
their nobility, not in commanding, but in fulfilling and in achieving. The attitude of 
the highest intelligences we can conceive and depict is that of perfect rea(iiness to carry 
out the commandments, to do the work, to promote the kmgdoni of God. It will be 
thus that we too shall attain our highest. Not by receiving that which is most costly, 
not by enjoying that which is most pleasant ; but by eagerly and faithfully doing that 
which is most worthy and most Divine. — C. 

"Vers. 15 — 17. — Our strength and heauty. The dimensions of these pillars are still 
unsettled and uncertain. But there can be no question as to their main characteristics, 
and very little doubt as to their spiritual significance. Their obvious size and their 
names speak of strength, ; the decorations which they bore speak of beauty. Standing 
where they stood, in or at the porch of the house of the Lord, they weie standing 
monuments of the two closely related truths — 

I. That wb should recognize in God himself strength and beauty. 1. 
Strength. Our temptation is to trust in the strong barrier of sea or mountain range; 
in the powerful army and navy with all their equipments; in the vigorous and 
sagacious policy of our statesmanship; in the amplitude of pecuniary resources, etc. 
But the strength of a country, as also of a man, is in GoH. If his favour is turned 
away, all our material advantages will fail us. Rabshakeh's multitudes of armed 
Assyrians disappear at the stroke of the God of Israel ; the rich man, with his full 
barns and his cherished plans, leaves his wealth behind him when God says, " Thy 
soul is required of thee." But to the faithful Hezekiah the favour of Jehovah proves 
an ample shield against the threatening enemy. And they are blessed who " walk in 
the liglit of God's countenance ; " for he is " the glory of their strength : and in his favour 
shall their bom be exalted" (Ps. Ixxxix. 15, 17). The wise nation and the wise man 
will not look complacently around them to find the secret and source of their strength ; 
they will look up toward him that dwelleth in the heavens, and say, " Jachin ; Boaz ; " 
"he will establish;" "in him is strength." 2. Beauty. We are inclined to boast of 
the beauty of the landscape ; or of the persons of our sons and daughters ; or of our 
palaces and castles and cathedrals; or of our "pleasant pictures," and fair gems and 
jewels. But our delight should be, first and most, in him whose Divine character ii 
perfect ; who unites in himself, with completest symmetry, all possible attributes ; who 
ia as merciful as he is pure; who is as pitiful as he is righteous; who is as gentle as he is 



40 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [ch. in. 1—17. 

strong i whom we can not only adore and honour, but delight in and love. We go to 
the house of the Lord that we may behold " the beauty of the Lord " (Ps. zxvii. 4) ; 
and especially that we may dwell upon the beauties and the glories of the character of 
that Son of man who was "holy, harmless, undenled," in whose mouth no guile was 
found, but in whose life every grace that can adorn humanity was seen by those th«t 
knew him. 

II. That we should seek from God oue steenoth and beauty. The Israelites 
went up to the house of the Lord that by obedient sacrifice, by reverent worship, by 
believing prayer, they might secure the favour of the Most High. If we would gain 
from God the strength we need, aud that spiritual excellency which is the true beauty 
of the nation and the individual, we must go to Ood to seek it. We must present our- 
selves before him from whom all strength and glory come. We must seek him (1) 
ill confession, and in Christ who is our Propitiation ; (2) in reverent worship ; (3) in 
earnest and believing prayer for his upholding power and for his shaping hand. Then 
wiU he make us strong to overcome and to accomplish; heauti/vi to attract and to 
win. — 0. 

Vers.! — 17. — The huHding of the temple. I. The bite. 1. Central. At Jerusalem. 
(1) Natural. Jerusalem, the metropolis of the kingdom, the political and religious 
centre of the country, was entitled to contain the chief symbol round which the 
political and religious life of the nation was in future to revolve. (2) Appropriate. 
As the king had a palace in the capital, it was fitting the king's King, Jehovah, should 
there have a temple. (3) Convenient. Since the temple was to be Israel's meeting- 
place in their national assemblies, it was better the structure should stand in the chief 
city of the realm than in a provincial town. (4) Significant. It seemed to say that 
henceforth Solomon was to seek the security of his throne, the stability of his govern- 
ment, and the welfare of his empire in the worship of Jehovah and the practice of 
religion. 2. Conspicuous. On Mount Moriah, which had been so named because of 
Jehovah's appearing on its summit to Abraham (Gen. xxii. 2), rather than because it 
had been pointed out to David by Jehovah (Bertheau) — a mountain situated north-east 
of Zion, and now styled " The Haram," after a Mohammedan mosque with which it is 
crowned. According to present-day measurements, rising to the height of between 
2278 and 2462 feet above the level of the Mediterranean (Conder, ' Handbook to the 
Bible,' p. 359), it was a fitting site for the temple, which, besides being firmly 
established as founded on a rock, would thereby be visible trom afar, and so a centre of 
attraction for travellers approaching the city. So is Christ's Church, like it, founded on 
a rock (Matt. xvi. 18), and, like it, should be a city set upon a hill (Matt. v. 14). 3. 
Consecrated. In the threshing-floor of Oman the Jebusite. (On the suitability of the 
Haram summit to be a threshing-floor, see Exposition.) In addition to the theophany 
which had there occurred in connection with the offering of Isaac, a similar manifesta- 
tion of Jehovah had recently taken place in the lifetime of David (1 Chron. xxi. 16 — 
30). It was thus to Solomon a spot doubly hallowed. If in David's eyes, because of 
the old patriarchal altar that had stood thereon, the place was invested with a special 
charm, in Solomon's this charm would not be diminished, but intensified, by the recol- 
lection of the altar his father had built. 

II. The time. 1. Specific. " In the second day of the second month, in the fourth 
year of bis reign, began Solomon to build; " i.e. 480 years alter the exodus from Egypt 
(1 Kings vi. 1); or, according to another reckoning, 592 years subsequent to that 
event, 240 after the building of Tyre, and 143 years 8 months prior to the founding of 
Carthage (Josephus, ' Ant,' viii. 3. 1 ; 'Against Apion,' i. 17, 18). Great events make 
deep indentations on the memories of men as well as on the course of time. The build- 
ing of the Solomonic temple, of more than national, was of world-wide importance. 
2. Early. It shows the high conception Solomon had of the work delegated to him by 
his father, as well as marked out for him by God; indicates the earnestness and 
enthusiasm with which he undertook it, that he set about its performance almost at 
the earliest possible moment, " in the fourth year of his reign," before erecting for him- 
self a palace, or for his country a chain of forts. It is an Old Testament form of the 
New Testament lesson, " Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and 
all these things shall be added tmto you " (Matt. vi. 33). 



OH. ni. 1—17.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 41 

in. The erection. 1. The house, or the temple proper. (1) Its dimensions : 60 
cubits long, 20 broad (ver. 3), 30 high (1 Kings vi. 2) ; i.e. taking the cubit at 1"33 
feet, 79"8 feet, 26'6 feet, and 39'9 feet, or, in round numbers, 80 feet, 27 feet, and 
40 feet. (2) Its parts. " The greater house " (ver. 5), i.e. the holy place, or the outer 
of the two compartments into which the house was divided, and " the most holy house " 
(ver. 8), or the inner of the two compartments. As this latter was a perfect cube, 
20 cubits each way, the former was (internally viewed) a rectangular parallelopiped, 
of length 40, of breadth 20, of height 30 cubits. Besides these were " the upper 
chambers" (ver. 9), or the space above the holy of holies, whose dimensions were 20 
cubits long, 20 broad, and 10 high. (3) Its ornaments. The houae was built of white 
freestone cut from the royal quarries under Bezetha, the northern hill on which Jeru- 
salem is built (Warren, 'Underground Jerusalem,' p. 60), smoothly polished and laid 
so skilfully and harmonioiisly together that " there appeared to the spectators no sign 
of any hammer or other instrument of architecture, but as if, without any use of them, 
the entire materials had naturally united themselves together" (Josephus, 'Ant.,' viii. 
3. 2), The interior of the house was covered with wood, the walls and the ceiling with 
cedar, the floor with cypress (1 Kings vi. 15), so that no part of the stonework was 
visible. The wood was ornamented with carved work representing palm trees (ver. 5) 
and cherubim (ver. 7), the latter on the walls, the former on the roof. In addition 
were knops or gourds and open flowers (1 Kings vi. 18). Similar decorations were 
carved upon the outer sides of the walls (1 Kings vi. 29). The whole house, interior 
and exterior — walls, roof, beams, posts, doors — was overlaid with gold plates, which 
received impressions from the carved work underneath. " To say all in a word, Solomon 
left no part of the temple, neither internal nur external, but what was covered with 
gold " (Josephus). The gold, of the finest quality (1 Kings vi. 20), was fetched from 
Parvaim, a place of uncertaia location — Ophir in Ceylon (Bochart), Ophir in India 
(Knobel), Peru and Mexico (Bitter), Soutliern or Eastern Arabia (Bertheau), the 
peninsula of Malacca (Leyrer, in Herzog), having all been suggested. The veil which 
divided the compartments was made of blue, and purple, and crimson, and fine linen — 
the same materials as were employed in constructing the tabernacle vail (Exod. xxvi. 
31) — and was ornamented with similar cherubic figures. The precious stones where- 
with the walls were garnished are not mentioned. 2. The porch. (1) Its situation: m 
front of the house. (2) Its dimensions : 20 cubits broad, 120 high, and 10 long (1 Kings 
vi. .S). The disproportion between the ground measures and the altitude has suggested 
the existence in this place of an error (Keil), or of an intentional exaggeration (Bertheau), 
though Josephus appears to have regarded it as literally correct (' Ant.,' viii. 3. 2). 
Ewald, who uphoUis the text as genuine, thinks of a tower rising above the porch 
to the height of 120 feet (' History of Israel,' iii. 236) ; but this is far froA pro- 
bable, indeed statically impossible, and must be rejected. On the assumption of a 
corrupt text, the question remains how high the porch was. Some say 20 cubits (Keil), 
or 10 lower than the house ; others 30, i.e. the exact height of the house (Bertheau) ; 
a third 23, at least as high as the pillars (Merz, m Herzog ; Sohtirer, in Eiehm). (3) 
Its ornaments. Its interior was overlaid with fine gold (ver. 4) ; its entrance guarded 
by two massive columns. 3. The pillars. (1) Their names: that on the riglit 
Jachin, or, " He shall establish," meaning that in this shrine Jehovah would henceforth 
permanently abide (1 Kings viii. 13 ; Ps. Ixxxvii. 5 ; cxxxix. 14), or that through this 
would the kingdom be henceforth immovably established (Ps. Ixxxix. 5) ; that on the 
left Boaz, signifying " In him, or in it, is strength," and pointing perhaps to the fulness 
of heavenly might that resides in him who is the sanctuary's God (Isa. xlv. 24), or to 
the consolidation which should henceforth be given to the kingdom through the erection 
of this temple (Ps. cxliv. 14). Other explanations have been given, as that Jachin and 
Boaz were the names of the donors or builders of the pillars (Gesenius), or of two 
youthful sons of Solomon (Ewald), or that the two words should be read together, as if 
both were inscribed on each pillar, " He will establish, or may he establish, it with 
strength " (Thenius). Least acceptable of all solutions is that of the Fathers, that the 
two names were intended to point to the two natures in Christ, in whom, though 
•ppearing in a lowly garb of humanity, dwelt the fulness of Divine strength. (2) Their 
height : thirty-five cubits, inclusive of the chapiter of five cubits with which each was 
crowned (ver. 15); each shaft eightfen cubits, and each crown five cubits, or both 



42 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. iv. 1—22. 



together twenty-three cubits (1 Kings vii. 15, 16; Jer. lii. 21; Josephua, 'Ant.,' vii. 
3. 4). It has been suggested that, as twice 18 are 36, the Chronicler should be regarded 
as stating the length of the two columns together. But as this does not get over the 
discrepancy, it is better to recognize that the original text has suffered some corruption. 
(3) Their position : before the temple. Whether within the porch (1 Kings yiC 21), 
perhaps supporting the roof, or outside and apart from the building, is contested. (For 
the arguments on both sides, the Exposition may be consulted.) The ablest art scholars 
who have given attention to the subject have decided for the latter (see Biehm, ' Hand- 
wSrterbuch,' art. "Jachin and Boaz"). (4) Their parts: first, a hollow column of 
brass, eighteen cubits high as above mentioned, twelve cubits in circumference, and of 
metal four fingers thick ; and, second, a chapiter or crown of lily-work, i.e. a brass cup 
shaped like a fully-opened lily — the under part a belly-shaped band of network, bulging 
out between an under and an upper row of pomegranates strung on chains ; above the 
upper row the lily-shaped cup, or crown, decorated all over with buds, flowers, and 
leaves like those of lilies. 

Lessons. 1. The place due to religion in communities and indiriduals, the first. 
2. The quality of service given to God and the Church, the best. 8. The power of art 
to express the ideas and emotions of religion. — W. 



EXPOSITION, 



CHAPTER IV. 

This chapter is occupied with some ac- 
count of the contents of the house, following 
naturally upon the account of the structure, 
dimensions, and main features of the build- 
ing given in the previous chapter. The 
parallel, so far as it goes, is found in 1 Kings 
vii. and viii. 

Ver. 1. — An altar of brass. This in 
worthier material superseded the temporary 
altar of the tabernacle (Exod. xxvii. 1, 2), 
made of shittim wood, and its dimensions 
five cubits long and broad and three cubits 
high. Large as was the present altar of 
brass ag compared with the altar that pre- 
ceded, it fell far short of the requirements of 
the grand day of dedication (1 Kings viii. 
64). No statement of tlie making of this 
altar occurs in the parallel. The place of 
it would be between vers. 22 and 23 of 1 
Kings vii. But that Solomon made it is 
stated in 1 Kings ix. 25, and other references 
to its presence are found in 1 Kings viii. 22, 
54, 61, etc. The position given to the altar 
is referred to alike in 1 Kings viii. 22 and oh. 
vi. 12, 13, as in the court of the temple. It 
may be well to note that the altar, taorifioe, 
eomes first, and is first spoken of. 

Ver. 2. — ^A molten sea. The Hebrew of 
this verse and of 1 Kings vii. 23 are fao- 
siudles of one author, except that here is 
stands, where the parallel shows nip, pro- 
bably the fruit merely of some error in 
transcription. Verses like these point not 
to the derivation of Chronicles from Kings, 
but rather of both from some older common 
source. This sea of brass superseded the 
laver of tiie tabernacle (ExoJ. xxx. 18, 28 ; 



xxxi. 9; XXXV. 16; xxxix. 39). It was 
called a sea on account of its size. We are 
told in 1 Chron. xviii. 8 whence David had 
drawn the supplies of metal necessary for 
this work. The size of the diameter mea- 
sured from upper rim to rim (ten cubits) 
harmonizes, of oourae, to all practical pur- 
poses, with that of the circumference (thirty 
cubits) ; it would assist questions connected 
with the contents of this large vessel, how- 
ever, if we had been told whether the cir- 
cumference were measured at the rim, or, 
as the form of language here used might 
sUghtly favour, round the girth. (For these 
questions, see ver. 5 below.) This sea for 
the washing of the priests significantly fol- 
lows the altar. Beside the general sugges- 
tion of the need of purification or sanotifica- 
tion, it here reminds of the fact that the 
earthly priest and high priest must need 
the purification, which their great Antitype 
would not need. 

Ver. 8. — The similitude of oxen. The 
parallel gives simply " knops " (i.e. flower- 
buds) in the room of this expression, and 
no word " similitude " at all, the characters 
spelling the word for " knops " being D'jfpi} 
and those for "oxen" being D'Tpa. The 
presence of the word " similitude " strongly 
suggests that the circles of decoration under 
description showed the likenesses of oxen, 
not necessarily (as Patrick) " stamped " on 
the so-called knops, but possibly constitut- 
ing them. For the ambiguous under it of our 
present verse the parallel says with defi- 
niteness, « under the brim of it." There is 
intelligibility, at all events, in the orna- 
mentation being of these miniature oxen, 
presumably three linndred in the circle of 
llie thirty ciiLiits. The symbolism would 



OH. IV. 1—22.] THE SKCOND BOOK OB TUB CHRONICLES. 



43 



harmonize with that which dictated the 
superposition of the enormous vase on twelve 
.tobably life-size oxeu. There is a general 
jaeferenoe, however, accorded to the opinion 
that the present text has probably been the 
result of some copyist's corruption, and that 
the text of the parallel should be followed. 

Ver. 4. — The words of the Hebrew text of 
this verse and the parallel (I Kings vii. 25) 
are facsimiles. 

Ver. 5. — ^An handbreadth. Not riTj, "a 
span" (nevertheless tabled by Conder, 
' Handbook to the Bible,' 2nd edit., p. 79, as 
a handbreadth, and put at eight digits, two 
palms, or 5'83 inches), but nsQ, " the palm 
of the open band," the breadth of the four 
fingers, which Tlienius puts at 3'1752 
inches, but Condor's table at 266 inches. It 
received and held should be translated, 
it was able to hold. Three thousand baths. 
The parallel has two thousand batlis, and 
tliis latter is the litcelier reading. It is, 
however, conceivable that the statement of 
Kings may purport to give the quantity of 
water nsed, and that of Chronicles the 
quantity which the vessel at its fullest could 
accommodate. As to the real capacity of 
the bath, we are hopelessly at sea. Jo- 
sephus's estimate of it is about eight gallons 
and a half, that of the rabbiuists about four 
gallons and a half (see Smith's ' Dictionary 
of the Bible,' iii. 1742), and Conder, in the 
' Handbook to the Bible,' p. 80, a fractional 
quantity above six gallons. The largest 
bowls on the Assyrian bas-reliefs, the silver 
bowl of Crcesus, and the bronze bowl in 
Soythia (Herodotus, i. 5 1 ; iv. 81), did not, 
under the lowest estimate of the bath, hold 
as much as one-half of the contents of this 
vast sea of brass of Solomon. The use of 
this vessel was, as we read in tlie next verse, 
for the priests to wash in, or, as some would 
read, to wash at (Exod. xxx. 18 — 20). 

Ver. 6. — This verse, with vers. 14, 15, are 
all here that repiesent the lengthy account 
of bases rather than lavers, occupying in the 
parallel vers. 27 — 39 of 1 Kings vii., which, 
however, omits to state the use of either sea 
or lavers. 

Ver. 7. — Ton candlesticks of gold. The 
only allusion to these in the parallel is 
found later on in part of the forty -ninth 
Terse of 1 Kings vii. According to their 
form. This expression, though so vague, 
might point to the fact that the form of the 
old candlestick of the tabernacle was ad- 
hered to (Exod. iiv. 31). But considering 
the recurrence of the same words (ver. 20), 
there can be no doubt that the plirase is 
identical in its meaning with the use found 
in such passages as Lev. v. 10 ; ix. 16, and 
means *' according to the prescribed ordi- 
nance." 

Ver. 8. — Ten tables. These tables al-o 



(the use of which is given in ver. 19) are not 
mentioned, so far as tlieir making is con- 
cerned, in the parallel, except in its summary, 
ver. 48 (cf. 1 Kings vii.), where furthermore 
only one table, called "the table" (Exod. 
XXV. 2;-i), is specified, with which agrees our 
oh. xxix. 18. It is hard to explain this 
variation of statement. It is at least an 
arbitrary and forced explanation to suppose 
that ten tables constituted tlie furniture in 
question, while only one was used at a time. 
Keil and Bertheau think that the analogy of 
the ten candlesticks points to the existence of 
ten tables. The question, however, is, where 
is the call for, or where are the indications 
of any analogy ? An hundred basins of gold. 
The Hebrew word employed here, and trans- 
lated "basins," is 'pnin, as also vers. 11, 
22, infra; and 1 Kings Vii. 40,45,50; Exod. 
xxvii. 3 ; xxxviii. 3 ; Numb. iv. 14 ; but it is 
represented as well by the English transla- 
tion " bowls " in 1 Chron. xxviii. 17 ; 2 
Kings XXV. 15 ; Numb. vii. 13, 19, etc. The 
" pots," however, of our vers. 11, 16 has for 
its Hebrew niTBn. It were well if, in 
names such as these, at any rate, an abso- 
lute uniformity of version were observed in 
the translation, for the benefit of the Eng- 
lish reader, to say nothing of the saving of 
wasted time for the student and scholar. 
These basins, or bowls, were ■ to receive and 
hold the blood of the slain viotima, about to 
be sprinkled for purification (see Exod. 
xxiv. 6 — 8, where the word ]4(« is used; 
xxix. 12, 10, 20, 21 ; Lev. i. 5, and passim ; 
Heb. ix. 18 — 20; see also Exod. xxxviii. 3; 
Numb. iv. 14.) The Hebrew word pnip, 
whether appearing in our version as " basin" 
or "bowl," occurs thirty two times, sixteen in 
assooiiitiou exactly similar with the present 
(viz. Exod. xxvii. 3 ; xxxviii. 3 ; Numb. iv. 
14; 1 Kings vii. 40, 45,-50 ; 2 Kings xii. 13; 
XXV. 15 ; 1 Chron. xxviii. 17 ; ch. iv. 8, 11, 
22 ; Neh. vii. 70 ; Jer. Iii. 18, 19 ; Zeoh. xiv. 
20), fourteen as silver howls in the time of 
tho tabernacle for the meat offering of " fine 
flour minted with oil " (viz. Numb. vii. 13, 
19, 25, 31, 37, 43, 49, 55, 61, 67, 73, 79, 84, 
85), and the remaining two in an entirely 
general application (Amos vi. 6; Zech. is. 
15). It is evident, therefore, that the p^jo 
was not the only vessel used for holding the 
blood of purification, nor was it exclusively 
reserved to this use. 

Ver. 9. — The court of the priests (comp. 
1 Kings vi. 36, where this court is denomi- 
nated the inner court, and any other coiut 
an outer one, i.e. the great court only im- 
plicated thereby). The construction of thia 
court of the priests, withheld here, given 
there, leaves it ambiguous whether the 
" three rows of hewed stones and one row of 
cedar beams " intends a description of fence, 
as the Septuagint seems to have taken it. 



44 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. iv. 1— 22 



or of a higher floor with which the part in 
question was dignified. The citation Jer. 
xxxvi, 10, though probably pointing to this 
Bame court, can scarcely be adduced as any 
support of J. D. Michaelis' suggestion of this 
latter, as its ji'^J? (translated " higher ") 
does not really carry the idea of the compa- 
rative degree at all. For once that it is so 
translated (and even then probably incor- 
rectly), there are twenty occurrences of it as 
the superlative ezcellentiss. Tbe introduction 
just here of any statement of these courts at 
all, which seems at first inopportune, is pro- 
bably accounted for by the desire to speak 
in liaa connection of their doors and the 
brass overlaying of them (1 Kings vii. 12 ; 
2 Kings xxiii. 12 ; ch. xx. 5 ; Ezek. xl. 28 ; 
Conder's ' Handbook to the Bible,' p. 370). 
It is worthy of note that the word employed in 
our text, as also ch. vi. 13, is not the familiar 
word "isn of all previous similar occasions, 
but rntji, a word of the later Hebrew, occur- 
ring also seveial times in Ezekiel, though 
not in exactly the same sense, and the ele- 
mentary signiKcation of the verb-root of 
which is " to gird," or " surround." 

Ver. 10. — The right side of the east end, 
over against the south (so also 1 Kings vii. 
39 ; comp. Exod. xxx. 18). The sea found 
its position, therefore, in the place of the 
tabernacle iaver of old, between altar of 
brass and poroli. It must be remembered 
that the entrance was east, but it was 
counted to a person standing with the back 
to the tabernacle or temple, as though he 
were, in fact, going out, not entering in, the 
sacred en' lonure ; therefore on the right side 
will be southward, as written in this verse. 

Ver. 11. — The pots. As stated above, the 
Hebrew word is niTBn. It occurs in the Old 
Testament twenty-seven times; it is trans- 
lated in our Authorized Version "pans" 
once and "caldrons" four times. By a 
manifest copyist's error, the parallel (1 
Kings vii. 35) has niT3, "la vers," by the 
use of eaph for lataech. The use 4>f the I'D 
was to boil the peace offerings, though some 
say they were hods in which to carry away 
the ashes; and it certainly is remarkable 
that it is no one of the words employed in 
I Sam. ii. 14. In addition to these twenty- 
seven times, it occurs also four times in 
Ecclesiastes, Isaiah, Hosea, Nahum, with 
the meaning of " thorns," and once in Amos 
it is translated " fish-hooks." The passage 
in Ecclesiastes (vii. 6) is additionally re- 
markable, in the fact that the root occurs 
twice in the same sentence in its different 
iigniflcationa, e.g. "the crackling of tliarjii 
nnder a pot." The shovels. The Hebrew 
word is D<j)ji. This word occurs in the Old 
Testament nine times — in Exodus, Numbers, 
Kings, Chronicles, and Jeremiah. The use 



of the shovel was to remove the ashes. The 
basins should very probably reoA fleth-hodkt. 

Ver. 12. — The pommels. The Hebrew 
word is n''.), translated in the parallel 
"bowls." The word occurs in the Old Tes- 
tament twelve times, and is translated six 
times (in Judges and Joshua) "springs," 
four times " bowls," and twice " pommels." 
It was an architectural ornament to the 
capital, in shape like a ball. The chapiters. 
The Hebrew word is nlris, occurring twenty- 
three times or more, and always translated 
thus ; in modern architecture, the head or 
capital of the pillar. The two wreathi. 
The word is nD3'E>, occurring fifteen times, 
and translated seven times " net-work," five 
times " wreath," or " wreathen-work," once 
a " snare," once " checker-work," and once a 
" lattice." These wreaths were of some lace 
pattern plaiting and festoons of fancy chain- 
work. The fuller expression of them is 
found in 1 Kings vii. 17, though in descrip- 
tion not more distinct, certainly — " nets of 
checker-work, and wreaths of chain-work." 

Ver. 13. — Four hundred pomegranates. 
This number of pomegranates substantially 
agrees with the parallel (1 Kings vii. 20). 
Tliere were two hundred of them on each 
wreath that encircled the chapiter. The 
pomegranate wns a favourite ornament in 
work as well aa in more solid architectural 
forms (Exod. xxviii. 'A?,, 31). The popu- 
larity of the fruit as fnoJ (Numb. xili. 28; 
XX. 5 ; Deut. viii. 8 ; Josh. xv. 32 ; xxi. 2!5), 
its simple beauty to the eye (Cant. iv. 3, 13), 
and its welcome homeliness, will quite ac- 
count for this beside any symbolic signifi- 
cance that may have become attached to it. 
The description of the pomegranate as a 
fruit may be found in any Bible dictionary, 
but especially in Tristram's ' Natural His- 
tory of the Bible.' 

Ver. 14. — Bases. The first mention of 
these in Chronicles, on which so much is said 
in the parallel (1 Kings vii. 27—39). Tlie 
Hebrew word is HjiDp, occurring eighteen 
times in Kings, twice in Chronicles, once in 
Ezra, and three times in Jeremiah. These 
bases were, as may be learnt more fully in 
the parallel, pedestals of brass four cubits 
square by three and a half high, supported 
by wheels a cubit and a half in diameter. 
The pedestals were richly decorated with 
mouldings, and with the similitudes of lioui, 
oxen, and cherubim, and with other subor- 
dinate ornamental work, and were designed 
to bear the lavers, the use of which is given 
in ver. 6. Vers. 6 — 16 in our chapter 
strongly suggest, in their repetitiousness, the 
writer's resort to different sources and 
authorities for his matter. 

Ver. 16. — Flesh-hooks. Hebrew, niJ^j!; 
occurring twice in Exodus (xxvii. 3 ; xxxviii. 



OH. IV. 1—22.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 



'5 



S), once in Numbers, and twice in Chro- 
nicies. Another form of the same root, J^ja 
occurs twice in Samuel, in the same sense of 
"flesh-hook" (1 Sam. ii. 13, 14), where also 
its use is made dramatically plain. Hnram 
his father ; i.e. his chief artist. 

Ter. 17. — In the plain ... in the olay; 
c.e. in the Ciccar (or round, equivalent to 
the New Testament " region round about ") 
of Jordan, a distinctive designation of the 
Jordan yalley (Conder's ' Handbook to the 
Bible,' p. 213). The region here intended 
lies east of the river, in what became the 
division of Gad. Suoooth lay a little to the 
north of the river Jabbok, which flows al- 
most east to west into tlie Jordan. Zered- 
athah ; i.q. Zarthan of 1 Kings vii. 46 ; and 
this latter is in the Hebrew also the same 
in characters and all with the Zaretan of 
Josli. iii. 16. Very possibly the place is the 
same as Zereraih (Judg. vii. 22). The exact 
sites of these places are not known, though 
tlie range within which they all lay is clear 
(see Grove's article in Smith's ' Bible Dic- 
tionary,' iii. 1817). The clay ground ; that 
is, " the clay of tiie ground " (Hebrew). The 
radical idea of the word here translated 
" clay " is " thickness," which should not be 
rendered, as in margin, " thicknesses." The 
word (3J|) occurs in all thirty-five times, and 
is rendered a large proportion of these times 
" clouds" or " thick clouds " (e.g. Exod. xix. 
9), clouds being presumably thicknesses in 
air; but if the subject-matter in question be 
in wood, or growing timber, or the ground, 
the word is rendered conformably "thick 
planks " (1 Kings vii. 6 ; Ezek. xli. 25, 26), 
or "thickets" (Jer. iv. 29), or "clay" (as 
here), to distinguish from other lighter or 
more friable soil. 

Ver. 20. — Candlesticks . . . lamps, that 
they should bum after the manner before 
the oracle. Ten candlesticks, as we learn 
here and in ver. 7, supersede in Solomon's 
tfmple the one candlestick, with its central 
fhaft lamp, and the three branch lamps on 
either side of Moses and the tabernacle 
(Exod. ixv. 31—87 ; xxxvii. 17—24 ; Lev. 
xxiv. 4; JosephuB, 'Ant.,' iii. 6. § 6, 7; 
MairaonidcB [1135—1205], "De tempio, ya- 
sig sanctuarii," etc.). This single candle- 
•tlck was restored in Zerubbabel's temple. 
The present ten candlesticks, or strictly can- 
delabra, of Solomon are said at one time to 
have been placed in a row like a rail before 
the veil, and connected with a chain under 
which the high priest went on the Day of 
Atonement into the inner sanctuary. The 



removal of these candelabra is recorded Jer. 
Iii. 19. The expression, " after the manner," 
points to the various and somewhat minute 
regulation for the lighting, trimming, and 
keeping alight of the lamps, all or some, of 
the candelabra (Exod. xxvii. 19 — 21 ; Lev. 
xxiv. 1 — 3). 'The use of the word for 
"lamp"(nq) in some passages (1 Sam. iii. 
3; 2 Sam. xxi. 17; Prov. xiii. 9; xx. 27; 
Ps. xviii. 29) suggests not the part as used 
for the whole in speakingof the candelabrum, 
but more probably that the perpetual burn- 
ing was not of all seven lamps, but of one, 
the central shaft. 

Ver. 21. — ^Tho flowers ; Hebrew, nis, oc- 
curring sixteen times, of which number it is 
translated " flowers " thirteen times, " buds " 
twice, and " blossom " once. Ihe flower was 
a part of the ornamentation of the branches 
of the candelabrum (Exod. xxv. 31, 33). 
The tongs; Hebrew, D'njiijn, occurring six 
times, of which number it is translated five 
times "tongs," but once " snuffers" (Exod. 
xxxvii. 23). This latter is the corrector 
translation, perhaps. The instrument, at 
any rate, was to trim the lamp-wicks (Exod. 
xxv. 38). 

Ver. 22. — ^The snuffers; Hebrew, niipt!?, 
oocuning five times, and always translated 
" snuffers." A slightly different form of 
the word is translated " pruning-hooks " four 
times in the Prophets Isaiah, Joel, Mlcah. 
No doubt these snuffers were something dif- 
ferent from the tongs of the preceding verse; 
the use of one may have been rather to cut 
the wicks, and the other to trim them. The 
spoons ; Hebrew, cjs. This is the word used 
BO often for the " hand," but the essential 
idea of which is ihehollow of either hand or 
foot or other thing, and among other things 
of a spoon shape. The word is used of the 
frankincense-cups (Numb. vii. 14, 20, 26) 
brought to the dedication of the tabernacle 
by the several princes. The censers ; He- 
brew, ninriD. These were "snuff-dishes" 
(Exod. xxv.' 38; xxxvii. 23; Numb. iv. 9). 
The entry of the house ; Hebrew, nns. Some 
think this word refers to the door-/rame8, as 
distinct from the door- leaves or doors them- 
selves. But the parallel (1 Kings vii. 50) 
gives na what is translated as " hinges " 
(Hebrew, lie), a word that occurs only here 
in any such sense, as presumably (Gesenius, 
'Lexicon') "the hollowed part of a hinge," 
and Isa. ill. 17 for the pudenda muliehria. 
The mistaken transcribing of a hheth for a 
tou will amply account for the difference. 



H0MILETIC8. 

Vers. 1 22. — Tha altar, the tea, the light, and the bread. The homiletica of this 

ehapter, viewed in certain general aspects, have been already treated with those 



46 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. iv. 1—22. 

of ch, iii. But it remains to notice other interesting and important aspects of the 
contents of this chapter. As soon as these are exhibited in such a manner as to make 
their relative importance apparent, they do indeed become of marked interest. 

I. First, and no doubt first in importance, we read of the great altar ov bbass. 
The contents of the temple begin from this. The sacrifice is the great feature ; nay, 
the great fact of worship on the part of the Church on earth. By this early forecast 
of prophecy ; by the earlier of the tabernacle ; by the much earlier of the patriarchs' 
house and family ; by one earlier even than that — ^by the earliest of all, just outside 
the garden of Eden, and "eastward" of it, and in the presence of "cherubim" and 
" flaming sword " there, — the sacrifice is what Scripture brings prominently to our view. 
Take note also of the " golden altar" (ver. 19). Well may it be that, though in every 
corruptest form of religion, no heathen tribe that emerges to view in our wide fields of 
missionary enterprise needs to be taught one thing, viz. the place of "sacrifice and 
ofierins" in religion, the call for it, the efScacy of it. Can we deny, all charity 
granted, that the lesson all this teaches nothing short of blindoess can fail to see and 
acknowledge I 

IL We notice that, second in order, comes the great bxa of moltkn bbabb, with its 
■ymbolic lily-flower ornamentation. The use of the " molten sea " is expressly stated. 
That use reminds us primarily of the need on the part of the priests of old, and of those 
of modern day, who in even a more real sense take their place, of all cleanness of Land, 
of deed, of word, of thought, of conscience ; furthermore, of the perpetually recurring 
need of the cleansing and renewing of their spirit ; and of this most solemn thought, 
that even in their holiest work impurity and defilement may be first contracted, and 
most disastrously. And then, by all most just and certain of inference, it reminds all 
believers, all servants of God and oiu- Lord Jesus Christ, all saints and faithful, of their 
perpetual need of such purification as consists of self-examining and self-watching 
together with the direct and only all-suflaoing sanctification of the Holy Ghost. 

III. We notice, third in order, the ten lavbbs. These, for the washing of the 
victims and sacrificial offerings themselves, remind us what pure offerings and genuine 
sacrifices all that we bring to God should be; broken and contrite hearts, simplest 
motives, genuine affections, and the outward objective gifts we bring, not merely 
ungrudged, but — ^best proof of the same — of our best, of what may have cost us self- 
denial, some preparation, some honest labour to make them a little less unworthy of 
the Master's work. To bring the blemished, to bring what we can so utterly dispense 
with, that we either do not know it is gone, or are glad to know it, is, in plain words, 
to bring polluted offerings. 

IV. We find, next in order, the ten golden oamdlbbtioks, each probably of seven- 
fold lamps. They were for actual light. They were typical of that yet more actual 
ipiritual light that must ever be present in the true Church, must ever be witnessed 
to by it, and which must ever be shed forth from the true Church. We are not to 
forget that these, too, were made from the pattern shown in the mount. And the 
various and beautiful Scripture references to them are most animating to think of (see, 
for instance, Zech. iv. 1—3, 11—14 ; Rev. i. 12, 13, 20 ; ii. 1 ; xi. 3—5). 

V. We have next the ten tables on which was placed the shewbread, which lay 
there one week, and was after that to be eaten by the priests alone. Though it is not 
distinctly revealed what the twelve loaves of shewbread intended, the very mystery 
left hanging about it enhances our interest in it, since high importance is repeatedly 
attached to the mention of it. It must justly be regarded as an ordinance; it must 
•urely typify nourishment, and that not the mere nourishment of the body, but of 
very spiritual life. It was the sAetobread, i.e. of Ood ; the presence-bread, i.e. of God. 
Was it not one perpetual standing type of the Bread of lyfe — th* Bread that was to coma 
down from heaven for the life of the world ? 

And after these five leading declarations of the contents of the temple, and the 
preparation of them, there follow descriptions of several lesser ones, all beautiful, all 
pure and costly in their material, each with its distinct tributary service and use. 
Distinct attention may be invited to the seventeenth verse, specifying the place where 
King Hiram cast the precious metal vessels, and the pillars, etc. It must not be said 
that this statement may not be important, and may serve merely some perhaps evidentid 
ase at some time or another, in corroborating tlie general contents of this holy history. 



OH. IV. 1—22.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 47 

Yet, if It be so, the mere suggestions it inevitably excites are worth giving some 
expression to. The moral suggestions of the clay ground and thickened clay, by help of 
which and in which the finest vessels, and most enduring monuments of metal were 
cast and fashioned, are fruitful. They may recall to us the very mould original of 
that body into which the Almighty breathed the breath of life, and countless instances 
in the history of the individual and of the Church, when the Master-Potter has indeed 
(hown his sovereign power ami unchallengeable right over the clay. Out of it, what 
▼essels of grace and beauty and enduringness has not he tashioned 1 by aid of it, 
and all its humiliation, what grand results to character, discipline, and sanctification, 
has not he brought about ! and — not the least encouragement to our faith and patience 
in trial, in affliction, in the horrible pit and miry clay — ^how has the very contrast 
astonished and delighted the beholding Church and world, between the methods used 
and the Divine results obtained 1 But the humble sufferer himself has been not a mere 
admiring beholder. His tears have been turned into smiles and joy; and even on 
earth he has learnt how the " sufTering " has been outweighed beyond all estimate by 
gain, advantage, and that which he best knows to be the earnest of a certain " eternal 
weight of glory." 

HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORa 

Vers. 1 — 6. — Aec^table worship. " He made an altar of brass." This is a simple 
sentence enough, but it is one which had a great significance to the people of God. 
For to that brazen altar they came for many generations, and there they either wor- 
shipped God and gained his Divine favour, or they failed to do the one and to secure 
the other. It was the place of sanctity or profanation, of victory or defeat. It, with 
the various regulations that applied to it and provisions that were made for it, tought 
them, and it teaches us — 

I. That man mat meet with God, in wobship and communion. God is not so far 
removed from us in his nature, nor are we so separated from him by our sin, but that 
he is willing to draw nigh to us, is indeed desirous of meeting us. He is the Infinite 
and Eternal One, immeasurably above us ; but he is our heavenly Father, profoundly 
interested in us and mindful of us. He is the Holy One, who hates all manner of 
iniquity ; but he is also the Merciful One, delighting to forgive and to restore. He, 
therefore, not only permits his human children to meet him at his altar, in the sanctuary, 
but he positively enjoins this as a saoied duty; he is displeased when we neglect to do 
so. But, apart from its obligatoriness, it is "a good thing " for us, an exalted privilege 
and a most valuable opportunity, " to draw nigh to God." 

II. That there he should seek God's mbrct. This altar of brass was to receive 
sacrifices ; and among these, sin offerings and trespass offerings were to be conspicuous. 
We are to draw near to the God whom we have grieved and wronged, with the language 
of confession on our lips, pleading the great sacrifice as a propitiation for our sin. 

III. That there he should dedicate (ee-dedicate) himself to hib servicb. 
Burnt offerings (holocausts) and peace offerings as well as sin offerings were presented 
at that brazen altar. In the house of the Lord we are to consecrate our tohole selva to 
him, and are to recognize that all we have and are is his, to be spent in his fear and 
service. 

IV. That he must see to it that both himself and his saorifiok abb fubb. 
In tlat " molten sea " (ver. 2) the priests were to wash, that they themselves might bs 
unspotted when engaged in their sacred work. And in the lavers (ver. 6) they were to 
Tvash " such things as they offered for the burnt offering," the " gifts and sacrifices them- 
selves." Both offerers and offerings were to be perfectly pure when the Holy One of 
Israel was approached in worship. And with what purity of heart should we draw 
nigh to him now I It is only those who have " clean hands and a pure heart " that can 
" see God," or that will be accepted by him. It is only those who worship " in sprit* 
who worship him at all (John iv. 24). And as now we all — the whole Christian com- 
munity — are " priests unto God," and are charged to present " spiritual sacrifices" unto 
him, it becomes us to remember that both (1) our own hearts and also (2) our laerifieei, 
i.e. our thoughts, our feelings, our purposes, our vows, our prayers, our praises, must 
l»" clean" and pure We must be clean who "bear the vessels of the Lord," who 



48 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE 0HE0N1ULE8. [oh. iv. 1—22. 

■peak his truth, who lead his people in prayer to himself. And the spiritual " gifts " 
of all who worship him must be cleansed of all impurity, of all selfishness and worldli- 
ness, of all insincerity, of all unholy rivaby or envy, that they may " come up with 
acceptance " in the sight of God. — 0. 

Ver. 7. — Lights in the world. There are many difficulties and disagreements about 
the spiritual significance of the temple furniture ; but there is a general agreement a» 
to the meaning of the "candlestick," or of these "ten candlesticks of gold" to which 
the text refers. As in the "Divine compartment" of the "most holy place" the 
Shechinah was the symbol of the Divine presence, and spoke of the Lord God of Israel 
as the one true Light of the world, so in the human department of the " holy place " 
these lights were the symbol of the Hebrew Church, regarded as the centre and source 
of light in the midst of surrounding darkness. And such it was. We may well regard — 

L IsBAEL AS THE souBUB! OF LIGHT. Perhaps rather as the possessor than the source, 
for communication between neighbouring countries was very much more limited then 
than it is now ; and it was in its later days that the Jew was such a traveller and 
such a propagandist. But from the time that God made himself and his will known 
to Moses, down to the birth of Christ, Divine truth was known in Israel as it was not 
known elsewhere, and " salvation was of the Jews," as our Lord declared. Comparing 
the theological and ethical ideas of the people of God with those of contemporary 
peoples, we see how really enlightened they were. And some of the most essential 
doctrines, on which all Divine wisdom, and all moral excellency, and all national pros- 
perity, and all individual well-being must always rest, were carried by the worshippers of 
Jehovah to Egypt, to Persia, to Eome, to still more distant countries. The light that 
shone in the sanctuary went forth and illumined a large space. 

II. The Christian Chukch as a bouecb of light. Said the great Teacher to his 
disciples, and through them to his Church for all time, "Ye are the light of the woild." 
The Apostle Paul wrote to his converts at Ephesus, and through them to ns, " Ye are 
light in the Lord." And it becomes us to do two things. 1. Manifest the great character- 
istic of light ^purity. To "walk as children of light, . . . inall goodness and righteousness 
and truth " (Eph. v. 8, 9) ; as the servants of him who himself " is light, in whom is no 
darkness at all;" to be "holy as he is holy." 2. Discharge the great functiort of light — 
to reveal. To " make manifest " (Eph. v. 13) those great verities which renew and sustain 
and ennoble us in heart and life. We are so to let our light shine that men may see 
our good works, and glorify our Divine Father. It does not take any prolonged study, 
or any range of experience, or any remarkable talent, to cause men to know the 
redeeming truths which restore them to God ; which give them spiritual rest and abid- 
ing joy, and a hope that will not make ashamed ; which build them up in manly virtues 
and in Christian graces ; which prepare for the heavenly kingdom. Even the humbler 
disciples, who claim no rank in the community, may render this valuable service. (1) 
By living a true, faithful, earnest life, day by day, in the love of Christ ; (2) by speak- 
ing familiar Christian truth to those who are willing to hear it, this good work caa be 
wrought. — C. 

Ver. 8. — OocPs bounty and our response. The significance of the table of shew- 
bread (of which Solomon, in his desire for fulness and richness of provision, now made 
ten) depends on its position and on the objects it was to sustain. The table stood in 
the "holy place," very near to the inner sanctuary, where the presence of God wai 
symbolized ; and it bore upon it the shewbread, or " bread of presence ; " this was so 
called because it was " the shewbread before me always " (Exod. xxv. 30), continually 
in the presence of God. There were also some vessels (Exod. xxv. 29) which were 
probably intended to receive wine ("to pour out withal"), which was the ordinary 
accompaniment of bread, as the source of daily sustenance. The whole arrangement 
pointed to— 

I. A CONTINUAL BECooNiTioN OF DiviNB BOUNTY. The bread and wine which largely 
constituted and adequately represented the provision for the nation's need were placed 
in the near presence of God, as the One from whom they came. It was well that the 
Israelites should be continuallv acknowledging that the fruit of the field was of Divine 
origin. They were very mindful aud very proud of the great gift of the manna, which 



OH. r7. 1—22.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 49 

was a palpable and very remarkable provision from above — a clear produce of the power 
and goodness of God. They would be in danger of thinking that there was less of the 
Divine in the annual harvest; for this was, in part, the result of their own labour, and 
came gradually, by ordinary and gradual processes of nature. But Divine goodness 
and power were as truly in the latter as in the former. Prom God himself came the 
soil, the seed, the sunshine, the rain, the airs and winds of heaven ; from him came 
the power that made all these work together for the germination, growth, and ripening 
of the grain ; from him also came the knowledge and the skill which enabled the farmer 
to cultivate his ground and to secure his harvest; it was also of God's goodness that 
he required of his children the putting forth of these powers, both of body and mind, on 
the exercise of which so largely depended their health and character. The shewbread 
and the wine, standing where they stood, were a perpetual acknowledgment that all 
things which sustained and strengthened the nation came from the Lord their God. 

II. A SOLEMN DEDICATION OF HUMAN 8TKBNQTH TO THE SBRVICB OF GOD. It WaS 

significant enough that "pure frankincense [was to be placed] on each row" of the 
loaves or cakes (Lev. xxiv. 7). " The offering of incense was embodied prayer, and 
the placing of a vessel of incense upon this bread was like sending it up to God 
on the wings of devotion" (Pairbairn's 'Typology'). It was, therefore, "a kind of 
sacrifice," and is spoken of (Lev. xxiv. 7) as " an offering unto the Lord." To present 
to God those things which are the recognized sources of sustenance and strength, is to 
acknowledge that our power and our resources belong to him and should be paid to him; 
it is, indeed, solemnly to dedicate them to his service in formal worship. We dc the 
same thing now in our harvest thanksgiving services, and when we sing in the sanc- 
tuary hymns ascribing all our comforts and all our well-being to the good hand of our 
God. We only " perform our vows " when we dedicate to God, in daily life, the strength 
and the possessions with which he has enriched us ; when we live in grateful remembrance 
of his love, in cheerful obedience to his will, in active and earnest endeavour to serve 
his children and extend his kingdom. — C. 

Vers. 11 — 22. — Completeness in Christian ^service. Sacred service may be of two 
kinds : it may be feeble, slight, slovenly, wholly incomplete and unsatisfactory ; or, on 
the other hand, it may be vigorous, effective, thorough, commanding the esteem of men 
and securing the commendation of Christ. The way in which Solomon's temple was 
built biings before ua the more excellent order of service. It was characterized by — 

I. Solidity. The " two pillars " (ver. 12), and the chaiaoter of the timber and of the 
gold, are suggestive of strength and solidity. Our woik for Christ should have no 
slightness about it ; it should be good, solid, durable ; work that will resist the disinte- 
firating forces about us ; that may be " tried by flre " and still endure (see 1 Cor. iii. 
12 — 15). Por such a result we must not be content with stirring the emotions ; we 
must convince the judgment, must produce conviction in the soul, must reach and win 
the whole spiritual nature. 

II. Bbautt. The strong pillars were ornamented with pommels, with wreaths, and 
pomegranates (vers. 12, 13). Beauty as well as strength was in the building of the 
temple, and should be in the sanctuary of God, in the service of Jesus Christ (Ps. xcvL 
6). We should introduce into the work we do for our Master all the graces that 
we can bring — meekness of spirit, unselfishness of purpose, conciliatoriness of tone and 
temper, excellency of workmanship. On the top of the pillars should be pomegranates; 
covering and adorning our service should be sweetness and loveliness of manner and 
of spirit, 

III. Fitness. "In the plain of Jordan did the king cast them" (ver. 17). That 
was obviously a more fitting place for such an operation than the near neighbourhood 
of the site of the temple. Everything in its own time and place. That which is wholly 
unfitted for the sanctuary may be quite right and altogether suitable and desirable in 
the hall or in the home. The fitness or unfitness of the surroundings of a work may 
make all the difference between the excellent and the objectionable, between the useful 
and the harmful. 

IV. Attention to the mintitb. " Hiram made the pots, and the shovels, and tne 
basins " (ver. 11). " And the flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs, made he of gold, and 
that perfect gold" (ver. 21). Nothhig was too small or too trinal to be made by this 

n. OHBONIOIiEa ■ 



60 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. it, 1—22. 

•killed artificer, or to be made by him with the best material. There is nothing wa 
can do in the service of our Lord that is not honourable and worthy of our manhood ; 
nothing that we should not do to the full height of our ability. 

V. Abukdance. (Ver. 18.) It is not right that we should do our work in Christ's 
Tineyard in a spirit of perfuuctoriness, as the workman who will do no more than 
is imperatively demanded of him. Ours is not a slavery ; nor are we hirelings. We 
are the children of God ; we are the friends of Jesus Christ ; we are co-workers with 
him; his interests are ours also; we long intensely for the coming of his kingdom. We 
■hall not do stintingly or grudgingly what we do for him. We shall not count the 
hours, or the days, or the weeks we spend in his service ; we shall not measure the 
powers we employ for his glory. We shall gladly pour forth all our faculties, shall 
give in " great abundance " of our resources, that his Name may be extolled, and that 
£e may be made " very high." 

VI. PnBlTT. AH these things were made " of pure gold " (vers. 20, 22) ; the flowers, 
•te., of gold, " and that perfect gold " (ver, 21). The purest gold that could be obtained 
was used. The thought, the feeling, the energy, that is most perfectly refined of all 
dross of earthliness and selfishness, should be brought to the service of the Divine 
Redeemer. 

VII. CoNTiNUANCK. " Hiram finished the work that he was to make " (ver. 11). 
" The end crowns the work." Well is it for the Christian workman when, having 
•ndured all criticisms, having borne all rebufTs, having met and mastered all difficulties, 
having submitted to all disappointments, having cheerfully wrought all his labours and 
having struck his last stroke, he can say, " I have finished the work which thou gavest 
me to do." For him is a generous commendation and a large reward (Matt. xxv. 
23).— C. 

Ver. 11. — The manvfacture of the temple furniture. I. The cherubim. (Ch. iii. 10— 
13.) 1. Their appearance. Colossal winged figures ; but whether, like the cherubim 
of Ezekiel (i. 6) and of John (Rev. iv. 7), possessed of four faces (of a man, of a liun, 
of an ox, of an eagle) and six wings, cannot be decided. Probably they had only one 
face, resembling that of a man. Unlike the cherubim in the tabernacle, which were 
" beaten out of one piece of gold " (Bxod. xxxvii. 7), these were made of olive wood (1 
Kings vi. 23), presumably on account of its durability and firmness, qualities which 
induced the Greeks to select it as the best material out of which to construct idols (see 
Biehm, ' Handworterbuch,' art. " Oelbaum "). The woodwork was overlaid with gold. 
2. Their dimensions. In height ten cubits (1 Kings vi. 23) ; their wings were each five 
cubits long, or twenty cubits in all. They were thus twice as broad as high, and probably 
altogether double in size to those on the capporeth. 3. Their position. In the holy 
of holies, their feet upon the ground, their wings touching the walls on either side, and 
their feces directed towards the interior of the building, i.e. towards the holy place, 
whence only an intruder could enter the secret shrine. Underneath and between their 
outstretched wings, the ark, with the mercy-seat and the lesser cherubim, were subse- 
quently placed (ch. v. 8). 4. Jlieir meaning. That similar winged figures are met 
with in the mythologies and religions of Oriental peoples, in particular of the Egyptians 
and Assyrians, does not prove the cherubim of Jewish theology to have been derived 
from those. That in those the beast-figure prevails, while in these the human face 
predominates, marks an essential distinction between the two. Hence the notion that 
among the Hebrews the cherubim had no higher significance than such winged 
creatures had in Egypt, Assyria, or Babylon — were, in short, merely symbols of the 
underlying idea common to Oriental religions, that the life of nature is identical with 
the life of God (Bahr) — is to be rejected. So also is the opinion that they were purely 
mythical figures, like the Egyptian or Greek sphinxes (the former half-man and half- 
lion, the latter half-woman and half-lion), or like the colossal winged lions at the doors 
of Babylonian and Assyrian temples (Hengstenberg, ' Egypt and the Books of Mosea,' 
p. 163 ; Schrader, ' Die Keilinschriften, p, 40). That they represented real beings is now 
generally believed (Hofmann, Kurtz, Keil, Kliefoth, and others), and appears implied in 
the passage where they are first mentioned (Gen. iii. 24). That they belonged to the 
Nuue order of super-terrestrial existences as the angels and the seraphim of Scripture 
1 a necessary inference, from the fact that all three — angels (Pi. Ixviii. 17), seraphim 



CH. IV. 1—22.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 61 

. . __^ „^ — > 

{Isa. tL 2), and cherabim (2 Sam. xxii. 11; Ps. xviii. 10^— are depicted as attending 
Jehovah in bis tbeophaniea, or manifestations of himself to men. That they were 
different from angels may be inferred from the fact that these are nevar exhibited as 
winged, and are usually represented as Jehovah's messengers (Ps. civ. 4), which the 
cherubim never are. It is not so certain that they were different from the seraphim, or 
ahining ones (Isa. vi 2), who in appearance, situation, and function resembled them, 
having six wings, appearing always in the vicinity of the self-revealing Jehovah, and 
proclaiming aloud the presence of his glory. Yet from the fact that they are commonly 
exhibited as bearers or upholders of the Divine throne (b^zek. i. 26), whereas the 
seraphim surround the throne (Isa. vi. 2), it may be concluded that the two, though 
belonging to the same order, were not the same species of being (cf. Delitzsch on Isa. 
to vi. 2). At the same time, whilst holding the cherubim to have been images intended 
to represent real existences, it need not be assumed that the actual cherubim bad really 
the four faces of a man, of a lion, of an ox, and of au eagle. These belong to the depart- 
ment of symbology, in which supersensuous ideas are set forth in sensuous images. 
Hence, inasmuch as the human face represents the notion of intelligence, the leonine 
that of strength, the bovine that of endurance, and the aquiline that of keenness of 
vision, combined perhaps with the idea of swiftness of motion, the ascription of these 
to the cherubim can only mean that these heavenly beings were possessed of all the 
elements of a perfect life, and, as the crown and summit of creation, stood nearest God. 
5. Their /imction. Comparing the Scriptures in which they are alluded to, the 
following may be regarded as the complex function performed by the cherubim : 
(1) To proclaim the Divine presence, so that, wherever they are or appear, God is (Ps. 
zviii. 10 ; Exod. xxv. 22 ; Ezek. i. 26) ; (2) to keep guard over places rendered holy 
by the Divine presence, so that no unholy person might irreverently intrude therein 
(Gen. iii. 24) ; and (3) to symbolize that only beings themselves perfect could stand in 
the presence of the glory of God (Rev. iv, 8). All three functions may be said to have 
been performed by the colossal figures in Solomon's temple as well as by the smaller 
cherubim on the oapporeth in the tabernacle (see Kurtz, in Herzog's ' Real Enoyclopadie,' 
art. " Cherubim ; " Riehm, in ' Handworterbuch,' art. " Cherubim ; " Keil, 'Die Biblische 
Archaologie,' pp 92, etc.). 

II. The altar op inceksb. (Ver. 19.) 1. Its material. Like the other articles 
in the interior of the house, it was made of cedar wood and overlaid with gold (1 Kings 
viL 48). That in the tabernacle was formed of shittim wood overlaid with gold; was 
two cubits high, one long, and one broad ; was furnished with a covering, and horns of 
the same wood overlaid with gold (Exod. xxxvii. 25). 2. Its position. (1) In the 
holy place ; and (2) immediately in front of the entrance to the holy of holies, i.e. before 
the curtain, or second veil. 3. Its use. As in the tabernacle (Exod. xxxvii. 29), so in 
the temple, it was intended for the burning of fragrant incense before the holy of holies 
day and night, to S3'mbolize the adoration of Jehovah's worshipping people. 

in. The candlesticks. (Ver. 7.) 1. Their number. Ten. This was demanded 
by the larger dimensions of the temple in comparison with the tabernacle, which con- 
tained only one. 2. Their /orm. Each seven-branched, as in the tabernacle, i.e. con- 
sisting of a main stalk with three branches on either side, rising to the same height as 
that, each of the six branches and the middle stalk being crowned with a lamp (Exod. 
xxv. 31, etc. ; xxxvii. 17, etc.). 3. Their ornaments. Bowls, knops, and flowers, as in 
the tabernacle candlestick, seeing that each in the temple was constructed " according 
to its form." 4. Their utensils. Snuffers and basins ; the former to trim the wicks,, 
the latter to receive what was removed by the process. 5. Their use. To keep a light 
continually burning in the holy place and before the holy of holies (Exod. xxv. 37 ; xxviL 
20). Their material. 6. Of gold (ver. 7), pure (ver. 20), and perfect (ver, 21). In 
this, again, they resembled the candlestick in the tabernacle (Exod. xxv. 31). 7. Their 
position. In the holy place, before the oracle, five on either side. 8. Their significance. 
To symbolize either (1) the light of God's favour which the worshippers or the sacred 
community (represented by the priest who ministered in their name) enjoyed, when 
their sins had been first covered by the blood shed in the fore court (Ps. xxxvi. 9 ; 
IxxxLx. 16); or (2) the illumination which the Spirit-enlightened Church of God, 
collectively and individually, should shed forth upon the world (Matt. v. 16 ; PhU. 
ii. 15). 



62 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE OHEONICLES. [ch. iv. 1—22. 

IV. The tables of shewbbead. (Vers. 8, 19.) 1. Their number. Ten ; in the 
tahernacle, one. 2. Then position. Five on either side of the holy place. The one table 
in the tahernaole stood upon the side of the tabernacle northwHrd, without the veil 
(Exod. xl. 22). 3. Their material. Of gold (1 Chron. xxviii. 16). 4. Their purpose. 
To receive and set forth the shewbread, or the loaves of unleavened bread, twelve on 
each table, which were commanded to be set before the face of Jehovah continually 
(Exod. XXV. 30). 5. Their significance. To symbolize religious truths which it con- 
cerned Israel to know. The " face loaves " were so called, not because with them or the 
eating of them the si.;ht of God's face was associated, but because they stood continu- 
ally in God's presence as emblematic (1) of the spiritual food Israel should present 
to God in the good works they should perform through Divine assistance, and (2) of 
the spiritual nourishment pardoned worshippers should receive from God (Exod. 
xxiv. 11). 

V. The brazen altab. (Ver. 1.) 1. Its position. In the interior of the fore court 
(1 Kings viii. 22, 64). 2. Its dimensions. Twenty cubits long, twenty broad, and ten 
high. 3. Its miterial. Brass. 4. Its use. To offer thereupon the burnt offerings 
presented by the worshippers who came to the temple. 

VI. The MnLTBN SEA. (Vers. 2 — 5.) 1. Its appearance. A huge metallic ba<in, sup- 
ported on the backs of twelve metallic oxen — " three looking toward the north, three 
looldng toward the west, three looking toward the south, and three looking toward the 
east," all having their hinder parts inward. The basin had the form of a cup, decorated' 
on the brim with flowers of lilies, underneath the brim with two rows of " knops," ten 
in a cubit, therefore with three hundred in all, compassing the basin around (ver. 4 ; of. 
1 Kings vii. 28). 2. Its size. Ten cubits in diameter and thirty in circumference, 
five cubits high and a haridbreadth in thickness, with a capacity of three thousand, or,, 
according to a more accurate measurement (1 Kings vii. 26), two thousand baths, i.e. 
upwards of twelve thousand gallons. With this may be compared the basin borne by 
twelve lions in the Alhambra dt Granada, and the two giant sandstone vases which 
were found by Miiller at Amathus in Cyprus, each of which was oval-shaped, thirty- 
feet in circumference, had four handles, and rested on eight bulla, four in each half- 
round of the oval (see in Herzog and in Eiehm, art. " Meer ehernes "). 3. Its situation. 
Between the brazen altar and tiie porch, on the right side of the west end, over against 
the south of the court (ver. 10). 4. Its use. For the priests to wash in when they 
came to engage in the sacrificial worship of the sanctuary (ver. 6 ; cf. Exod. xxx. 19 — 
21). 5. Its significance. (1) The form and decorations of the vessel showed it was 
designed for priestly service. " Its form, that of an open Wy cup, corresponded to its 
purpose. If all budding and blossoming signified holiness and priesthood (Numb. xvL 
7; com p. with xvii. 20, 23; Ps. xcii. 14), the flower named the white, i.e. the lily,, 
must have been pre-eminently the priestly one" (Bahr). (2) The twelve oxen on 
which it rested accorded with the same idea. Oxen were the principal sacrificial 
animals, especially for the priests (Exod. xxix. 10, etc. ; Lev. iv. 3, etc. ; xvi. 11 ; 
Numb. viii. 8). Twelve were selected, hardly for the sake of symmetry (Thenius), or 
to represent the twelve months of the year (Vatke), but, like the twelve loaves of shew- 
bread, and the twelve lions on Solomon's throne (1 Kings x. 20), to symbolize the 
twelve tribes of Israel, which also when in camp were placed, like the oxen, three to 
each quarter of the heavens (Numb. ii. 2 — 31). (3) The washing of the priests was 
emblematic of that inward spiritual purity without which none can approach a holy 
God, or render to him acceptable service (Isa. i. 16 ; Heb. x. 22). 6. Its history. In 
after years it was taken down from off the brazen oxen by Ahaz and set upon a pave- 
ment of stones (2 Kings xvi. 17); it was ultimately broken in pieces by the Chaldeans, 
and its brass conveyed to Babylon (2 Kings xxv. 13). The brazen oxen the Chaldean 
general transported as booty to the East (Jer. lii. 20). 

VII. The lavebs. (Ver. 6.) 1. Their material. Brass, 2. Their number. Ten. 
S. Their position. Five on the riiht and five on the left of the brazen altar. 4. Their 
appearance. Basins resting upon bases or pedestals with wheels (ver. 14), of which a 
minute description is given in the First Book of Kings (vii. 27 — 37). 5. Their dimen- 
iiont. Every laver or basin four cubits in diameter. 6. Their contents. Forty baths, 
or two hundred and forty gallons. 7. Their use. To wash the victims in when thea»- 
wera brought to the priests to be offered upon the altar. — W. 



4)H.T. 1— 14.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHBONICLES. 



63 



Ver. 17. — An ancient manufactory. I. To whom it belonged. To Solomon the 
king. 

II. Where it wab situated. In the clay ground between Suocoth and Zeredathah, 
-both of which were in the plain of Jordan. 

III. By whom it was managed. By Hiram the artist. 

> IV. The fabrics it peodcjoed. The articles above described, all the vessels for th« 
house of God. — W. 



EXPOSITION. 



OHAPTEE V 



The first verse of this chapter would have 
■aiooA more fitly as the last verse of the 
previous chapter. The narrative, that began 
with the preparations for building the temple 
■(ch. i. 18 — ii. 18), and proceeded to the ac- 
count of the building itself, and the making 
of the various needed vessels (ch. iii. 1 — v. 
1), now goes on to recall and recount the 
dedication (ch. v. 2 — vii. 10), enriching the 
parallel (1 Kings vii. 51; viii. 1 — 12) by 
our vers. 11 (partly), 12, and 13 — an enrich- 
ing addition not by any means of insignificant 
•interest. Its colouring is rich, indeed, and 
its sound the sound of true music. 

Ver. 1. — The things that David . . . had 
•dedicated; literally, Hebrew, the holy things; 
i.e. the dedicate or set apart things of David. 
The temple-building, which had been com- 
menced in Solomon's fourth year, had occu- 
pied seven years in construction (1 Kings 
vi. 1), but another thirteen years in furnishing 
(1 Kings ix. 1, 2). The record of Chroni- 
■cles is, of course, in some respects somewhat 
more sketchy than that of Kings; and the 
correct view of the chronology has in both 
writers to be sought and read between the 
•lines. It was when the house and " all the 
work" designed "for the house of the Lord 
was finished," that (ver. 2) "Solomon 
assembled the elders," etc., and arranged 
•for the solemn dedication; that is, when 
four years of his reign, and seven years of 
iuilding and thirteen years of furuishing, 
etc., had elapsed. 

Ver. 2. — Comparing the language of this 
and the following verse with that used on 
the occasion of David's bringing up of the 
ark to Zion, found in 2 Sam. vi. 1 ; 1 Chron. 
ziii. and xv., some have thought that a con- 
siderable difference of tone is perceptible, 
>and that indication is given of the intention, 
or at any rate a feeling, even if more or less 
unconscious, on the part of Solomon, that 
times were ripe for a demonstration, that 
•should partake less of the enthusiasm of the 
mass, so far as his own summons might be 
^joncerned, and more of the form and dignity 
•of the chief and representative men of the 



nation. This view can hardly be pressed. 
The very word "wherefore" in ver. 3 goei 
far to discredit it. And any difference that 
may be apparent in the language is far more 
probably and easily attributable to the old 
cause of the narrower, though intenser, in- 
terest of the writer of Chronicles. 

Ver. 3. — In the feast which . . . in tht 
seventh month; i.e. tlie Feast of Tabernacles. 
This commenced on the fifteenth of the 
seventh month, named Ethanim (see 1 
Kings viii. 2). With this the festivals of 
the sacred year closed. 

Ver. 4. — The Eevites. So see Numb. iv. 
1.5, 19, 20, which, with our vers. 5, 7, throw 
this statement into sufficient harmony with 
that of the parallel (1 Kings viii. 3), which 
purports to say that thepriests only, unaided 
by the Kohathite Levites, performed the 
service. 

Ver. 5. — III the parallel (1 Kings viii. 4), 
the "and" in the lust line of this verse does 
not need the italic type, but is found in the 
Hebrew text, confirming o\vc version of ver. 
4 foregoing. The tabernacle of the con- 
gregation ; or, tent of meeting, designs here 
the tabernacle of Moses from Gibeon (comp. 
1 Kings iii. 4 ; 1 Sam. xxi. 6 ; 1 Chron. xvi. 
39, 40 ; ch. i. 3), and not the tent of Mount 
Zion (2 Sam. vi. 17). This tabernacle, then, 
and these holy vessels all, are carried into 
the new temple, as venerated relics and sacred 
mementoes of a memorable past of vicissitude. 
But the ark had still its ministry to per- 
form (ver. 7). 

Ver. 6. — King Solomon and all the con* 
gregation . . . sacrificed ; i.e., of course, with 
the intervention of their priests. 

Ver. 7. — The wings of the cherubim (see 
ch. iii. 10). Their situation was by the west 
wall of the oracle (1 Kings vi. 16). 

Ver. 9. — They drew out; i.e. the stavei 
projected. A similar intransitive oocun 
in Exod. xx. 12. Were seen from the ark. 
The words, " from the ark," are here probably 
by misposition, and should follow the words, 
the staves projected ; while the parallel tells 
us what should be in their place here, 
namely, " from the holy place " (1 Kings viii. 
8). The confusion and omission will merely 
lie with some copyists, for five manuscript! 
show the words "from the holy place." There 
it is unto this day. The parallel (1 Kings 
viii. 8) reads, "there they are unto this day," 



64 



THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. v. 1—14. 



i«. tile stoTM. In eithei case, whether the 
•ik or the staves were spoken of, the memo- 
randnm is exceedingly interesting and note- 
worthy, as a patent hare copy of an old 
reoord dating before the destruction of the 
temple, on the part of whether the writer of 
Einn or Chronicles. Plainly the historian 
tondiea ground, and shows us that we do 
also ; for it is evident that, far from cunningly 
devised fable, he has before hjp in either 
case an original document. 

Yer. 10. — Nothing in the ark save the two 
tables (see Deut. z. 5; and Exod. zl. 20; 
then zziv. 12; zxv. 16; xxxi. 18; xxxii. 
19; xxxiv. 1, 4, 29; xl. 20). The stones 
were therefore now, in Solomon's time, nearly 
four hundred and ninety years old. Why 
the " golden pot " and " Aaron's rod " (Heb. 
ix. 4) were not there does not appear. The 
language of the Epistle is partially con- 
firmed, at any rate in harmony with Exod. 
xvi. 34; Numb. xvii. 10. Possibly they 
may have now been removed by Solomon, 
but it seems very unlikely that, if so, no 
mention of the removal is made. On the 
other hand, the " book of the Law " had not 
been consigned to tlie ark, but to a place 
.« by the side of" it (Deut. xxxi. 25—27). 

Ver. 11.— The parallel (1 Kings viii. 10) 
•hows the first half of this verse and the last 
sentence of ver. 13 to make its tenth verse. 
All between these two is special to the present 
passage and to Chronicles. All the priests 
. . . not by course ; i.e. all of all the courses, 
twenty-four in number, instead of only the 
one course on daily duty at the time (1 
Chron. xxiii. 6 — 32 ; xxiv. 1 — 81). Present ; 
OT, found more literally; that is to say, all 
who were not for one cause or another out 
of reach (1 Chron. xxix. 17 ; Ezra viii. 25). 
The Hebrew word is the familiar D'NXDJn. 

Ver. 12. — This verse, marked off in the 
Authorized Version in brackets, is most 
graphic. First all the priests, who were 
not hors de combat, i.e. all the "courses" of 
them together, thronged the arena; and 
now they are joined by all the Levites who 
were singers, of them of Asaph, of Heman, 
of Jeduthun (1 Chron. xxv. 1 — 31), i.e. 
twenty-foor choirs in one, with their sons 
ftnd their brethren ; and tiiis collected choir 
is arrayed in white linen; and they have 
three kinds of musical instruments — cymbals 
(Fi. d. 5) and psalteries (or lutes) and 
harps (1 (jhron. xvi. 5; xxv. 1); and they 
take up their station at the east end of the 
•Itar, and still further a strong support 
flanks these of a hundred and twenty 
priests sounding with trumpets (1 Chron. 
xvi. 6). So ends our inopportune Authorized 
Version parenthesis. But to what all this? 
It ia a scene in a nation's history, in the 
universal Church's history ; it is witnessed 
firom heaven, and by Heaven's will recorded 



in the book on earth, which will endure 
through all generations, as long as the sua 
and moon endure, as ushering in the moment 
when, as described in the next verie, to the 
unanimous fervent adoration and praise of 
man, God bent a willing, gracious ear, 
and to earth the glory of heaven drew nigh. 
OymbaU. The word used here (D'B^XO), 
denoting strictly " paur of cymbals," occBre 
eleven times in Chronicles, once in Ezra, 
and once in Nehemiah. Another form of 
essentially the same word occurs once in 
2 Sam. vi. 5 and twice in Ps. cl. 5. This 
last passage notes two kinds of cymbals — the 
"loud" and the "high-sounding." It was 
the former of these that Asaph, Heman, and 
Jeduthun used, and their use was probably 
to regulate or beat the time (see Smith'* 
•Bible Dictionary,' i 375, 376; Condor's 
'Handbook to the Bible,' p. 167, 2nd edit.). 
Psalteries (^3:)- This word occurs twenty- 
eight times in the Old Testament, but of 
these it is translated (Authorized Version^ 
four times as "viols" (Isa. v. 12; xiv. 11; 
Amos V. 23 ; vi. 5) ; it is also once rendered 
" vessels of flagons " (Isa. xxii. 24), but the 
margin offers the version "instruments of 
viols." While the cymbal was, of course, an 
instrument of percussion, the psaltery was 
one of strings — its use was as an accompani- 
ment to the voice. The first mention of it 
is very interesting (1 Sam. x. 5). Compare 
also David's and Solomon's psaltery in 2 
Sam. vi. 5; ch. ix. 11. Barps(yii2). This 
word occurs forty-two times, beginning with 
Gen. iv. 21. Trumpets (nn^sn). This word 
(including eleven of the personal forms of it, 
as e.g. the person blowing the trumpef) occurs 
just forty times, beginning with Numb. x. 2. 
It was tlie straight tvha, and was not, there- 
fore, the same with the ram's-horn shaped 
buccina ("i?^'). generally rendered in the 
Authorized Version " cornet," but sometime* 
" trumpet ; " the specialty of the comet being 
to blow a sound for a signal or summons of 
some sort, whether secular as in war, or 
sacred as for some festival. The trumpets 
of nur verse evidently (Numb. x. 8) were in 
a particular sense the instrument of the 
priests. 

Ver. 13. — It cannot but be that it wa» 
intended in this verse that attention should 
be rivetted to the fact of the splendid con- 
sentaneity of all singers and all musicians, 
of hearts and voices and instruments. The 
suggestion is as significant as it is impressive, 
a suggestion to the Church of all time, and 
supremely asking notice now. Even the 
house. The close of ver. 14, as also the 
parallel (1 Kings viii. Il),justifie8 the suppo- 
sition that the Septuagint showing the word 
Sd^Tjs, guides us rightly in restoring the 
word "glory" (to?) here, in place of the 



OH.V. 1— 14.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 



55 



word "honie" (n«a). Por he is good (so 
1 Chron. xvi. 84 ; Fs. cxxxvi. 1 ; ch. vii. 3 ; 
Ezroiii 11). 



VeT. 14.— The priests conld not stand t* 
minister by reason of the olond (so Exod. 
xl. 34, 35). 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1—14. — The first worship in the finished temple. The homiletic matter of this 
chapter may be said to be one. For we are, in fact, brought face to face with the central 
interest— the mystic presence, and veiled glory of the tabernacle or temple, in connection 
with the outer worship — the whole form of the outer worship of the Church visible of 
Qod's ancient people. This central interest means the ark — the ark of the covenant ; 
the ark, with its two Divine autograph tables of stone ; the ark, with the mercy-seat 
upon it, and its overshadowing guardian cherubim. This ark is now to be installed in 
the place of long " rest " — long, though indeed it ought to have been so much longer. 
We may notice — 

I. In the first place, the solemn, sedulous oabe with which " the king, and all the 
heads of the tribes, and the chief of the fathers of the children of Israel," drawing upon 
their chastened memories of foimer error, neglect, irreverence, and consequent disastrous 
punishment, brought up from the city of David, even Zion, that ark by the hands and 
uuder the strict escort of its proper conservers, viz. " the priests, the Levites." 

n. That the occasion was one observed and celebrated with untold, unnuubebed 

SACRIFICES. 

III. Looking into the real significance of.tTie ark, so far as we can determine it, wa 
are called to notice the tremendous sanction implied in the covenant. The heads 
of a complete moral law for all the world, world without end, are surely what is to be 
understood to be written, in the handwriting of God, graven on those tables. The 
covenant of mercy rests, and is based upon, these "observed and done." Prom the 
moment that the dawning fropossibility of observing these takes any shape (however 
dim to the merely self-trustful and self-confident), the prefigured form of the cross, 
however dim it also be, begins to take shape. There are countless sacrifices " before the 
king, before the ark" — they are all speaking the "of necessity " (Heb. viii. 3) that arises 
out of the significance of that ark, or rather of that which is embodied in it. No wonder, 
then, that its ordained symbolizing of the Divine presence should be so mysterious, so 
deep, yet ever, as a fact, so reverently asserted and fenced. It is within the veil ; it is 
in the most holy place ; it is unseen, unvisited except " once a year ; " the cloud of 
awe and of glory, of darkness and of radiancy, is its visitant ; it is the consecrate site 
of the Shechinah, before which a marvelling and adoring people wait, gaze, bow down, 
" as seeing the invisible " One ! 

IV. Lastly, the deep satisfaction that results to the Church of God from a 
genuinely deep impression of his presence abiding in and with it. It was when the 
full chorus of adoring praise and joyful devotion, because of " the Lord and the ark of 
his strength having arisen into their rest " (Ps. cxxxii. 8), resounded with leaping tumult 
of holy gladness, that " the cloud filled the house," and that " the glory of the Lord 
filled the house." All this was but the sensible projecting, for the earlier Church, of 
the greater spiritual facts and realities with which the Church of modern day is well 
acquainted, although it ought to be so much better acquainted with them than it is. 



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. 1. — Conclution, " Thus all the work that Solomon made . . . was finished." Better 
is the end of some things than the beginning, though there are other things in which 
the beginning is better than the end. It is matters of achievement in which the end 
is so honourable and so desirable. 

I. It is ground fob congratulation. We may congratulate ourselves and receive 
the felicitation of our friends that we have been spared long enough in health and 
strength ; that we have had patience to endure all the vexations, skill and determination 
to surmount all the difficulties, resolution to proceed in spite of all the disappointment! 
that we have been called to confront ; that we have had the steadfastness of soul that 



56 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHEONICLBS. [ch. v. 1— 14. 

enabled us to pursue our aim until the goal was reached and the work was done. The 
path of human life is strewn with failures, with abortive attempts to do what was 
unattainable, with half-built towers which those who began but were unable to finish 
(Luke xiv. 28 — 30) ; well will it be for us if those who shall speak or write of us are 
aWe to record that we finished what we took in hand. Persistency is a characteristic 
to be carefully cultivated, and to be exemplified all through our life. 

II. It is an occasion for thankfulness. 1. That we have been able to conclude 
any work on whicli we have set our heart, if it be a right and worthy ambition we 
have cherished, is reason enough for gratitude to Grod. For all bodily health, all mental 
faculty, all moral vigour and capacity, have come ultimately from him. 2. And if we 
have been able to do something that will last, we have especial reason for thankfulness. 
What better thing can we hope for or deserve than that we should be the means 
of effecting that which will be speaking and working; when our tongue is silent and our 
hand is still in death ? We should bless our God with peculiar fervour that he has 
thus employed us ; that, through his grace and power resting upon us and our endeavour, 
we have so wrought that, when we are dead, we shall still be speaking (Heb. xi. 4) ; 
that, perhaps, long years and even generations after we have been forgotten, the work 
we did will be imparting a blessing to the children of men, to heal, to comfort, to 
enlighten, to renew. 

III. It mat be a souecb op inspieation. When Solomon finished the building 
of the temple he had many years to reign ; there was abundance of strength and energy 
remaining in him to begin and finish other works. And if we are rightly affected by 
what we have wrought, we shall not say, " I have accomplished something ; I will now 
take my ease and spend my time in enjoyment." On the contrary, we shall say, " I 
have proved that it is in my power to do one good thing for my Master and my fellow- 
men ; I will commence another. I will still further trust the kindness of my heavenly 
Father, and draw upon his resources with which to labour and to persevere, until the 
end again crowns the work." So the conclusion of one solid achievement will be an 
inspiration to begin another, as it has been in very many instances in the lives of the 
good and true. — C. 

Ver. 1 (latter part). — Dedication, permitted and desired. We have here— 

I. The dedication which God permitted. God did not allow David to build 
the temple, because he had been " a man of war, and had shed blood " (1 Ohron. xxviii. 
3); it was fitting that the house of the Lord, the " God of peace," should be built by 
a sovereign whose very name spoke of peace, and whose reign was pacific. But God 
permitted David to dedicate to the service of the temple the spoils he had taken in war. 
It was, apparently, those spoils which he had taken from Syria, Moab, Ammon, etc., after 
his successful battles, that he " dedicated unto the Lord," which Solomon now " brought 
in " (see 2 Sam. viii. 9 — 12). But they do not seem to have had the higher honour of 
being used in the services of the temple; they were stored "among the treasures of the 
house," only to be occasionally brought out and admired. Some things there were 
which might not, on any conditions whatever, be accepted as offerings to the Lord. But 
these spoils were taken in wars which were honourably conducted, and which at that 
time, in that twilight of history, were fought out with a perfectly clear conscience; they 
might, therefore, he dedicated to the Lord, and " put among the treasures " of the temple. 
We may be right in aarrying our trophies and depositing them in our churches and 
cathedrals, but it is only by a gracious Divine permission that we can dedicate to him 
that which has been wrested from our brother's hands by violence. This is the lowest, 
the least precious and acceptable form which our dedication of substance can take. We 
must look about for that which is worthier of ourselves, more consonant with the 
peaceable and spiritual economy under which we live, more pleasing in the sight of the 
Lord of love. 

II. The dedication which God desires. There are three things which our God 
not only alloms us to dedicate to himself, but desires that we should do so. 1. Of the 
products of our peaceful industry. These may be in kind, as they were, very largely, 
under Judaism — the creatures taken from flocks and herds, or the produce of the field and 
garden ; as they still are in semi-civilized communities, in islands recently reclaimed 
from tdolatry and barbarism. Or they may be in current coin, in money. There is no 



OH. V. 1—14.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE OHBONIGLES. 57 

precept requiring Christian men to devote a particular proportion of their earnings to 
the cause of Christ and man. But they are at liberty to do so ; and if they do this, 
freely, conscientiously, and in the spirit of gratitude and attachment to the Person and 
the kingdom of their Lord, they do that which will be acceptable to him — a source of 
continual sacred satisfaction to themselves, and a material contribution to the welfare 
of others. 2. 0/ the culture of our faculties. We may dedicate to the cause of Jesus 
■Christ generally, and to the service of the house of the Lord particularly, the trained 
power and skill we have acquired — in music and sacred song, in oratory and persuasive- 
ness, in architecture and ornamentation. But it may be said, speaking more broadly, 
that our God is desiring and demanding of us the dedication : 3. Of ourselves and our 
whole life. Our will, that it may be subjected to his will ; our heart, that its affection 
may be yielded to our Divine Friend ; our understanding, that our mental powers may 
be exercised for the glory of his Name and the furtherance of his kingdom ; our days 
and hours, that they may all be spent consciously in his presence, and continuously in 
his service and honour. This is the true dedication ; and the little child that thus 
•dedicates its powers and days to the service of its Saviour may be doing more for God 
than the royal king setting apart golden vessels to be " put among the treasures " of 
the sanctuary. — C. 

Vers. 2 — 13. — Bringing in the ark. It was fitting enough that the ark which had 
been in the ancient tabernacle should be brought with mtich ceremony into the new 
temple. It linked the past and the future, and it associated two things which must be 
■constantly kept together. It suggests to us — 

I. The true national continuity. This was not found at all in the permanence 
•of one form of government, for that had passed from a theocracy to a monarchy ; nor 
was it found only or even chiefly in the descent by blood of one generation from another ; 
nor in the continuance of the same social customs. It was found in the faithfulness of 
the people to the Lord their God ; in the perpetuity of the national faith and, conse- 
quently, of the national morals and habits of life. The code of religious and ethical law 
which God gave to them through Moses was to remain the statute law of the realm. 
It was to be placed, on the most solemn occasion, under the most striking and memor- 
able conditions, in the most sacred place of the sacred building in the holy city (vers. 
7 — 10). The nation that changes its faith is itself changed; it is not the same, but 
another nation. The people that remain loyal to their God and true to their a[icient 
■convictions are the same people, however their institutions and customs may be 
modified by "time and change." 

II. The two great codnterpakts op Divine service. Much was made of the 
altar of sacrifice ; indeed, the temple was the place ot sacrifice. Tbere, and there only, 
could offerings be presented and sin be expiated. But in the most holy place, beneath 
the " mercy-seat," at the very point where the blood was sprinkled on the great Day of 
Atonement, was the ark which held the tables of stone ; and on these was inscribed the 
epitome of law, the demand for obedience. Sacrifice (or worship, as it is now) and 
obedience are the two great complementary parts of the service of God (see homily on 
ch. i. 3 — 5). 

III. The best service of worldly dignity. We learn (ver. 2) that " the elders 
of Israel, and all the heads of the tribes," assembled on this occasion ; they lent the 
weight of their social dignity to it. They did well to do this. There is nothing in 
which any kind of earthly distinction can be so well engaged as in promoting the 
piety of the people, in attaching them more firmly to their sacred principles, connecting 
them with and committing them to the service of the living God. Sad is it indeed 
when rank uses its influence to undermine the faith ; admirable and honourable is it 
when exalted station spends its strength in advancing the devotion and the integrity of 
the people. 

IV. The joYotrsNEes that belongs to Divine worship. It was surely right that 
the first act of worship associated with the temple should be accompanied by a feast 
rather than by a, fast (ver. 3). It was right that the choir should unite " In praising 
and thanking the Lord " (ver. 13). In the service of One to whom such ascription can 
be rendered as is offered to the Lord (ver. 13), the soimd of holy gladness should be the 
prevailing note. 



Bt THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHKONICLES. \oa.T.l—U. 

V Thb nearness of human approach and Divine manifestation. (Vers. 13, 14.) 
Let us draw nigh unto God in praise and prayer, and he will draw nigh unto us in the 
hest proofs of his presence, in the most valuable manifestations of his power and 
grace. — 0. 

Vers. 13, It. — God's gUrry in the tcmetuary: churehropening termon, Rrofonndly 
subdued and solemnized indeed must those worshippers have been on this great occa- 
sion. When, in the presence of the sovereign and of all the elders of Israel, the priests 
brought the ark of the covenant into its place, into the holy of holies ; when they 
reverently withdrew from that innermost sanctuary, which wag only to be entered once 
in the year by the high priest only ; and when, amid the sound of many trumpets and 
the loud voice of sacred song, the sanctuary was suddenly filled with that luminous 
cloud which symbolized and assured the presence of Jehovah ; — the supreme moment 
had arrived in the history of the sacred building : " for the glory of the Lord filled the 
house of God." If we ask the question — When may it be truly said of our Christian 
sanctuaries that " the glory of God has filled" them? we should say it is when — 

I. God's peesenob is bbalizbd by those who worship within the house. When 
they who meet one another there are profoundly conscious that they have come to 
meet GK}d ; that the Lord of all power and truth and grace is present in the midst of 
them — as trtdy, though not as manifestly, present as he was in the temple when " the 
house was filled with a cloud." It is a deep and strong sense of God's nearness to us 
that makes that to be " holy ground " on which we stand. 

II. God's spikitualitt is becoonizbd and honoured. God is glorified when he 
is truly and acceptably worshipped by his human children. And he is thus worshipped 
when he is approached and honoured as a Divine Spirit (John ir. 23, 24 ; Phil. iii. 3) ; 
when worship is essentially and predominantly spiritwd; when the service is not 
merely or mainly that of the lip or the hand, but of the mind, of the heart, of the will ; 
of the intelli<;ent, fervent, determining spirit ; when prayer and praise and " inquiry " 
(Ps. xxvii. 4) are the devout actions of the soul. 

m. God's nature and character are presented in their fulness. When he is 
not represented in a way that is needlessly and culpably partial and misleading, but 
when he is made known with the fulness with which he has revealed himself to us ; 
when the message that is declared concerning him is that " God is light, and in him is 
nil darkness at all," and also that " God is love," love being the chief, the commanding, 
the crowning feature of his character ; when he is presented as the Author of law, and 
also " the God of all grace," and " the God of our salvation ; " when he is made known 
as the Divine One, who punishes all iniquity (both in the body and in the spirit), and 
who also pardons sin and restores the offender to his favour and his friendship; when 
not only the grandeur of his holiness, but also the glory of his goodness (Exod. xxxiii. 
19) are upheld before the eyes of men ; when he is preached as the universal Sovereign, 
holding all hearts and lives in his control, and also as the Divine Father, deeply 
interested in all his children, and seeking their return to his likeness and to his home ; — 
then the " glorious God " is seen by those who have "eyes to see " the highest and the best. 

IV. Gton's gracious power is manifested. When, in the Person and by the power 
of his Divine Spirit, he takes possession of the mind and heart of those who are gatnered 
in his presence ; when he thus inspires the teacher who speaks in his Name, quickens 
and animates the hearts of his people, renews the will and regenerates the spirit of 
those who entered his house unreconciled to his rule. This, his gracious action, is that 
manifestation of his glory which we should most eagerly desire and should most 
sedulously seek; it is to he found by purity and prayer (see Matt. v. 8; 1 Cor. iii. 16 ; 
vi. 19 ; Luke xi. 13).— C. 

Vers. 1 — 14. — The dedication of the tenuis t 1. 2Ti« hringing-in of the ark. I. The 
preparation for the oerbmont. (Vers. 1 — 4.) 1. The completion of the temple 
furnitvrre. The manufacture of the various articles having been described in the pre- 
ceding chapter, it is here briefly recorded that the whole work which Solomon made 
for the house of the Lord was finished — a happy illustration of the proverb, " Better is 
the end of a thing," etc. (Bccles. vii. 8). The work, difficult and varied as well as 
laborious and costly, had been carried to a successful termination. Of how few human 



CH. V. 1— 14.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHE0NICLE8. 69 

undertakings can this be affirmed! 2. !Z%e placing in the temple of the dedicated 
treasures. These were the gold, silver, and brass David had taken from the nations 
X conquered ; the tpoJfa opima he had piously consecrated to Jehovah, to be used for 
>cred purposes (2 Sam. viii. 7 — 12 ; 1 Chron. xviii. 7 — 11). So immense had been 
the quantity of precious metal prepared beforehand by David for the house of the Lord 
(1 Chron. xxii. 14 — 16), that it bad not been all used. What remained after the 
temple and its utensils had been constructed was brought into the sacred edifice and 
lodged among the treasures of the house of God, probably in one or more of the side 
chambers of the building. An act of filial piety on the part of Solomon thus to respect 
the will and purpose of his deceased father, who had designated, not a part merely, but 
the whole of the just-mentioned wealth to the service of Jehovah, it was also an 
example of strict conscientiousness on the monarch's part to abstain from either appro^ 
priating the surplus wealth to himself or employing it for civil purposes. The money, 
given by David to Jehovah, was Jehovah's and not Solomon's. Having been meant 
for the service of Jehovah, it was not free to be diverted to other ends and uses. Hence 
it was solemnly laid up among the treasures of the house of God. 3. The selection of 
a date/or the ceremony. The time fixed was the Feast of Tabernacles, which commenced 
on the fifteenth day of the seventh month, called Ethanim in Hebrew, but in Aramaic 
Tisri. This was one of the three principal religious festivals of the Jews (Exod. xxiiL 
14, 17). Intended to commemorate the birth-night of Israel as a nation (Lev. xxiii. 
33- — 43), and the goodness of Jehovah to his people year by year in giving them rain 
from heaven and fruitful seasons (Deut. xvi. 13 — 15), it was a period of special and 
intense rejoicing. Commonly esteemed the greatest feast of the three, it was sometimes 
spoken of as "the feast" (ch. vii. 8, 9), was usually attended by large numbers of the 
people, and " was kept by the Hebrews as » most holy and most eminent feast " 
(Josephus, ' Ant.,' viii. 4. 1). It was thus peculiarly appropriate for the dedication 
of the temple, in the successful erection of which God's goodness to the nation had 
culminated. In this light, doubtless, it was regarded by Solomon, who observed it 
" splendidly and magnificently " (Josephus, ' Ant.,' viii. 4. 5), protracting it for twice 
seven days, instead of eight as the Law enjoined, and himself feasting together with 
his people before the temple. From a statement in 1 Kings ix. 1, 2, that Jehovah 
appeared to Solomon in answer to his prayer of dedication only after the erection of his 
palace, it has been inferred (Thenius, Keil) that the dedication did not take place till 
thirteen years after the temple was finished ; but this, to say the least, is far from pro- 
bable. Another unlikely suggestion is that the Feast of Tabernacles referred to was 
that of the eleventh year, i.e. of the year in which the temple was finished (Ewald, 
Bertheau); but as the building was not ended till the eighth month of that year 
(1 Kings vi. 38), the dedication must in this case have taken place before the structure 
was completed. The best conjecture is that the date was the Feast of Tabernacles in 
the following year (Bahr), which would allow sufficient time for all necessary arrange- 
ments, in particular for the step to be next mentioned. 4. ITie assembling of the people's 
representatives in Jerusalem. As the transportation of the ark from the city of David 
to Mount Moriah and its permanent settlement in the temple was designed to be a 
national act, it was requisite that the people's official heads should be convened for that 
purpose. Accordingly, the king issued orders that on the day fixed for the momentous 
ceremonial, the fifteenth day of the seventh month of the following year, "the elders 
of Israel, and all the heads of the tribes, the chief of the fathers of the children of 
Israel," should meet with him in the capital. In answer to the royal summons, " all 
the elders of Israel came," " from the entering in of Hamath," the northern boundary 
of Palestine, " unto the river of Egypt," its southern frontier. Few spectacles are more 
impressive or becoming than that of a monarch and his people co-operating in works 
that aim at the good of the commonwealth, and especially at the advancement of true 
religion in the land. 

II. The steps in the cbremont. (Vers. 5^13.) 1. The fetching of the ark from the 
city of David to the temple. This was done by such of the Levites as were also priests 
(vers. 5, 7 ; cf. 1 Kings viii. 3), to whom on high occasions the duty belonged (Josh, 
iii. 6 ; vi. 6) ; though, while the Church was in the wilderness, the task of bearing about 
the sanctuary from station to station devolved upon the sons of Kohath, who at the 
■•me time were charged not to touch any holy thing lest they should die (Numb. iv. 15). 



60 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE OHEONIOLES. [oh, v. 1—14. 

In David's day also, when the ark was brought from the house of Obed-edom to the 
city of David, the work of carrying the sacred symbol was performed by the priests 
and Levites (1 Chron. xvi. 1 — 15). Now, when it required to be removed to its permanent 
resting-place on Mount Moriah, the same religious ofBoers were deputed to the honour- 
able service of uplifting and bearing it along. The city of David, the original Jebusite 
fortress (2 Sam. v. 7), lay upon Mount Zion, on the opposite side of the Tyropoean valley 
from that on which the temple stood, the distance being probably about three quarters 
of a mile. While one detachment of priests and Levites proceeded to Mount Zion in 
search of the ark, it is probable that another went to Gribeon for the old Mosaic taber- 
nacle which still stood in that ancient city, upon which Solomon had offered sacrifice 
in the beginning of his rei^n (1 Chron. i. 3), and which it was now desirable to fetch 
into one place with the ark. The two companies, it may be imagined, arranged to 
meet at the temple gate — the one with the ark of the covenant, to be established in the 
holy of holies between the cherubim; the other with the sanctuary or tabernacle of 
the congregation, with its sacred vessels, to be laid up in one or other of the already 
mentioned side chambers of the house. 2. The offering of sacrifice hefore the arh in 
the temple court. Before the sacred chest passed out of -sight and into its sunless retreat 
within the veil, this ceremony pi'esided over by the sovereign, was carried through by 
another company of priests, and in presence of " all the congregation of Israel." The 
sheep and oxen laid upon the altar could not be told for multitude. The First Book of 
Kings and Josephus mention that the king sacrificed twenty-two thousand oxen, and 
a hundred and twenty thousand sheep. In any case, the offering was munificent, and 
corresponded to the magnificence of the occasion. The monarch probably felt that 
Jehovah's grace to himself and his peojile demanded generous acknowledgment. Cf. 
David's offerings on bringing the ark to Mount Zion (2 Sam. vi. 6, 18) and Josiah's on 
3, similar occasion (oh. xxxv. 7). 3. The placing of the arh in the holy of holies. While 
the blood of the sacrificial victims was flowing in the outer court, the priests at a given 
signal once more uplilted the symbol of Jehovah's presence, and, advancing with it 
towards the dwelling, passed in through the holy place, entering the inner shrine and 
reverently setting it between the wings of the colossal cherubim there erected. So 
immense were these figures that their wings overshadowed both the ark and its staves. 
It is probable that the staves were in the long side of the ark (Josephus, 'Ant.,' iii. 6. 5), 
and that this ran from north to south of the holy of holies. As, moreover, the staves 
were designed to be inseparable from the ark (Exod. xxv. 15), they were not removed, 
but merely drawn out, jierhaps two in each direction; or they were so long (Revised 
Version), i.e. extended so far in each direction, that their ends might be seen by one 
standing in the doorway or immediately in front of the oracle, but not by one who 
«tood without or at a distance in the holy place. Thus located, the ark remained in 
its shrine until the temple was destroyed. The phrase, " unto this day " (cf. ch. ix. 21 ; 
xii. 19 ; 2 Kings viii. 22), need only signify that the Chronicler used a manuscript 
composed before the destruction of Jerusalem, and deemed it unnecessary to alter 
words which were accurate enough from the standpoint of the original writer. 
Whether the ark was at any time home before the Israelitish armies to battle, as in the 
days of Samuel (1 Sam. iv. 4), cannot be determined ; but it seems to have been removed 
from its place in the days of Mauasseh, as it underwent a kind of second consecration 
at the hands of Josiah, who, in the eighteenth year of his reign, replaced it in the temple 
with imposing ceremonies (see oh. xxxv. 3). In Solomon's time the ark contained nothing 
but the two tables of stone, which Moses put therein at Horeb. There is no reason to 
suppose it ever contained aught else, the golden pot and Aaron's rod (Heb. ix. 4) having 
been originally appointed to be laid up before the Lord (Exod. xvi. 33), and before the 
testimony (Numb, xvi. 10), not necessarily inside the ark. 4. The giving of thanks hefore 
the altar. On emerging from the holy place into the court, the priests united with the 
rest of their brethren, and the Levites who were singers, in raising an anthem of praise 
to Jehovah, who had enabled them to carry forward their work to a successful terminsi- 
tion. The whole body of the priesthood were present, the divisional arrangements 
made by David (1 Chron. xxiv. 3), by which they waited in turns, having been sus- 
pended, and the entire force consecrated for the occasion. The Levites, marshalled 
according to their families, the Asaphites on the right, the Hemanites in° the centre, 
the Jednthites on the left, each with their sons and brethren, were arrayed in byssua. 



OH. V. 1—14.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHEONICLES. 61 

or white linen — a dress not prescribed by the Law for the singers, but not forbidden 
fflerlheau) — and furnished with cymbals, trumijots, and other instruments of music 
(of. 1 Chron. xxv. 1). The priests, a hundred and twenty in number, and the Levitioal 
•ingers, probably two hundred and eighty-eight (1 Chron. xxv. 7), standing on the east 
of the great altar of burnt offering, while the trumpets, cymbals, and other instruments 
discoursed what was meant to be melodious music with one voice, praised and thanked 
the Lord, saying, " For he is goed ; for his mercy endureth for ever." Cf. the jubila- 
tion of David on fetching the ark from the house of Obed-edom (1 Chron. xv. 28). 

IlL The coNOLtrsiON of the cebemont. (Vers. 13, 14.) "The house was filled 
with a cloud, even the house of the Lord ; " and again, " the glory of the Lord had 
filled the house of God;" concerniag which may be noted: 1. What this ivas. The 
notion that this was the smoke-cloud from the offerings on the brazen altar, which 
swept into the holy place as the priests emerged (Bertheau), is untenable. The- 
phenomenon which now occurred was manifestly the same which had taken place on 
the completion of the tabernacle (Exod. xl. 34). The cloud was not the "brigiit and 
streaming cloud" called by the rabbins the Sheohinah (Thenius), nor was the " glory 
of the Lord" the same thing as the "cloud" (Bahr); but the "glory of the Lord" was 
the beaming radiance of fire (Exod. xxiv. 16), the resplendent appearance of light with 
which, as a heavenly Being, Jehovah is surrounded (Exod. iii. 2 ; xiii. 21) ; the " cloud " 
was the robe of darkness in which that "glory" was wiapped, and by which it was- 
veiled from mortal sight (Exod. xix. 9, 16; Lev. xvi. 2). 2. What it signified. 
(1) That Jehovah graciously accepted the finished structure which had been laboriously 
prepared for his dwelling, as formerly he had accepted the tabernacle at the hands of 
Moses and his contemporaries (Exod. xl. 34), and as he still accepts at the hands of his- 
believing people their works of faith and labours of love (Heb. vi. 10). (2) That God 
would condescend to establish in it his presence, as of old he had done in the tabernacle,, 
and as afterwards he would do in the temple of Christ's humanity (John. i. 14), yea, 
as he still does in hearts that open to receive him (2 Cor. vi. 16). (3) That God would 
considerately accommodate the manifestations of himself to the feebleness and imper- 
fection of his worshippers, then as in the days of Moses, coming to them in a cloud as he 
did to the Church in the wilderness, as in the fulness of the times he came to men in 
the Person of his Son, with glory veiled and majesty concealed, and as he still reveals 
himself to his worshippers, according to the measure of their capacities (Eph. iv. 7), 
and in every instance " through a glass, darkly" (1 Cor. xiii. VI). 3. When it happened. 
(1) When the priests had come out of the holy place. " This is the way of giving 
possession. All must come out, that the rightful Owner may come in. Would we 
have God dwell in our hearts? We must leave room for him, let everything elso 
give way " (Henry). (2) When the priests and Levites had arranged themselves at 
the east end of the altar. The choice of this as their situation, probably dictated 
by local convenience, was nevertheless significant. It symbolized that only on th* 
basis of sacrifice, or through the mediation of atoning blood, could either men come 
to God or God approach to men (Heb. ix. 7, 22 ; x. 19). (3) When the whole com- 
pany were of one mind. This also an indispensable preliminary to either Church or 
individual receiving a Divine visitation. The Church of Pentecost was of one accord 
when it obtained the baptism of the Holy Ghost (Acts i. 14 ; ii. 1). Being pre-emi- 
nently the God of peace (Rom. xv. 33 ; 2 Cor. xiii. 11 ; 1 Thess. v. 23 ; Heb. xiii. 20), 
and having called his people to peace (1 Cor. vii. 15), God cannot dwell either in th» 
midst of communities (sacred or civil) that are torn by strife and marred by faction, 
or in the hearts of individuals that are distracted by care or divided by worldliness. 
(4) Whilst the anthem was ascending. At the moment the trumpeters and singers 
were engaged in thanking and praising God for his goodness and mercy. That 
showed the proper attitude of soul for all true worshippers, and in particular for such 
as are expectant of favours. Faith in the Divine existence and Divine goodness there 
must be (Heb. xi. 6), but gratitude for past mercies is no less indispensable (Phil. iv. 6). 
4. How it operated. " The priests could not stand to minister by reason of the cloud " 
(cf. ch. vii. 2). It inspired them with awe, filled them with such fear as became sinful 
creatures in the presence of a holy and a jealous God (Exod. xl. 35 ; Lev. xvi. 2 ; Deut. 
iv. 24). Thus it symbolized the reverence that ought to characterize all who venture 
before him, whether in the public or private exercises of religion (Ps. xxxiii. 8 ; Ixxxiz. 



62 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHEONICLES. [oh. vl 1—42. 



7 ; Heb. xii. 28 ; 1 Pet. i. 17). Christ's disciples on the Mount of Transfiguration 
feared when they entered into the cloud (Luke iz. 34). Then it hindered their minis- 
trations in the holy place. In this respect it served as an emblem of the dark dispensa- 
tion under which they lived (2 Oor. iii. 13, 14), in comparison with which that of the 
New Testament is a dispensation of light, as well as of those obstructions arising from 
imperfect knowledge (1 Cor. xiii. 12) which still hamper the worship of believers in 
the heavenly places of the Christian Church. 

Learn : 1. The importance of order in all things connected with religion (1 Cor. liv. 
40). 2. The settlement of religious ordinances in a country a true occasion of joy. 3. 
The high place assigned to music, vocal and instrumental, in Divine worship (Epb. t. 
19). 4. The highest theme of praise for either Church or saint — the goodness and grace 
of God. 5. The true glory of land and people, of state and Church — the indwelling 
in both of the Divine glory (Ps. Ixxxv. 9). — W. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER VL 



The first thirty-nine verses of this chapter 
(leas the thirteenth) correspond very closely 
with the thirty-eight verses of the parallel 
that run 1 Kings viii. 12 — 50. For once 
also the two places are in closer accord in 
the original than might be augured from 
otur English Yersion. Our thirteenth verse 
is not found in the parallel, and this fact, 
with the pheaomenou of its presence here, 
will be considered under the verse when we 
reach it. The chapter consists of: first, 
Solomon's remarks addressed to his people 
(vers. 1 — 11); and secondly, the prayer and 
intercession he offers to God (vers. 14 — 42). 

Ver. 1. — In the thick darkness; Hebrew, 
hingp. The Lord had said this in so many 
words, and also by not a few practical 
examples (Lev. xvi. 2 ; Exod. xix. 9 ; xxiv. 
16 ; XXV. 22 ; xl. 34, 35). This thin"; which 
he said, and did, even wliile really instruct- 
ing, after the manner of special revelation, 
a specialized people, is essentially what he 
ever has said and ever is doing in all time, 
in all the world, and in all nature and pro- 
vidence. It is a fact and it is necessary 
that his glory be for the present veiled in 
"clouds and darkness" (Ps. xcvii. 2; xviii. 

Ver. 2. — Solomon's words ijow address 
themselves to God. 7or ever. These words 
refer rather to the permanence and station- 
arineSB of the temple as the dwelling-place 
of the ark, and the mercy-seat and cherubim, 
■ad all that symbolized and invited the 
Divine presence, than design any prophecy 
e( length of time. They contrast with the 
wandering people, and wandering worship 
•ad sacrifices, and wandering tent and 
tabernacle with all their sacred contents 
(Fa. Ixviii. 16; cxxxii. 14; 1 Ghron. xxii. 
M: xxviii 6—8; 2 Sam. vii. 5—16). 



Ver. 3. — Beading between the lines, this 
verse shows us that the face of Solomon had 
been turned to the symbol of God's presence, 
wliile he addressed to him the words of our 
second verse, since he now faces round to 
the assembly of the congregation. What 
words Solomon used in thus blessing the 
whole congregation are not given either 
here or in the parallel. The impression one 
takes is that the blessing was, in fact, wrapt 
up tacitly in all that Solomon recounts, 
when he said, Blessed be the Lord God of 
Israel, etc. (ver. 4). However, it is not im- 
passible that, with the variation of the tense 
in ver. 59, the verses of 1 Kings viii. 55 — 
61 may contain the substance of it, if not 
itself. 

"Ver. 4.— (See 2 Sam. vii. 4—17; 1 Chion. 
xi. 2; xvii. 4 — 14.) VITith his hands, . . . 
with his mouth. Expressions like this, 
antithesis and all, remind how language 
formed itself in the concrete mould at first, 
from that, ever hecoming more abstract as 
time grew. The ampler language of later 
date would be. Who hath indeed fulfilled 
that which he spake. 

Ver. 5. — I chose no city, . . , neither 
chose I any man The tabernacle and all 
it contained had but travelled from place to 
place, and rested at temporary halting- 
places ; and from Moses' time all the leaders 
of the people Israel had been men in whom 
vested no permanent and no intrinsic au- 
thority (1 Sam. xvi. 1 — 13; 2 Sam. xxiv. 
18—25). 

Ver. 6. — (See again references of preced- 
ing verse, and 2 Sam. vii. 8 ; Ps. Ixxviii. 70.) 

Vers. 7— 9.— (So 2 Sam. vii. 2, 10—16 ; 
1 Ghron. xxii. 9, 10 ; xxviii. 2 — 7.) 

Vers. 10, 11. — The moment that might 
have witnessed the utmost inflation of 
spiritual pride, the acme of ambition, the 
highest point of even moral kind of gran- 
deur, being touched, is saved from the periL 
To the " performing of the Lord "the glory k 
all given (Luke i. 54, 55, 68—72). Probably 



OH. VL 1—42.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHBONIOLBS. 



63 



delivered from earthly feeling, and sheltered 
just now from self and human ambition, 
Solomon was in a very high degree " in the 
spirit" (Rev. i. 10) on this great day. The 
moment was a proud moment in Solomon's 
history, as well there may be proud momenta 
in men's lives, but it was divinely shielded, 
as divinely inspired. Hereafter, for all that, 
" the thorn in the flesh" might become very 
necessary, lest Solomon "be exalted above 
measure'* in the memory of all that had 
transpired, 

Ver. 12. — Before the altar. This means 
to say that Solomon stood (and afterwards 
knelt down) eastward of the altar indeed, 
but with his face to the temple and congre- 
gation. Although the voice of Solomon 
was raised in prayer to God, yet the prayer 
was to be that of the whole congregation 
and not of priestly proxy, and therefore of 
the whole congregation it must be heard. 

Ver. 13. — ^A brazen scaffold. The Hebrew 
word is -n'S. The word occurs twenty-one 
times. It is translated, in the Authorized 
Version, " laver " eighteen times, once 
"pan" (1 Sam. ii. 14), once "hearth" 
(Zecb. xii. 6), and once "scaffold," here. 
The meaning evidently is that the stand 
was in some sort basin-shaped. 

Ver. 14.— No God like thee, et». The 
quoting of Scripture and the utilizing of 
language in which the religious feeling of 
those who have gone before has expressed 
itself had plainly set in (Exod. xv. 11, 12; 
Deut. vii. 9). The prayer which this verse 
opens occupies twenty-eight verses ; it is 
the longest prayer recorded in Scripture. It 
consists of two verses (14, 15) of opening; 
then follow three petitions— ^rst, that God 
would perpetuate the line of David (ver. 
16) ; next, that he would have regard to 
the pliioe where his Name is put (vers. 
17 — 20); and thirdly, that he would hear 
the prayers addressed to liim toward this 
place (ver. 21). Of this last subject, seven 
different cases are propounded— jSrsHj, the 
case of the man wronged by his neighbour 
(vers. 22, 23); secondly, of the people 
worsted by their enemies (vers. 24, 25); 
thirdly, of the people suffering from drought 
(vers. 26, 27) ; fourthly, of the people visited 
by death or special calamity (vers. 28 — 31); 
fifthly, of the stranger who comes to offer to 
pray (vers. 32, 33); sixthly, of the people 
going to war by God's permission (vers. 
34, 35) ; seventhly, of the people in captivity 
(vers. 36 — 89). Then the prayer closes in 
Ters. 40—42. 

Ver. 16. — There shall not fail thee, eto. 
(so 2 Sam. vii. 12 ; 1 Kings ii. 4; vi. 12). 
Yet so that thy children, eto. (so Fs. 
oxxxii 12). 

Ver. 17. — Let thy word be verified (so 
1 Ohron. xvii. 9—13). 



Ver. 18. — Swell with men (Ps. ozxxli. 
14). Heaven and the heaven of heavens. 
Solomon's conception of the infinite God 
comes plainly to view here (ch. ii. 6 ; Deut. 
I. 14; Ps. oxxxix. 5 — 12; oxlviii. 4; Iia. 
Ixvi. 1 ; Acts vii. 4 — 9 ; xvii 24). 

Ver. 20. — This house, ... the place 
whereof, . . . this place (so Kzod. zxix. 43 ; 
Deut. xii. 5 ; xiv. 23 ; iv. 20 ; ivi. 2). 

Ver. 21. — The supplications of thy servant. 
"The great thought of Solomon now is 
that the centre and core of all worship is 
prayer" (Professor Dr. James 6. Murphy, 
in 'Handbook for Bible Classes : Chronicles'). 
Toward this place (see other instances of 
this expression, Ps. v. 7 ; xxviii. 2 ; cxxxviii. 
2; Jonah ii. 4; Dan. vi. 10). From thy 
dweUing-plaoe. 1 Kings viii. 30 has, " hear 
to thy dwelling-place, to heaven," by pro- 
bably the mere error of a copyist. 

Ver. 22. — And an oath be laid upon him 
to make him swear. This verse is explained 
by Exod. xxii. 9—11 ; Lev. vi. 1—5. The 
case of ordeal by self-purgation of oath is 
supposed. And the oath come. The Sep- 
tuagint translates here, " and he come and 
declare by oath," eto. — a translation which 
» very slight alteration in the Hebrew, 
consisting in prefixing a vau to the word for 
swear, will allow. The Vulgate follows the 
Septuagint 

Ver. 23. — The prayer is that God will 
command his blessing on the oath ordeal. 

Vers. 24, 2.i.— (See Lev. xxvi. 3, 17, 33, 
40; Deut. xxvii. 7, 25 ; also iv. 27, 29—31; 
xxviii. 64 — 68; xxx. 1 — 5.) 

Ver. 26. — No rain (see 1 Kings xvii. 1; 
Lev. xxvi. 19; Deut. xi. 17; xxviii. 23). 

Ver. 27. — When thou hast taught them ; 
rather, when thou art guiding them to the 
right way. 

Vers. 28— 31.— (See Lev. xxvi. 16—26; 
Deut. xxviii. 22—52, 59 ; ch. xx. 9.) In the 
cities of their land. This, to represent cor- 
rectly the Hebrew, should read, in the land 
of their gates. Eeferenoe probably is being 
made to the fact that law and justice and 
judgment were administered " in the gate of 
the city " (Deut. ivi. 18 ; xxi. 19 ; Josh. 
XX. 4). Thou only knowest (so 1 Cbron. 
xxviii. 9). That they may fear thee (so Ps. 
cxxx. 4). In the absence of a healthy fear 
is involved both the absence of a healing 
hopefulness, and too probably the presence 
of recklessness. 

Vers. 32, 33. — The stranger . . . com* 
from a far country for thy great Name's 
sake. These two verses, with every clause 
in them, must be felt most re&eshing by 
every reader; but they onght also to be 
particularly observed, as both corrective of 
a common but striotly erroneous impres- 
sion as to exolusiveness and a genius of 
bigotry inhering in the setting apart of the 



64 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. vi. 1—42. 



Jewish race for a certain purpose in the 
Divine government and counsel, and also as 
revealing very significantly that that setting 
apart was nothing but a method and means 
to an end, as compreliensive and universal 
as the world itself. The analogies, in fact, 
in the world's history are linked, in one 
unbroken chain, to what sometimes seems 
to a mere reader of the Bible pages as an 
wtifioial and somewhat arbitrary decree or 
arrangement (see, amid many significant 
parallels, Kxod. xxii. 21; Lev. ,xxv. 85; 
Numb. XV. 13—17 ; Deut. x. 19 ; xxxi. 12). 
Not of thy people Israel (John x. 16; xii 
20 — 26; Acts viii. 27). For thy great Name's 
take. The insertion of the ailjective " great " 
here ("jni) is not Pentateuohal, but is found 
in Josh. vii. 9; in our parallel, 1 Kings viii. 
42 ; Ps. Ixxvi. 1 ; xoix. 3 ; Ezek. xxxvi. 23 ; 
Jer. X. 6 ; xliv. 2'i. All people of the earth. 
Not only are many of the psalms utterly in 
harmony with the spirit of this verse, but 
also the light of it is reflected brilliantly in 
Buch passages as Acts xvii. 22 — 31. This 
house is called by thy Name ; literally, thy 
Name ii called upon (or perhaps, into) thi.-< 
house, meaning that God himself is invoked 
there, or present there in order that he may 
be constantly invoked. 

Vers. 34, 35. — The different supposition 
of these verses, compared with vers. 24, 25, 
it plain. Here we are reminded how right 
it is to implore a blessing before we go out 
to our allotted labour, or even on some 
specially and divinely appointed enterprise. 

Vers. 36 — 39. — The matter of these verses 
is given fuller in the parallel (1 Kings viii. 



46 — 53). The prayer is remarkable all the 
more as the last of the whole series, and one 
BO Badly ominous! The last clause of ver. 
36, carrying the expression far off, as the 
alternative of near, throws its lurid glare of 
unwelcome suggestion on all the rest. No 
man which siuneth not. The words need 
the summoning of no biblical parallels, for 
these are so numerous. But out of the rest 
emphasis may be placed at least on those 
furnished by Solomon himself — Prov. xx. 9 ; 
Eccles. vii. 21 ; both of which are particu- 
larly sententious. Bethink themselves. The 
words well express, in English idiom, the 
literal Hebrew, as in margin, " bring back 
to their heart" (Deut. xxx. 1 — 11). Havfr 
sinned, . . . done amiss, . . . dealt wickedly 
(so Ps. cvi. 6 ; Dan. ix. 5). The Authorized 
Version in the parallel (1 Kings viii. 47) is 
somewhat happier in its rendering of the 
three verbs employed here. It seems doubt- 
ful whether these have it in them to form » 
climax ; more probably they speak of three 
different directions in wrong going. The 
parallel is well worthy of being referred to, 
in its vers. 50, 51. 

Vers. 40— 42.— These three verses are 
wanting in the parallel, which has kept us 
four verses (50—53) not shown here. Our 
two verses 41 and 42 are doubly interesting, 
first, as almost an exact copy of the words- 
of David (Ps. cxxxii. 8 — 10); and secondly, 
as not an entirely exact copy, in some respects 
the form of word not being identical, though 
the signification is the same, emd in other 
respects the clause being not identical, though 
still the meauing is essentially equal. 



HOMILBTinS 

Vers. 1 — 42. — The dedication, and Solomon's prayer. The ark once within the most 
holy place, the whole temple seems to wait expectant for its own solemn offering and 
dedication, to that heaven from which its pattern came, to its own supreme Archi- 
tect, of whose wisdom it was designed, and of whose inspiration of the mind and heart 
of so many, its beautiful and costly materials had been ungrudgingly given and skil- 
fully wrought. The picture photographed so faithfully in this chapter does not fail of 
rivetting our gaze, but its points of view are very various, and we do not embrace them 
•11 by any means at one glance. We seem to hear also while we gaze. Now it is the 
broken snatch of a soliloquy that we seem to hear ; now the unfeigned and adoring 
Moription, of blessing, and honour, and power, and of mercy's majesty, to the one Father 
of heaven and earth ; now again the vast throng of worshippers, priests, princes, and 
people, is hushed in silence audible, on the knees of prayer. The royal typical son of 
David utters the solemn prepared service of prayer and supplication. The (5od, to whom 
none in heaven or on earth can be compared, is invoked, and the praise of his covenant- 
keeping and of his mercy and of his free promises is celebrated. These are made the 
ground, not indeed of any expostulation (for there was nothing in respect of which to 
expostulate), but rather of earnest pleading, that what seemed sometimes too great, too 
good to be true on the earth, might nevertheless be " verified," " in very deed with men 
npon the earth ; " and then the measured sevenfold prayer begins. It cannot but be 
tut in this service of dedication, followed upon so promptly with Heaven's ovm accept- 
ance and most graciously vouchsafed consecration, there Bhould be manifest lessona, or 



«H. T1.1— 42.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, 65 



possibly more recondite principles of ever-enduring application and value. Let us, 
then, observe from this whole service of dedication the following suggestions. 

L How THE INEFFABLE NaTDBB PBBMIT8 ITSELF TO BE EEPEESBNTBD, AS HAVING 

LOOAL HABITATION ON EARTH. If that infinite, spiritual Nature or Being did of old 
neither preclude the possibility nor prohibit the imagination of such a thing, there can 
be no intrinsic reason why it should not be so now and for all time. We must not sup- 
pose that certain well-known and sublime passages in New Testament Scripture outruled 
this. But, on the contrary, they acknowledge it rather, and are only anxious to do so 
to the extent of universalizing it. The place of this worship is, indeed, wherever the 
worshipper himself it ; and not only in Jerusalem, nor only " in this mountain," but 
where Jacob stretched himself, when his head was pillowed on the stones, and waking 
he exclaimed, " This is the house of &od ; " or in the dungeon ; or in the windowless, 
chimneyless, mud-built croft ; or in the chamber's solitude ; or in the palace, the church, 
or cathedral, all-gorgeous with arch and pavement, height and length, music and 
painting. In fact, God's condescending grace gives what the nature of man, once also 
itself given of him, constantly and everywhere either postulates as of course, or craves 
with stimulated spiritual force. There is scarcely anything that sits closer to our, 
not mere outer but innermost nature, than that law which binds us ly association, 
and by the associations of place in particular. There is no reason why we should 
disown it, or be ashamed of it, or slight it, or try at any time to rid ourselves of it by 
force. The reasons lie rather to the contrary, if only we cherish the sacred associations 
and discourage the reverse. It is not when our sense of God as a Presence in a place 
is nearest, that we least feel that he still " dwells," to be wondered at and adored, " in 
the thick darkness," or that we least " fear because of him." The acts of worship, 
no doubt legitimate everywhere, are helped there, and to cherish that help is wise. 
II. The essential, or natural and most desirable requirements of such a 

DEDICATION — THE DEDICATION OP A PLACE FOE THE WORSHIP AND SERVICE OP GoD. 

They are such as these : 1. The presence of the people, or of a representative gathering of 
them, in a prepared and quickened state of mind, of whom in part and for whom the 
occasion of the dedication arises. The people were certainly present on this occasion. 
They are already in a very quickened state of mind, which is greatly added to when 
their leader faces them, and in the act, as it is here called, of " blessing them," summons 
them to take an earnest and intelligent part in the impending ceremony. 2. A 
rehearsal, in the nature of a preamble, of the circumstances which had led up to the 
present work — the human side of them, the Divine side of them, the motives which 
had been at work in them, the promise and providence of God, and the gratitude due 
to him for them. 3. Prayer uttered by one, offered by all, acknowledging the sole 
Oodhead, without comparison in heaven omd earth, magnifying his infinite condescen- 
lion, reposing entire confidence upon his supporting and encouraging goodness ; with 
imploring petitions that an ear may be opeaed tx> the special prayers now waiting to 
be offered, and a gracious eye bent down upon the place and the scene now out- 
itretched before heaven. Special note may be made under vers. 19 — 21 of the three 
points : (1) of the earnestness of the prayer that prayer may be heard ; (2) that it may 
be heard by witness of this very memorial house on earth, unto which Divine and 
emphatic promise had been made ; and (3) that forgiveness (ver. 21) may be the first 
part of answer to every and all prayer. What an amazing depth of significant import 
underlies this one fact, and how entirely it is in harmony with all Scriptures' setting 
forth of the position of human nature in the presence of God 1 

m. The beybnfold petition of the service. Whatever these petitions are, they 
speak distinctly the apprehensions — and those from a religious point of view — which the 
king and leader of the nation had in renpect of that nation. The circumstances of the 
position compel us to regard them as a correct and faithful reflection or transcript 
(from the inner thoughts of Solomon and those who co-operated with him in the com- 
position) of those perils to national well-being which might sadly ripen as time went 
on. It is evident that the estimate formed of these perils was such, and of such 
significance, that to deprecate them most importunately absorbs the larger part of the 
whole prayer. The petitions are manifestly more what concern the outer life, for ihe 
most part, than the inner thought of the people ; the providence of Heaven, than their 
own work and doing. But, for that very reason, they bind together so much more 

n. OB.iONIOLEB. w 



66 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. vi. 1--42. 

indisaolubly the welfare of a people's outer life and the Divine favour. They illustrate 
forcibly the dependence of the former on the latter. They remind us how this was at 
one time the chief ^aj, probably at all time a necessary and leading way (as bodily pain 
is for the individual), to teach the fear of God and not less the fullest love of him. The 
•even petitions may be enumerated, as : 1. That relating to what may be designated 
as the ordeal-altar-oath. 2. That relating to the condition of those who at any time 
might be taken captive in war — an event only supposable oa the assumption of the 
people " having sinned against " God. 3. That relating to the visitation of drought, 
as punishment in the same way of sin. 4. That relating to dearth, pestilence, blasting, 
mildew, locusts or caterpillars, siege, sore or sickness of what sort soever, as in the 
same way punishment of sin. 5. That relating to the stranger — a petition surely 
charged with significance and sweet compassion, and most prophetic in its character. 
6. That relating to absence from their home and their land, and the holy city of their 
solemnities, through the enterprise of just and divinely sanctioned war, where no case 
of capture by the enemy is contemplated. 7. And lastly, that by fearful omen relating 
to the possibility of the sin of the people having reached such a pitch, that their 
punishment should consist in a general captivity, and exportation to a foreign land 
" far off or near." And it is the supplication of Solomon, and the vast Church there 
assembled before the temple, with its most holy place and ark, with its brazen sea, 
lavers, and altar, that, when under any of these cases " confession " has been made, 
" repentance " has been approved, and prayer for "forgiveness " has been importuned, 
while the worshipper turns his thought, his faith, his hope, towards the temple, and 
its adorable indwelling Majesty, that confession may be heard, that repentance may be 
accepted, and that prayer be answered to by healing and restoring mercy. The one 
collective result left on our mind is that the structure of civil and national society, 
BO infinitely complex, dependent on so many individuals, the lilsely victim of such 
an unlimited variety of influences and motives, good, bad, and most vague and incon- 
clusive, needs nothing short of the wisdom and compassion, the justice and the 
tenderness, of the infinite God. 
IV. The final invooatios — all oatherbd into one — that the Lord God 

WOULD, ACOEPTINa THE DEDICATION, PEBFOBM THE VERT O0N8E0RA TION ITSELF. Amid 

the seven distinct appeals of entreaty (contained in our vers. 40—42), instinct with 
highly elevated energy, and six of which may be said to be rather of the nature of 
material helps of faith and imagination of spiritual realities, how clear we may count 
it that the absolute grasp of spiritual truth, and apprehension of the spiritual Being, 
were not strange to Solomon and the true Israelite of the elder dispensation ! What 
a real exertion of such power, gift, grace, is told by the central invocation, to which all 
the rest are but the setting, viz. " Now therefore arise, Lord Ood, into thy resting- 
place, thou " / The open eyes, the attent ears, the uttered sound of prayer, the sight 
of the place, the ark, the priests, the saints, the face of the anointed, the memory of 
the mercies of David, — these, these all are but the surroundings and aids to the grand 
effort, the effort of Solomon and his people, to which they address themselves, and, we 
may believe, successfully rose, at the one commanding climax of the whole pomp, 
ceremony, and most really religious service — this, that effort — to have, to know, to 
believe in, the Lord Ood, the Thou (as Solomon, addressing him, says), as the IndtikU- 
ing, effective Pretence, and Olory of the place. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. 1. — Ood, the incomprehensible One. What is the historical reference ? Is it to 
the luminous cloud that shone between the cherubim ? or is it not, rather, to the Divine 
manifestation on Mount Sinai, of which God had said, " I will come unto thee in a thick 
cloud " (Exod. xix. 9) ? God " dwells in the light which no man can approach unto " 
(1 Tim. vi. 16), and this is the same thing ; for the dazzling light is to us as the dark- 
ness. Ab our eye is constituted to receive no more than a certain degree of light, so our 
mind if created to receive no more than a measure of truth. And this is markedly and 
manifestly true of our knowledge of God. He is the incomprehensible One, whom we 
" cannot find out," whose " ways are unsearchable." This is true of — 

I. The DrviNK natpbb. Of bis eternity, of his infinityj of his sovereignty, and of 



OH.VI. 1— 42.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 67 

hU omniscience, taken in connection witli our hi.iman liberty, how little can we compre- 
hend ! how soon do we find ourselves beyond our depth, involved in difficulties which 
are hopelessly insoluble I 

II. His revelation of himsblp in Jesus Christ. " His rich, his free redemption " 
is, as has been said or sung, " dark through brightness." Jesas Christ is distinctly and 
pre-eminently the Revelation of God to man. Yet is there in the connection of his Son- 
ship of God with his Sonship of man a mystery which baffles us. How One equipped 
with Divine power and wisdom as was Jesus the Christ could "grow in wisdom" a« 
well as in stature, is dark and impenetrable to our understanding. 

III. His RULING OF CUB RACE. Why did God allow forty centtiries of sin and 
strife, of superstition and sorrow, of darkness and death, to pass away before he sent hii 
Son into the world to be its Light, and to redeem it from its ruin? 

IV. His direction of our individual lives. How is it, we wonder, that God 
allows certain things to hap|)en which (as it seems to us) are certain to be so injurioui 
in their effects ? how is it that he does not act in a way which would (as we are con- 
vinced) be fraught with so much blessing? Events in the lives of others or in our own 
lives are often so different from, so contrary to, what we should expect at the hand of 
One who rules in wisdom, in faithfulness, in love. Consider : 1. How inevitable it m 
that this should be so. The feeble-minded and uncultured man completely fails to 
understand his gifted and educated brother ; the little child completely misunderstands 
his father; nay, he thinks his father unwise, unjust, or unkind in those very thing8 in 
which that father knows himself to be most wise, most just, most kind. And wluit is 
the difference which separates human ignorance from human wisdom when compared 
with that which separates us from God ? 2. We may reasonably hope that this will 
gradually lessen, though they can never disappear. As we pass on in life, we understand 
more of God's character and his ways. When we shall receive that glorious enlarge- 
ment of spiritual faculty for which we look and long, we shall know God as the best 
and wisest do not know him here. But we rejoice to think that, in the remotest future 
to which our imagination can look forward, we shall still be inquiring and gaining 
knowledge of our heavenly Father. 3. How much we know now that is of the greatest 
practical vulue. We know that God is One who is a Spirit even as we are, but sinless 
and Divine ; that he is perfectly holy, wise, faithful, kind ; that be is accessible to our 
prayer, and is not only ready but eager to receive us again into his favour ; that he is 
a Father who is tenderly interested in all his children, and who responds to the filial 
love and obedience of those who seek to serve him ; that he is pleased with an endeavour 
to do and bear his will ; that he is seeking and outworking our spiritual, our eternal 
well-being. This is enough for the highest ends of our existence, for the restoration of 
our soul, for the ennoblement of our character. — C. 

Vers. 7, 8. — The worth of a with — the estimate of Christ. " David did well in that it 
was in his heart " to build a house for the Lord. The purpose of his heart, though it 
" lost the name of action," was acceptable to the God he served. Almost everything, 
in the estimate of him who " trieth the reins and the heart," depends on the motives by 
which we are inspired. Hence we may speak of — 

I. The worthlessness of Solomon's execution apart from the excellency of hii 
motive. That building now complete (at the time of the text) was very grand, very 
costly, very beautiful ; it was very elaborate in its workmanship ; it was very complete 
in all its parts ; it lacked nothing that treasure and time, that skill and strength, coald 
furnish. But, supposing that Solomon had done everything with the one desire to 
■ignalize his reigu over Israel, his execution would have counted for much among men, 
but it would have weighed nothing at all with God. It would not have advanced him 
by one step in the favour of the Most High. We need not, however, think that Solomon 
was devoid of a sincere desire to magnify Jehovah's Name. He said that he had " built 
the house /or the Name of the Lord Qod of Israel " (ver. 10) ; and this prayer of dedica- 
tion, adopted if not composed by him, is indicative of a reverent as well as a patriotic 
spirit (see 1 Cor. xiii. 1-— 3). 

II. The worth of a true and pure desire. Otod was pleased with David that 
ke wished to build him a house ; he " did well in that it was in his heart." 1. It is oui 
iitotive that makes our action to be our own. Another may command our speech or oui 



«8 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. vi. 1—42. 

•ction, our tongue or our hand ; but we are masters of our own thoughts ; our deslrw 
and purposes are our own. " As a man thinketh in his heart, so is he " (see Mark viL 
21, 22; Matt. xxvi. 12, 41). 2. There is an ascending scale in our motives, reaching 
from the very low to the very high. Men may have enough of the Satanic in them to 
be actuated in their conduct by absolute vindictiveness or even a positive delight is 
the misery and ruin of their neighbours ; at the other end of the scale they may bar* 
enough of the Divine in them to be inspired by pure magnanimity, by a wish to befriend 
those who have done them injury (Matt. v. 45). Very high up in this scale stands th» 
motive of desiring the glory of God, longing for the coming of the kingdom of Christ, an 
earnest wish to do something for his exaltation. And though tiie voice may be too 
feeble to speak any words that men may care to listen to, though the hand may be 
too weak to strike any blow that will shake the walls of iniquity, yet the very wish to 
do something for Christ, the prayer, " Make use of me, my God," weighs much in the 
balances of Heaven. It may be a pure desire to give of our substance to the needy, or 
to go forth to comfort some stricken heart, or to take a class in a ragged or a Sunday 
school, or to enter the ranks of the Christian ministry, or to do work in the foreign 
field. In Christian homes, in every land, there are hearts that sincerely and even ardently 
desire to serve their Saviour and to be a blessing to their brethren ; but there intervenes 
some forbidding word of God, some frustrating providence of his. The purse is emptied, 
or health fails, or home duties suddenly assume a new form or take much larger propor- 
tions ; and God says, " This is not for thee." But the desire is accepted ; the purpose 
of the soul is taken for the deed ; it is chronicled in the books of Heaven, " Thou didst 
well in that it was in thine heart." 

III. Its effective valtjb. When the pure desire of the true heart is not granted, 
it does not follow that it is without effect. Certainly it was not so in David's case. 
This desire of his heart, expressed to God but not granted by him, had very much to 
do with the ultimate result. It led to the Divine permission and direction extended 
to Solomon; it led to Solomon's personal aspiration and resolution; it led to thu 
preparation and storage of many valuable materials. It would hardly be an exaggera- 
tion to say that the temple was the work of David as much as of his son ; for he who 
originates the idea and inspires the people with his thought is as effective an agent as 
he who executes it. And many, since then, in the kingdom of Christ have succeeded 
where they seemed to fail; many a lonely and, apparently, unblessed worker for his 
Master, both at home and abroad ; both in the haunts and slums of some great city 
here, or in the depths of India, or in the heart of Africa, or in the midst of the idolatry 
and iniquity of China, or amid some island population ; — many such have gone home 
with no reward in their hand, unable to point to the gathered fruits of their toil and 
patience; and yet their unaccomplished efforts have been a precious and powerful 
inspiration, moved by which others have followed in their track, like Solomon in 
David's, and have built the edifice, have wrought the work, in the Xame and in the 
•trength of God. The finished work is, in some real sense and perhaps even in a largt 
degree, the fruit of the good thought " in the heart " of him whom no one regards as 
its author. We do more than we know when we think and feel in the spirit of our 
Lord.— a 

Vers. 12 — 14. — Splrittmt attitude. We have in these three verses four references 
to attitude. Solomon "stood before the altar;" he "spread forth his hands;" hs 
" kneeled down upon his knees ; " he spoke of those who " walk before OrodL," Now, 
it is worth while to observe that— 

I. BoDiLT ATTITUDE 18 NOT WITHOUT ITS VALUi!. In the gospel of Christ, with 
•II its precious and glorious spiritual freedom, there are no regulations as to posture 
in prayer; it is in no particular position of body that we must draw nigh to God and 
have fellowship with him. The sufferer on his couch, the workman at his post, is as 
free to converse with God as the minister in the ohvTch. We glory in this divinely 
bestowed liberty. But it is wise to remember that one bodily attitude may be more 
closely associated with prayer than all others are, and, being thus associated in our 
minds, we in that attitude more readily fall Into, apd more successfully maintain our- 
selves in, th« spirit of devotion than we can in any ^ther. The body is the servant of 
the mind, and we may compel it to serve us thus ; fay constantly suggesting to us and 



JH.T1.1— 42.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHB0NICLB3. 69 

thus favonring in ns the idea and the »pirit of worship. Here, as everywhere, is action 
and reaction. Our heart prompts us to worship, and this devout desire leads us to 
assume the attitude of devotion ; then the bodily attitude helps, in its way and measure, 
to sustain the spirit in its reverential mood. 

II. OvEBT ACTS ABE IMPOBTANT. 1. Attendance at the place of worship: "itanding 
before the altar." 2. Becogoizing sacred obligations publicly ; doing the right thing 
"in the presence of all the congregation." 3. Using right and true words, not only 
concerning God (as in ver. 14), but concerning man. 4. Acting, " walking," in honesty. 
In purity, in sobriety, in rectitude, in all relations. But, most important of all, because 
at the root of all — 

nL Spiritual attitude is of the first considebation. What Is the attitude of 
our soul toward God, toward the Lord Jesus Christ ? We cannot propose to ourselves a 
more radical, a more vital question. The answer decides our position in (or towards) 
the kingdom of God. If our spiritual attitude is that of enmity, aversion, indifference, 
then, whatever our overt actions may be, or whatever our professions may be, we stand 
outside that kingdom, and are in danger of hearing the words, " I never knew you." 
But if our attitude is not this, but rather one of hope and trust, if it be one of desire 
to understand and please God, if it be one of honest and earnest inquiry, then, though 
there be many imperfections in our behaviour, and though there be much to be learned 
and acquired, we are right in the sight of God, and are counted among his servants and 
his friends. It was the spiritual attitude of Mary when she came with her precious 
spikenard which drew the Saviour's commendation ; it was the attitude of penitence 
and faith which called forth his gracious assurance to the poor malefactor by his side. 
As Christian men, it concerns us much that our spiritual attitude is one of (1) reverence; 
(2) of prayerfulness; (3) of loving service; (4) of concern for the coining of his king- 
dom. — 0. 

Yers. 18 — 21. — ffod in the sanctuary. These elevated and eloquent words saggest 
to us what is — 

I. A FALSE THOUGHT OF GoD IN RELATION TO THE SANCTUARY. It may be, and probably 
k, imagined by the idolatrous that the temple of their deity contains the object of their 
worship; that it is his residence and home ; that it suffices for him. Solomon had no 
such false thought about Jehovah ; he knew that " the heaven of heavens could not 
contain him," and " how much less the house that he had built ! " God's presence is 
not to belimitedinourthoughtinany way whatever. He is "within no walls confined," 
and if we so habituate our mind to think of him as being present in some sacred place as 
he is not dsewhere, we " limit the Holy One " as we should not do. The only difference 
in the presence of the Eternal and Infinite One can be in our thought and to our 
imagination. 

II. The TRUE THOUGHT OF HIM IN THAT RELATION. As thosc who worship God in the 
sanctuary, we should accustom our minds to think of him as: 1. The very present One. 
"Will God in very deed dwell with men on the earth?" In very deed and in truth. 
Not only is his presence everywhere, and therefore within any walls that may be 
erected in his honour, but he is actively present there, interested in all that is passing 
there; "his eyes open . . . day and night" to observe all that is there done before him. 
The prevailing thought of those who " go up to the house of the Lord" should be that 
they are about to meet God, to stand and to bow before him ; to address him even as they 
address their neighbour, only with deepest reverence and in lowliest homage of heart. 
The commanding and restraining thought, the penetrating, soul-pervading thought of 
those who occupy the sanctuary, should be that of Israel at Bethel, " Surely God is in 
this place." 2. One who is waiting to he worshipped. Solomon earnestly and repeatedly 
desires of Jehovah that he would " hear his servaut(s)," that he would "hear their prayers." 
If only we are engaged in really reverential worship, we have no need to doubt this. 
God is not only " to be entreated " of us ; he is always to be found of all who truly seek 
him. Nay, he seeks us as his worshippers. " The Father seeketh such to worship him " 
(John iv. 23), i.e. such as worship him in spirit. All they, therefore, who draw nigh 
to God with a pure desire to render to him the homage and the gratitude of their heart, 
to renew before him their vows of loving attachment and holy service, to ask of him 
bis Divine guidance and enrichment, may niake quite sure that they "do not seek his 



70 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. vi. 1—42, 



face in vain." 3. One who is ready to forgive. " When thou hearest, forgive." W« 
should meet continually with God under a blessed sense of sonship, as those "whose 
transgressions have been forgiven," and who are as children at home with their^ Fatheri 
as redeemed ones with their Saviour. This is the true basis of communion with God. 
But, even then and thus, it becomes us to hethink ourselves that our service is not 
untainted with imperfection ; near to our lips should be the recurring prayer. " And 
when thou hearest, forgive." Humility is not disowned by the more advanced grace! 
of trustfulness, love, joy in God. — 0. 

Vers. 22 — 23. — Divine juitiee. This petition supposes — 

I. The commission of dblibbkatb wrong by one man against another. A dispute 
may readily arise in which each mao, affected in his judgment by his own personal 
interests, believes himself to make a righteous claim. Tliis is a case for impartial 
intervention, for the decision of one who is not prejudiced by any interest of his own. 
But the case here referred to by Solomon is one of deliberate wrong perpetrated by one 
man against his neighbour. It is a painful thing that this should have to be pre- 
supposed among the "people of God." Yet it was so. Enlightenment was not, and 
it is not, any positive guarantee against actual unrighteousness. A man may know 
all he can learn of Christ, sitting constantly and reverentially at his feet, and yet he 
may allow himself to do that which defrauds his brother and does him cruel and 
shameful wrong. Saddening observation only too frequently and only too powerfully 
attests it. 

II. The appeal to God. The injured Hebrew made his appeal to the Lord his 
God; he required the offending neighbour to take an onth in the very presence of the 
Holy One, invoking the judgment of God against the one who was in the wrong. It 
was presumably a last resort, an ultimate appeal. Not formally, but substantially, we 
do likewise. If humau judgment fails, we leave the guilty in the hands of God. We 
commit our righteous cause to his Divine arbitration. We ask God to make our 
innocence appear, to restore to us the good name or the possession of which we have 
been defrauded. We make our appeal from earth to Heaven. 

HI. The Divine judgment. Solomon prayed God to intervene so that the wicked 
should be recompensed and the righteous justified. Under that dispensation he might 
rightly and even confidently make that request. But what may we expect now of the 
Divine justice? These three things: 1. That the rin;hteous laws of God are always 
working for the overthrow of evil and the enthronement of integrity; the former i* 
radically weak, and the latter is essentially stron.; and prevailing. 2. That unvisited 
evil is always attended with spiritual failure, while unrewarded rectitude is always 
accompanied and sustained by spiritual worth. 3. That there is a long future which 
holds ample compensations in its unsoimded depths. Divine justice wiU prove to be 
completely vindicated when we have looked deep enough and waited long enough. — 0. 

Vers. 24 — 28, 34, 35. — Ood and the nation. Solomon takes his place and his part 
on this great occasion as the sovereign of the nation ; he prays /or the people of the 
land in the double sense of representing them and of interceding for them. It is the 
Hebrew nation that was then " before God," and is now before us. We therefore 
think of — 

L National responsibility. That is assumed throughout. It is not stated in lo 
many words, but the idea of it pervades the whole prayer. The people of Israel were 
not at liberty to choose their own deity, nor their own ecclesiastical polity, nor even 
their own forms of worship ; nor might they determine how they should be related to 
one another. In all the important relationships in which they stood, of every kind, 
they owed a direct obedience to God. And this rested upon the bases of — 

II. National inheritance. Their land was that which God had " given his people 
for an inheritance" (ver. 27). So very distinctly and remarkably had God bestowed 
their land upon them, that they might well realize their national obligation. But 
when we take all things into account, we shall see that every nation owes all that it 
has and is to the creative, formative, providential goodness of Almighty God; and 
it is, therefore, responsible to him for its creed, its religious worship, its laws and 
statutes, its habits of life ; for there is no nation anvwhere that has not derived iti 



OH. VL 1—42.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 71 

inheritance from him. Even that which may, at first sight, seem to disconnect it from 
him, viz. the element of national courage, energy, industry, struggle, suffering, — this alio 
is "of the Lord." 

IIL National activity. Solomon prayed (ver. 34) that, when Ood's people " went 
out to war," their prayers for victory might he heard, and that God would " maintain 
their cause." He could oft'er this supplication with a perfectly clear conscience. 
Neither as a spirit nor as a sentiment, much less as a religious conviction, had peace 
entered into the minds of men as it has now. Se had not been born who came to be 
the Prince ot peace, and whose advent was to be the beginning of the era of " peace on 
earth," War was then regarded as a rightful, honourable, commendable activity — s 
field of enterprise and capacity which any one might desire to enter. There may still 
be found a place for it, as a sad and deplorable necessity. Under the sway of Jesu* 
Christ, it can hold no larger or higher position among national activities than that. 
But as it was right that prayer should be offered for God's blessing on national wars, 
more certainly is it right that his Divine blessing should be continually sought on all 
peaceful industries; that is to say, on all those peaceful industries which make for tha 
comfort, the eurichment, the well-being of the world. There are activities on which 
the pure or kind heart must shrink from invoking the blessing of God. And what 
we cannot conscientiously ask him to bless we should refuse to promote or to entertain. 
Surely, however, it is a very large part of national piety that prayer should be mad* 
continually, in the church and in the home, that, in every path of honourable and esti- 
mable industry, the people of the land may walk before God, and fulfil in this respect 
his holy will ; that they may also receive his sanction and his blessing. 

IV. National misfoktunb. (Vers. 24, 2tj — 28.) Solomon anticipates the hour of 
national misfortune — defeat in battle, drought, pestilence, locusts, etc. He regards this 
conceivable calamity as the consequence of national sin and the sign of Divine dis- 
pleasure (vers. 24, 26), "because they have sinned aaainst thee," and he prays for 
mercy and for the removal of the stroke of penalty. It is a question of great impor- 
tance whether this view is to be taken under all circumstances whatever. We must 
remember that the way in which the favour of Goii was manifested in Old Testament 
times was the way of temporal prosperity, and (conversely) the form of Divine dis- 
approval was that of temporal adversity. But we are living in a period when th« 
spiritual and the future are the prevailing elements ; and what was a certain conclusion 
then may be only a possibility or a probability now. 1. It may be true that national 
calamity speaks of national delinquency, and calls for national repentance. It is not 
only possible, but even probable, that this is the case. For national sin is commonly show- 
ing itself in guilty indulgence, and that leads to weakness, to exposure to the enemy, 
to misfortune of many kinds. 2. It may be that national calamity is Divine discipline. 
It is quite possible that God is testing, is purifying, is refining the nation as he does 
the individual, is intervening to save it from sin and shame, is working thus for its 
moral elevation and enlargement. And therefore it may be that the question to b* 
asked is — What have we to learn? what is the peril to be shunned? which is the wmj 
God desires should be taken ? — C. 

Vers. 29 — 31. — Ood and the individual soul. Not only during the time of national 
calamity (ver. 28), though especially then, do families and individual men find them- 
selves in sore need of Divine succour. There is never any considerable congregation 
which does not include at least a few hearts that come up in hope of comfort and relisf 
from Heaven. 

I. Thb bueden which is borne by each human heart. With our complex 
nature, and our many human relationships, we lie open to many ills and sorrows. 
These may be : 1. Bodily ; pain or weakness, or threatened serious disease. 2. Tem- 
poral ; some difficulty or danger connected with " our circumstances." 3. Sympathetic ; 
some trouble of heart we are suffering by reason of our strong attachment to othera 
who suffer and are in distress. 4. Spiritual ; heart-ache, disappointment, compunction, 
doubt, anxious inquiry alter God. " Every one knows his own sore and his own 
grief." 

II. Thb appeal op the soul to the Supreme. Trouble does lead men to tha 
God of their life, to the Father of their spirit. " Men say, ' God be pitiful,' who ne'ar 



72 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. yv 1—42. 



•aid, • God be praised.' " We cannot supply our own need ; we find our own "insufficiency 
for ourselves;" we must look beyond ourselves, and in what direction? Man often 
fails us. 1. We cannot speak to him, either because we cannot get his ear, or because 
■we do not care to divulge our secret grief to any human heart whatsoever. 2. Or we 
have tried to secure human sympathy, and have failed ; men are too much occupied 
with their own affaiis and their own troubles to make much room in their hearts for 
ours, 3. Or we cannot discover the human hand that will help us ; those that pity 
cannot serve us, cannot save us. We must have recourse to God. And we bring qui 
grief, our sore, to him. 1. We are sure that he is accessible. He invites our approach; 
he says, " Call upon me in the time of trouble ; I will deliver thee, and thou shalt 
glorify me." 2. We are sure of his attention. He is our Father, who pities us with 
parental kindness (Ps. ciii. 13); he is our Saviour, who has trodden the path of struggle 
and of sorrow before us, on whose tender sympathy we may confidently count (Heb. iL 
18 ; iv. 15, 16 ; v. 2). 3. We may depend on his power. He is able to save, to rescue 
to restore, to renew. 

III. The Divine kesponse. 1. It is a question of ottr spiritual integrity. God 
answers " according to all our ways ; " that is, according to our integrity. We must 
have the spirit of obedience in us. We may not look for a response if we are " regarding 
iniquity in our heart ; " but, on the other hand, if we are seriously bent on serving the 
Lord, if " our heart condemn us not," if it acquit us of all insincerity and double- 
mindedness, " then have we confidence toward God ; and whatsoever we a.sk we receive 
of him, because we keep his commandments " (1 John iii. 21, 22). We may not, we are 
not able to keep all his precepts in all particulars ; but the spirit of filial obedience, 
the desire to do what is " pleasing in his sight," is dwelling within us and inspiring us, 
and we are, therefore, of those whose prayer he hears. He forgives our shortcoming 
(" heai' . , . and forgive "), and he " renders according to our ways." 2. It is a ques- 
tion of Divine knowledge. Who shall tell that this spirit of submission and obedience 
is within us? Only One can; it is he who "only knows the hearts of the children of 
men." He looks beneath our words and actions, and sees the motives and the purposes 
of our hearts. 3. It is a question of our character and the Divine intention. And 
God's design is so to hear and heed our prayers, so to giant or to withhold the desires 
of our heart, that we shall " fear God and walk in his ways," shall be "partakers of his 
holiness." — 0. 

Vers. 36 — 39. — Departure and return. It seems a melancholy thing that, at this 
hour of sacred joy and triumph, Solomon should have been under the necessity of con- 
templating national unfaithfulness. Divine displeasure, a return of the people of God 
to ignominious captivity and all its consequent distress. But he felt that it was 
necessary, and the issue abundantly justified his forecast. 

I. Departure fbom God. In the case of Israel, departure from the Lord their God 
meant either (1) the formal substitution of another deity for Jehovah, or (2) wide- 
spread disobedience to his Law, moral or ceremonial, or both. With ourselves it signifies 
one or more of three things. 1. A growing disregard, ending in an absolute indif- 
ference, or even denial, of God's claims. 2. A serious and, in the end, a shameful 
violation of his moral Law ; doing that which is grievous in his sight and injurious to 
ourselves and our neighbours. 3. Gradual but growing declension after acquaintance 
with God ; the heart allowing itself to become loosened from sacred tics and attaching 
itself to other objects — separating itself from him and quitting his service. 

II. Its penalty. 1. Divine displeasure. " Thou be angry with them." A meet 
serious and most deplorable thing it is to abide beneath the displeasure of our heavenly 
Father. The anger of love, the righteous anger of holy love, is ill to hear, indeed; it is 
a heavy weight upon the heart; it is a darkening of the life of man. 2. The triumph 
of our enemy. " And deliver them over before their enemies," etc. A sad thing it il 
for the human soul to be at the mercy of its enemy. Sin is a cruel enemy, and eKauts 
a full penalty. (1) How it rohs us of our true treasure — of our joy in God, of our 
gladness in his service, of our likeness to him, of the friendship of Jesus Christ, of the 
hope of eternal life ! (2) How it smites us — with inward compunction, with a sense of 
our guiltiness and folly, with humiliation at our low estate 1 (3) How it degrades us — 
bringing us down into captivity, so that we are no longer masters of ourselves, but are 



OH. ▼1.1—42.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHEONICLES. 73 

at the mercy of any tyrannous habit we may have contracted 1 We are in the land of 
the enemy ; his bonds are upon our soul. 

in. Our bepbntance and return. 1. Distress leads to thoughtfulness. " They 
bethink themselves." We "come to ourselves" (Luke xv. 17), as those who were 
created to consiiier and act reasonably ; we weigh our condition and our prospects. 2. 
Thoughtfulness leads to self-rebuke. We reprove ourselves for owr folly. We compare 
or contrast the present with the past, the land whither we have been " carried away 
captive " with the home of freedom and of sacred joy. We reproach ourselves with 
our guilt. We are pained and ashamed that we have left him, wlio is worthy of the 
riches of our strength, for all that is unworthy ; him, to whom we owe everything, for 
that or for those to whom we owe nothing. We repent of our decision and our deed. 

3. Repentance leads to return. We return unto God " with all our heart and with all 
our soul." We come with confession ; we say freely and sincerely, " We have sinned " 
(ver. 38). We come with consecration ; we offer ourselves, our hearts and lives, unto 
God, that henceforth we may walk in his ways with a perfect heart. We come in 
faith ; we have hope in his mercy, for we know what will be — 

IV. His reception of us. He will " forgive his people that have sinned against 
him " (ver. 39). He will cordially welcome ; he will immediately and magnanimously 
restore (see Liike xv. 20 — 24). — 0. 

Vers. 1 — H. — ITie dedication of the temple: 2. The address of Solomon. I. To 
Jehovah. (Vers. 1, 2.) On beholding the cloud which filled the temple (ver. 13), 
Solomon uttered words which expressed : 1. Recognition of Jehovah's presence. " The 
Lord hath said that he would dwell in the thick darkness." Though nowhere occurring 
in Old Testament Scripture, this promise accorded substantially with the declarations 
Jehovah had olten made (Exod. xiii. 21 ; xvi. 9 ; xix. 9 ; xx. 21 ; xxiv. 16 ; Lev. xvi. 
2 ; Numb. xii. 5 ; Deut. xxxi. 15). In speaking as he did, Solomon both intimated his 
faith in the Divine promise, and his belief that in the cloud which filled the temple 
that promise had been implemented ; in the thick darkness he recognized the dwelling- 
place of God. 2. Belief in Jehovah's acceptance of the temple. The phenomenon 
looked upon must have called to his mind the similar occuirenoe on the completion of 
the tabernacle, and led him to interpret this as Moses did that, as an intimation that 
Jehovah was pleased to accept tlie finished structure, and designed to make of It not 
simply " a lodging for a wayfaring; man," but " a house of habitation," and " a place of 
dwelling for ever." 3. Welcome of Jehovah to his house. Addressing himself directly 
to Jehovah, the king in effect says, " Lord, I have built a house of habitation for thee, 
and a place for thy dwelling for ever; and now that thou hast graciously condescended 
to come to us, according to thy promise, in ' a thick cloud,' in the name of thy people 
I give thee joyous welcome, and humbly invite thee to enter and take possession." 

4. A sense of the honour done by Jehovah to himself and his people in permitting 
them to huild him a permanent habitation in their midst. It is hardiy doubtful that 
Solomon at the moment realized the antithesis expressed by the words " I " and " thee " 
— "/, a sinful as well as puny creature, have built tov'thee, whom the heaven of 
heavens cannot contain, a house of habitation. Who am I, Lord, that thou shouldest 
set such honour upon me ? " Similar emotions rise in gracious souls at the thought of 
God taking up abode within them (Ps. viii. 4 ; cxliv. 3 ; Luke vii. 6), or accepting the 
work of their hands (1 Chron. xxix. 14; 2 Cor. ii. 14). 

II. To THE PEOPLE. (Vcrs. 3 — 11.) Pacing round upon the congregation, which at a 
signal rose to its feet, the pious monarch (probably with uplifted bands) supplicated 
for his subjects the Divine blessing, and in their hearing rendered thanks to God for 
the work that day finished. In particular, he acknowledged that the temple had been 
biilt by Jehovah : 1. Bather than by him, Solomon. Noteworthy is the emphasis 
laid upon the fact that " the Lord God of Israel had with his hands fulfilled that which 
he had spoken with his mouth." Quifacit per alium facit per se. Solomon esteemed 
himself the builder of the temple (ver. 10), though not a beam of timber had been felled, 
or a stone quarried, or a pillar cast, or a knop fashioned by himself, but all had been 
executed at and in accordance with his instructions by workmen and artisans ; and in 
like manner he regarded Jehovah as the prime Architect, inasmuch as without Jehovah's 
permission the work had aever been begun, and without Jehovah's aid it had never 



74 TflE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. vi. 1—48. 

been finished (Ps. cxxvii. 1). 2. As a mark of tpecial favour to Jerusalem. "In aQ 
places where I record my Name I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee," had 
Jehovah said upon the mount (Exod. xx. 24), while Moses on the plains of Moab had 
reminded them that "unto the place which the Lord their God should choose out of all 
their tribes to put his Name there, even unto his habitation should they seek, and 
thither should they bring their offerings " (Deut. xii. 5) ; yet never since the day of 
their departure from Egypt had a city been selected for such a purpose, until Darid had 
arisen to be the captain of his people and Jerusalem had become the metropolii of th« 
land. Then Jerusalem was chosen (Ps. cxxxii. 13), and the ark of Gtod established on 
Zion (2 Sam. vi. 12 ; 1 Chron. xv. 1, etc.) ; now, in further pursuance of this plan to 
•pecially distinguish the capital, a house had been built to set his Name there. 3. In 
fulfilmmt of a promise made to David Ms father. The first effect of the ark's establisli!- 
ment upon Mount Zion was to excite within David's heart a desire to erect a structur* 
worthy of its accommodation (2 Sara. vii. 2) ; a house of cedar instead of the goat's-hair 
tent in which it had hitherto been lodged. The design was approved by Jehovah in m 
far as it bespoke the deeply religious spirit of his servant, the fervour of his gratitude 
and the sincerity of his devotion. Nevertheless, the proposal that David should build 
the house was not favoured by Jehovah— rather was expressly negatived. David 
having been a man of war, and, having shed much blood upon the earth in God's sight, 
it was hardly congruous that he should build a temple to the God of peace (1 Chron. 
xxii. 8). Thus God intimates that in religion, as in ordinary affairs, is a " fitness of 
things" which cannot be transgressed without a shock to beholders. If in any depart- 
ment of life, much more in that of religion, a beautiful consistency should he maintained 
between one's public conduct and private character, and a strict watch set upon one'i 
present actions lest they should hinder future usefulness. But if David should not 
build the house, a son of his, to be afterwards born, would (2 Sam. vii. 12, 13 ; 1 Chron. 
xxii. 9, 10) ; and he, Solomon, had arisen in fulfilment of that promise. 4. For tht 
honour of Ms Name. So far as Solomon was concerned, that indicated true humility. 
Different from Nebuchadnezzar (Dan. iv. 30), Solomon had no thought of enhancing 
his own glory in what he undertook and executed, though, as the sequel proved, h* 
thereby the more effectually secured that (ch. ix. 28 ; 1 Kings x. 23, 24 ; of. Luke xiv. 
11). Of genuine religion also was it a sign, God's glory being ever to a good man tha 
foremost motive and highest aim in all his actions (1 Cor, x. 31), the uppermost desire 
in his heart being to sing forth the honour of God's Kame (Ps. Ixvi. 2), and to speak 
of his glory (Ps. xxix. 9). On the part of Jehovah the end contemplated was the 
loftiest possible, God having nothing more magnificently res|ilendent in itself, or more 
infallibly beatific in its results, to make known to man than just his own ineffably 
glorious Name, its holiness (Ps. cxi. 9), faithfulness (Ps. cxlvi. 6), goodness (Ps. xxv. 8), 
and mercy (Exod. xxxiv. 6). Symbolically that was done by the ark of the covenant, 
with the tables of the Law deposited in the inner shrine of the sanctuary between the 
cherubim ; historically that has since been done by God's Son, who m the fulness of tht 
times came forth from the Father, and revealed him to men (Matt. i. 23 ; John i. 13; 
V. 43) ; fully that will be done in the heavenly temple, when God's servants shall sac 
his face, and his Name shall be in their foreheads (Rev. xxii. 4). 

Lessons. 1. The condescension of God in dwelling with man. 2. The faithfulnesa 
•f God in keeping his word. 3. The sovereignty of God in working all things accord* 
ing to the counsel of his wilL 4. The love of God in making known his Name to 
men. — ^W. 

Vers. 12 — 21. — The dedication of Hm templet 3. The consecration prayer. I. Tma 
PBKSON OK THE SUPPLIANT. Solomon. 1. Boyol. That Solomon should have prayed 
was not surprising, considering the example and training he must have received from 
his father, and remembering the solemn and impressive spectacle he had witnessed. 
It is difficult to shake off habits formed within the soul by ancestral piety and early 
training ; while, if a sense of God's nearness and a realization of God's goodness will not 
stimulate to prayer, it is doubtful if anything on earth will. Yet praying kings are 
not so numerous as they might and should, or indeed would be, did they consider their 
own or tiieir people's good, not to speak of the allegiance they owe to the Kins; ol 
kings, by whose permission alone it is they reign (Prov. viii. 15 ; Dan. iL 21). % 



OH. Ti. 1—42.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 76 

Rtprtsentative. Though Solomon prayed for himself and in his own name, he nerer- 
theless acted as the official mouthpiece of his pc iple, who in this whole work were asso- 
rted with him. Though from this it cannot be inferred that earthly sovereigns in 
general (or eren Christian sovereigns in particular) have a right to prescribe creeds or 
lorms of worship to, or serve vicariously for, their subjects in the duties of the sanot uary, 
it is still true that they occupy a sort of representative position as the nation's head, 
and just on that account should interest themselves in the advancement of religion 
amongst those who own their sway, and should frequently bear these upon their heart* 
before God in prayer. 

II. The Deity addbbssed. The Lord God of Israel. 1. The only Ood. The lan- 
guage employed here by Solomon (ver. 14), and elsewhere by David (Ps. Ixxxvi. 8), was 
not intended to concede the existence of other divinities either in heaven or on earth, 
but designed, like the statements of Moses (Deut. Iv. 39), Bahab (Josh. ii. 11), David 
(2 Sam. vii. 22), and Jehovah himself (Isa. xlv. 22; xlvi. 5), to emphasize in the 
strongest way the unity and soleity of God (Exod. ix. 14; Deut. vi. 4; 1 Kings viii. 23; 
Jer. X. 6 ; 1 Cor. viii. 4). 2. A covenant-keeping Ood. Solomon, like all pious Israelites, 
like Moses (Deut. vii. 9), David (Ps. xxv. 10 ; Ixxxix. 34 ; 1 Chron. xvi. 15), Nehe- 
miah (i. 5), and Daniel (ix. 4), delighted to acknowledge Jehovah's faithfulness to hii 
promised word. It was solely on the ground of that covenant by which God had chosen 
Israel for his possession (Exod. xix. 5, 8), and made himself over to be their God (Exod. 
XX. 2), that Israel existed as a nation and enjoyed the privilege of drawing near to God. 
Had it been possible for God to violate his deliberately and graciously foimed engage- 
ments, or go back in the smallest measure fronn his promised word, Solomon knew that 
Israel's continuance as a people would instantly have become imperilled. That Jeho- 
vah had fulfilled the promise made to David with reference to the temple, was a proof 
that this contingency could not occur. The same covenant faithfulness is the believer's 
warrant for drawing near to God in prayer, and the suppliant's encouragement in 
expecting an answer (2 Cor. i. 20; 1 Thess. v. 24; Titus i. 2; Heb. vi. 18). 3. A 
mercy-showing Qod. This also indispensable as a characteristic of such a Divinity as 
man can hopefully address in prayer. For unless God can be merciful towards the 
undeserving and hell-deserving, it is useless to think of asking anything at his hands. 
The notion that man may treat with God on grounds of pure personal justice must be 
discarded, as neither warranted by Scripture nor supported by experience. 

" 'Tis from the mercy of onr God 
That all onr hopes begin." 

And that God is pre-eminently a God of mercy is the clear teaching of revelation (Exod. 
xxxiv. 7 ; Ps. ciii. 8 ; Micah vii. 18 ; Eph. ii. 4 ; Jas. v. 11). 

III. The mode op supplication. 1. Publicly. The king prayed from a brazen 
scaffold, or basin-like elevation, perhaps resembling a modern pulpit, five cubits long, 
five broad, and three high, erected in the middle of the court and congregation. Prayers 
for one's self should not be made in public (Matt. vi. 5), the place for such being, not 
the synagogue, street corners, or market squares, but the inner chamber of the house, 
the secret room, or retiring-hall of the soul (Matt. vl. 6). 2. Humbly. Indicated by 
the attitude assumed during prayer. Hitherto, while speaking to the people, the 
king had stood ; now, in addressing God, he kneels. David sat before the Lord (2 Sam. 
vii. 18) ; Abraham stood (Gen. xviii. 22). In Nehemiah's time the people stood and 
confessed their sins (ix. 2). Daniel kneeled three times a day on his knees and prayed 
(vi. 10). In the New Testament Scripture the Pharisee stood and prayed (Luke xviii. 
11) ; Jesus kneeled (Luke xxii. 41) ; so did Stephen (Acts vii. 60), Peter (Acts ix. 40), 
and Paul (Acts xx. 36 ; xxi. 5). 3. Fervently. Outstretched hands were a sign of 
prayer generally, their heavenward direction symbolizing a solemn and earnest appeal 
to him who sat enthroned on high (Exod. ix. 29, 33 ; Ps. Ixxxviii. 9 ; cxliii. 6 ; Isa. L 
15). The same thing now signified by the folding or clasping of the hands and the 
upward turning of the face. Both classes of actions betoken inward emotion, and fer- 
vency of spirit on the part of him who prays. 4. Believingly. The scaffold stood 
before the brazen altar. The king prayed from the neighbourhood of sacrificial blood 
— a recognition on his part that only through atoning blood could either himself or his 
supplications gain admission into Jehovah's audience-chamber, or acceptance with him 



76 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHEONICLES. [oh. vi. 1—42. 

gleb. ix. 7). It is now true that only through the blood of Jesna can one draw near tQ 
od (Heb. X. 19). 

IV. The contents op the pbateb. A fonrfold petition. 1, Tor David's hotue— 
that it should never want a man to sit upon the throne (ver. 16). Jehovah had promised 
this conditionally on David's children proving faithful to their covenant obligations, and 
walking in the ways of righteousness and truth (2 Sam. vii, 12 — 16). Solomon requests 
that this promise may he fulfilled, not provisionally merely, hut absolutely, by God deal- 
ing with David's children so that they shall take heed to their way, and walk in God's Law 
as David had done before them. To suppose Solomon only meant that Jehovah should 
stand to his word and maintain the Davidio dynasty, should it eventually prove worth 
maintaining, he, Jehovah, all the while .severely leaving it alone, is as incorrect as to 
Imagine that Solomon desired God to establish David's throne for ever, irrespective of the 
character of its occupants. What Solomon craved was the two things together — the 
perpetuity of David's house through the never-failing moral and spiritual worth of David's 
successors. 2. For the temple — thatit might continue to be a dwelling-place for God on 
earth, and in the midst of men (ver. 18). Solomon saw that, without this, his magnifi- 
cent edifice would turn out a comparatively worthless structure, as modern cathedrals 
■and churches, however imposing their appearance, elaborate their ornamentation, or 
giirantio their dimensions, are nothing more than piles of masonry if God is absent from 
their aisles. Yet, so overpowered was his imagination with the bare idea of God's 
immensity — " Behold, heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee" — that it 
seemed to him doubtful if it were not the merest vanity to dream that an infinite and 
omnipresent Deity could inhabit even a palace such as he had erected — "how much less 
this house which I have built ,*^ And in any case the condescension of it appeared so 
strange as to fill him with wonder and doubtful joy. " But will God in very deed 
dwell with men on the earth ? " The feelings here expressed have their counterparts in 
those kindled in believing hearts by the contemplation of that mystery of mysteries, 
the incarnation of the Eternal Son, and of that almost equally amazing fact, the inhabi- 
tation of the human heart by the Holy Ghost (1 Cor. iii. 16). (See next homily on ver. 
18.) 3. For himself— that his present supplication might be answered (ver. 19). The 
special burden of his supplication was that Jehovah's eyes might be open upon the 
temple day and night, not so much for protection — though that idea must not be 
excluded (Ps. cxxi. 3) — as for observation ; to note when any worshipper should be 
directing thitherward his prayer (ver. 20), lest for want of being observed such petitioner 
should go without an answer. The earnestness with which Solomon "cried" unto 
Jehovah concerning this thing was an attestation of the importance he attached to it. 
Bo far from doubting whether God could answer prayer, it seemed to him that, if God 
eould not, his entire reputation and character as a God would be gone. 4. For ail 
future suppliants— -that their prayers might be heard (ver. 21). Solomon believed that 
his people would in after-years retain such a faith in Jehovah as to lead them to direct 
their supplications towards his earthly dwelling-place. Yet Solomon confounded not 
Jehovah's earthly habitation with his true dwelling-place in heaven,or expected responses 
from the lower shrine after the manner of a heathen oracle, instead of from the upper 
temple where Jehovah sat enthroned in unveiled glory. Jehovah's symbolic presence 
might be behind^ the screen that concealed the holy of holies ; his real presence was 
beyond the curtain of the sky. Thence accordingly should all answers come, as thither 
would all petitions go. The coming of such answers would be a fruit and a sign of 
forgiveness. 

Learn : 1. The duty of intercessory prayer (1 Tim. il, 1). 2. The propriety of public 
devotion (Heb. x. 25). 3. The reverential spirit of prayer (Heb. xii. 28). 4. The 
reasonableness of expecting answers to prayer (Ps. v. 3).— W. 

Ver. 18. — " Will God in very deed dwell with men f I. Reason satb. No ! 1. 
The greatness of Ood/orbids it. The heaven of heavens cannot contain him ; how much 
less any house which man might build I or, even man's heart, which at the best is 
narrow and mean I The insignificance of man in comparison with the transcendent 
majesty of the Supreme has always been a difficulty in the way of accepting the reli- 
gion of the Bible. 2. The sinfulness of man opposes it. Had the thin? itself— the 
fellowship of God with man — been in reason's e^es conceivable, it wouM still have 



OH.VI. 1— 42.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE OHRONIOLEa 77 

been negatived by the fact of man's fallen and degraded condition, with which the 
holiness and justice of God must have for ever, apart from an atonement, seemed 
impossible. 

II. Ebvelation answers, Yes ! 1. Qod has already dwelt with man in the past. 

(1) Symbolically, umier the Hebrew dispensation, witli its ark dwelling originally in the 
tabernacle and latterly in the temple. (2) Historically, in the fulness of the times, in 
the Person of Jesus Christ, who as God's Son tabernacled in the flesh on the earth and 
in the midst of men. Hence it may be argued, that which has been may be. 2. God 
now dwells with man in the present. " Lo, I am with you alway " (Matt, xxviii. 20), 
said Christ before his ascension ; and again at the supper-table, " We will come and 
make our abode with him" (John xiv. 23). Christ dwells in the hearts of his people 
in the Person of his Spirit (John xiv. 16). " That which is done is that which shall 
be done " (Bcoles. i. 9). 3. Ood will dwell with men visibly and personally in the 
future. " And I heard a great voice out of heaven, saying, Behold, the tabernacle of 
God is with men, and he will dwell with them " (Rev. xxi. 3). — W. 

Vers. 22 — 39. — The sevenfold illustration, I. The oath op purgation. (Vers. 22, 
23.) 1. The case supposed. (Ver. 22.) (1) Common — that of a man sinning, or being 
suspected of sinning, against his neighbour in any of the ways specified in the Law of 
Moses— by theft (Exod. xxii. 10, 11), by finding and retaining lost goods (Lev. vi. 1), or 
in the case of a wife by adultery (Numb. v. 19 — 22). (2) Hard — one in which distinct 
and satisfactory evidence is a-wanting. Perhaps (3) wicked — on one side or another most 
likely so, either the accuser's charge or the accused's denial being consciously false. 
Certainly (4) solenm — an oath or appeal to Heaven having been either demanded by 
the accused or imposed by the accuser (Exod. xxii. 10), and carried through or per- 
formed " before the altar in his house," i.e. in the immediate Divine presence (Exod. 
XX. 24). 2. The prayer offered. (Ver. 23.) (1) That Jehovah would listen to the appeal 
of the litigants, not merely as he does to all words spoken on the earth (Ps. cxxxix. 5), 
in virtue of his omnipresence (Jer. xxiii. 33 ; Bph. i. 23), but as acting in the character 
of judge or umpire between the two (Job xxi. 22 ; Ps. ix. 7 ; Iviii. 11 ; Ixii. 12 ; Prov. 
xxix. 26). (2) That Jehovah would pronounce judgment on the case submitted to him 
(Ps. lix. 9 ; cxix. 137). This practically is what is meant by all judicial oath-taking. It 
is a virtual placing of the case before God, that he may elicit a true and righteous ver- 
dict (Rom. ii. 2 ; 1 Pet. i. 17). (3) That Jehovah would make known his decision by 
punishing the guilty and vindicating the innocent (Gen. xviii. 25 ; Exod. xxxiv. 7 ; 
2 Sam. xxiL 26 ; Nah. i. 3), not by supernaturally interposing to smite the former with 
death, as in the case of Korah and his company (Numb. xvi. 32), or as in the case of 
Miriam (Numb. xii. 10), with some malady which might be interpreted as a signal of 
the Divine displeasure, but by providentially bringing it about that the wickedness of 
the wicked should be discovered, as in the cases of Abimelech (Judg. ix. 56) and 
Haman (Esth. vii. 10), and the uprightness of the good man should be declared, as in 
those of Job (xlii. 10) and David (Ps. xli. 12). 

IL The pbatbb of the captive. (Vers. 24, 25.) 1. The instance selected. That 
of God's ancient people (1) having sinned against God, which they had often done ij; 
days past (Ps. ovi. 6 ; Ixxviii. 17 ; Hos. x. 9), and would most probably do again (ch. vl. 
86 ; 1 Kings viii. 46) ; (2) having been defeated in battle on this account, as frequently 
before had happened to them (Judg, vii. 1, 5 ; 1 Sam. iv. 3) ; (3) having been carried 
off in part into exile, as they subsequently were into Assvria (2 Kings xvii. 5) and 
Babylon (2 Kings xxv. 21); (4) having repented of their wickedness (1 Kings viii. 47), 
saying as at Mizpeh, " We have sinned against the Lord " (1 Sam. vii. 6), or as at Jeru- 
salem in the restoration, " Since the days of our fathers have we been in a great trespass 
unto this day " (Ezra ix. 7) ; (5) having confessed God's Name in their sorrowful 
calamity, i.e. acknowledged God's justice in all that had befallen them (Ps. li. 4 ; Rom. 
iii. 4) ; and (6) having prayed and made supplication before God in the temple, i.e. those 
of them who remained behind for those who had been carried off. 2. The request pre- 
sented. (1) That God would hear from heaven the cry of his suppliant people, and so 
vindicate his condescending character as a prayer-hearing God (Ps. Ixv. 2 ; Isa. xiv. 11), 

(2) That he would forgive the sin of his erring people, and so prove himself a gracious 
and compassionate God (Exod. xxxiv. 9 ; Neh. ix. 17 ; Ps. Ixxviii. 38 ; Ixxxvi. 6 ; Isa, 



78 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. vl 1— 4a 

Iv. T). (3) That he would restore his banished ones to their own land, and bo show 
himself a faithful and covenant-keeping Qod (Deut. vii. 9 ; Neh. i. 6 ; Dan. ix. 4 ; 
1 Kings viii. 23). 

III. The get of the famished. (Vers. 26, 27.) 1. ITie distress pktwred. Solo- 
mon imagines a stale of matters that in Oriental countries might easily happen, when 
through long-continued drought, as in the days of Joseph (Geu. xli. 57), the inhabi- 
tants might be perishing (or in danger of perishing) through lack of food — a state of 
matters not unknown in the land of Israel, both before (Euth i. 1 ; 2 Sam. xxi. 1) and 
after (1 Kings xvii. 7 ; 2 Kings iv. 38 ; vi. 25 — 29 ; xxv. 3 ; Acts xi. 28) his time, 
and commonly regarded as a visible token of Divine displeasure on account of sin (Lev. 
xxvi. 20 ; Deut. xi. 17 ; xxviii. 23 ; Amos iv. 7), as abundance of rain and fertility of 
ground were customarily accepted as intimations of Heaven's favour (Lev. xxvi. 4 ; Jer. 
V. 24; Joelii. 23). The state of matters depicted is rendered even more sorrowful, 
and the wretchedness more pitiable, by the fact that the famine and the drought 
spoken cf are represented as having been sent upon the people on account of their 
wickedness, exactly as Jehovah had threatened. 2. The condition presupposed. Solo- 
mon asks nothing for his people when in this plight except under limitations. He 
requests absolutely neither the complete removal of the judgment nor its mitigation. 
He assumes that his people shall have (1) learned the lesson designed to be taught by 
the afflictive dispensation sent upon them, sicce in his dealings neither with natioM 
nor with individuals does God afflict the children of men willingly or gratuitously, but 
always for their profit (Heb. xii. 10), that he might impart to them instruction (Job 
xxxiii. 16) concerning their sin (Jub xxxvi. 9, 10), lead them back into "the good 
way " (Ezek. xiv. 10 ; xx. 37, 43), and make them fruitful in holy deeds (Heb. xiL 11 ; 
Jas. i. 2 — 4) ; (2) put the lesson in practice by turning from sin and walking in the 
good way, acknowledging the Divine justice in their calamity, and supplicating the 
Divine forgiveness of their trespass — three things, reformation, contrition, and prayer, 
without which none need expect mercy even from a God of grace. 3. Thefavowr soli- 
cited. (1) A favourable audience : " Hear thou from heaven." (2) Immediate for- 
giveness : " And forgive the sin of thy sei'vants." (3) Effectual assistance : " Send 
rain upon thy land." 4. The reason given. (1) The stnckea people are " thy people" 
— "thy people Israel," to whom thou art engaged in covenant. God loves to be 
reminded of the gracious and endearing relationship in which believers stand towards 
him — he having taken them for his people, and made himself over to them as their God. 
(2) The barren land is " thy land " even more than thy people's. It is thine by right 
of creation ; theirs in virtue of donation : " Thou hast given it to thy people." Thine 
by possession ; theirs by inheritance : " Thou hast given it to them for an inheritance." 
God's people have nothing they have not received from him (1 Cor. iv. 7 ; Jas. i. 17). 
Yet all things are theirs, as co-heirs with Christ (1 Cor. iiL 22, 23). 

IV. The wail of the afflicted. (Vers. 28 — 31.) 1. Their case described. 
(Ver. 28.) Their distress — ^stricken by plague or sickness — is set forth (1) as to it« 
character, which might be either national or individual, since no man or community 
may claim exemption from the stroke of outward calamity ; (2) as to its cause, which 
might be either a " dearth in the land," a failure in the fruits of the earth, in conse- 
quence of long-continued drought as in the days of Elijah (1 Kings xvii. 1), or a 
destruction of the same by pestilence, by "blasting or nuldew," by "locust or cater- 
pillar," such as Moses had threatened God would send upon them if they apostatized 
from him (Deut. xxviii. 22), and as he afterwards did send upon them in the days of 
Amos (iv. 9), or a famine superinduced by a siege like that which occurred in Samaria 
in the days of Elisha (2 Kings vi. 25) ; (3) as to its consequence, which is supposed by 
the king to have been salutary, leading the afflicted people, collectively and individu- 
ally, to a knowledge of their sin, as in the instances of the widow of Zarephath (1 Kings 
xvii. 18) and of the Israelites in the wilderness (Numb. xxi. 7), and to a crying unto God 
in prayer as formerly the people had done when sore distressed by the children of Ammon 
(Judg. X. 15), and as afterwards Manasseh did when God laid affliction on his loins (ch. 
xxxiii. 12). 2. ITieir causepleaded. (1) The blessings craved on their behalf were accept- 
ance of their prayers whensoever they were moved to cry to Heaven, and whatsoevo' 
supplication might ascend from their lips — forgiveness of their sins, out of which all thei. 
trouble had arisen ; requital of their deeds, by giving unto each man according to hi* 



OT. vi. 1— 42.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, 79 

ways, wWeli hag always been the Divine principle of dealing with men (Job zxsiv. 11) 
nnder the New Testament dispensation (Rom. ii. 6; Matt. xvi. 27) quite as much as 
nnder the Old (Ps. Ixii. 12 ; Piov. xxiv. 12 ; Jer. xvii. 10; Ezek. xxxiii. 20). (2) Tha 
arguments employed in support of these requests were founded on God's omniscience 
as a Searcher of hearts, which in its operation extended to all— "Thou knowest the 
hearts of all the children of men ; " and belonged only to him — " thou only knowest ; " 
and on the moral and spiritual effect which such exercise of clemency would have upon 
the objects of it — " thcit they may fear thee all the days that they live in the land which 
thou gavest unto our fathers." It is doubtful if men are ever improved by outward 
calamity alune. Deterred from crime they may be, through fear of the sword; they 
•re not likely to be changed at heart without an experience of Divine mercy. 

V. The fbateb of the stbangbb. (Vers. 32, 33.) 1. Eia personal history narrated. 
(1) He is a stranger — not of thy people ; one belonging to the Gentile world, which, in 
respect of relation to Jehovah, stood on an altogether different footing from Israel, and 
in respect of privilege was not " near unto God " as Israel was (Ps. cxlviii. 14), but 
" afar off" (Eph. ii. 17), not merely geographically (Isa. Ixvi. 19 ; Jer. xxxi. 10), but 
also religiously, being " separate from Christ" or from the hope of Messiah, "alienated 
from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenant of promise, having 
no hope, and without God in the world" (Eph. ii. 12). (2) He has heard of Jehovah's 
great Name, and of Israel's relation thereto. Though the Hebrew Church was not mis- 
sionary in the proper sense of that expression, her gates were closed against none who 
sought admission within her pale (Isa. Ix. 11). In contradistinction, the New Testament 
Church is under obligation not alone to keep her gates open, but, going out into the 
highways and among the nations of the earth, to compel men to come in (Matt, 
xxviii. 19; Luke xiv. 23). Solomon expected that the nations of the earth would bo 
attracted towards Israel by the report of his greatness and of his glorious achievements 
on behalf of Israel (1 Kings viii. 42); how much more should Christians anticipate the 
Iflowing towards them of the inhabitants of heathen lands, to whom they bear the glad 
tidings of salvation, and eternal life through him who was and is the highest embodi- 
ment of Jehovah's Name? (3) He has come from his distant home to worship at 
Jehovah's altar, if not permanently separating himself from his heathen kinsmen like 
Abraham (Gen. xii. 4), at least doing so for a season like the chamberlain of Candace 
(Acts viii. 27). 2. His religious conduct described. He is represented as (1) praying, 
calling, asking witli audible voice and fervent heart — prayer a natural instinct of the 
awakened soul, and one of the first signs of grace (Acts ix. 11); (2) praying unto 
Jehovah, the only right Object of prayer, not unto heathen divinities which cannot hear 
•r help their devotees (Ps. cxv. 4—8); (3) praying in the temple, then the appointed 
place (Exod. xx. 24), though now any spot on earth may serve as an oratory (John 
iv. 21). 3. IBs favourable acceptance reguested. (1) For his own sake, that he may 
have the joy of answered prayer ; and (2) for the nation's sake, that men might come 
to fear Jehovah and recognize the temple as his dwelling-place. 

VI. The appeal of the soldibb. (Vers. 34, 35.) 1. A /our/old assumption. 
(1) That the people shall have gone forth against their enemies — which they did not 
always do when they should (1 Sam. xvii. 11), just as Christian soldiers, called to do 
battle with the principalities and powers of darkness (Eph. vi. 12), sometimes sulk 
Kke Achilles in their tents instead of marching forth like David to meet the foe (1 Sana. 
xvii. 40). If not always right for either nations or individuals to go to war with their 
enemies (Jas. iv. 1), it is never wrong for Churches or Christians to contend against 
their spiritual foes (1 Tim. vi. 12 ; 2 Tim. iv. 7). (2) That the way in which they 
Lave gone forth has been of God's choosing — an important distinction. As many run 
upon errands not of God's sending, so many plunge into strifes and contentions wirhout 
God's directing. Even when the battle is of God's appointing, i.e. when nation. Church, 
or individual feels that the warfare to be entered on has God's countenance so far as 
its object is concerned, it is still conceivable that it may be entered on in a way that 
God cannot approve. Hence Solomon assumes that Israel shall have gone out upon 
their campaign " by the way that thou shalt send them." It were welHhat all warriors, 
national and individual, political, social, religious, evinced a like solicitude to go forth 
by God's ways rather than their own. (3) That they have solemnly commended their 
cause to God in prayer. This presupposes that their cause is right, which of necessity 



80 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. vi. 1—42. 

it must be since God has sent them to the field. But all appeals to Heaven from 
battalions preparing to plunge into strife have not equal ground to rest upon. Neither 
kings nor parliaments, neither soldiers nor private persons, neither Christian Churches 
nor Christian individuals, should go to fight unless sure they can pray upon the scene 
of conflict. (4) That they have directed their prayer to the city of Jerusalem and the 
temple of Jehovah. Any sort of prayer will not suffice. It must be prayer in the 
manner God has shown. 2. A twofold •petition. (1) That their prayer should be 
heard— "Hear thou," etc. — and (2) that their cause should be maintained. Both 
petitions Solomon might offer with confidence, seeing it is God's practice to attend to 
the supplication of the needy, more especially when their need arises from doing his 
will, and seeing that, though God is not always on man's side, he ever is upon his own. 
If not always on the side of the strongest battalions, he is always on the side of truth 
and right. 

VII. The supplication op the exile. (Vers. 36 — 39.) 1. Thx calamity appre- 
hended. (1) That the people should sin against God. A dreadful apprehension, 
considering the character and power of God ; yet natural, remembering the universal 
corruption of the race : " There is no man who sinneth not " (Ps. xiv. 3 ; Eccles. vii. 20 ; 
Bom. iii. 23). (2) That God should be angry with them. This inevitable if the pre- 
ceding hypothesis should be at any time realized (Exod. xxzii. 33; xxxiv. 7; Ps. vii. 
11; xi. 6; Ixxviii. 21; >Isa. Ixiv. 7; Luke xix. 27; Bom. i. 18). If God cannot but 
be angry with unforgiven and unrenewed men when they sin, he cannot possibly be 
pleased with his people when they backslide into wicked ways. (3) That God should 
permit them to be defeated by their enemies. This they had oftentimes experienced 
because of their transgression (Josh. vii. 2 ; Judg. ii. 15 ; xiii. 1 ; 1 Sam. iv. 1) ; the 
king feared that a like experience might occur again. That which had been might be. 
(4) That God should suffer them to be carried captive into a foreign land whether far 
or near. This Solomon knew to be the common lot of prisoners of war. The monu- 
mental histories of Egypt, Assyria, and Babylon have rendered Bible students familiar 
with this phase of ancient warfare. The king also knew that such a fate had been 
threatened against his people in the event of their declining from their covenant fidelity 
to Jehovah (Deut. xxviii. 63). 2. TTie supposition made. (1) That the captive people 
should bethink themselves of their sinfulness in the land of their captivity. Such as 
have no consideration of their wickedness while at home, amongst friends, and in 
circumstances of outward prosperity, not unfrequently are led to serious reflection when 
far from home, among strangers, and in want. So the Israelites were in Egypt (Exod. ii. 
23) and again in Babylon (Ps. cxxxvii. 1) ; so was the prodigal in the far country (Luke 
IV. 17). (2) That they should make candid acknowledgment of the same unto God 
■aying, " We have sinned, we have done amiss, and have dealt wickedly ; " not merely 
In a mild way stating the fact, but with earnest repetition emphasizing the guilt of 
their declension from God, as Mnses had enjoined them in such circumstances to do 
(Lev. xxvL 40), as the Babylonian captives afterwards did (Ps. cvi. 6 ; Dan. ix. 5), 
as did the returned exiles under Ezra (ix. 7), and as all who hope in God's mercy 
are expected to do (1 John i. 9). (3) That they should return to Jehovah with 
■11 their hearts — a step beyond and in advance of confession. This, when earnest 
and sincere, ought to lead to reformation, but because it is sometimes formal and 
purely verbal it does not always bring amendment in its wake. Hence the neces- 
sity of insisting upon a practical demonstration of its genuineness by a renuncia- 
tion of those evil courses which have been confessed, and a reassumption of those 
good ways which have been forsaken (Isa. Iv. 7; Bzek. xviii. 21; Dan. Iv. 27; 
Amos y. 14, 15 ; Matt. iii. 8 ; Bev. ii. 5). (4) That they should pray to Jehovah in 
the land of their captivity, directing their supplication "towards the land of their 
fathers," thereby evidencing their faith in Jehovah's covenant, " and towards the city 
which thou hast chosen," so acknowledging Jehovah's grace, " and toward the house 
which I have built for thy Name," in that fashion showing their belief in Jehovah's 
readiness to forgive — all of which are still indispensable as subjective conditions of 
acceptable prayer. 3. The intercession made. That God would grant his repenting 
and praying people (1) an audience to their supplications by admitting these to his 
dwelUng-place in heaven, and into the ear of his infinite heart; (2) support in their 
canie as against their oppressors, by upholding them while m exile, and by causing 



BH.TI. 1— 42.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLBa 81 

them to return from it in his own time and way ; and (3) forgiveness of their sina, 
once without this all other hiessinga are in vain. 

Learn: 1. That good prayers, while never prolix, vagae, or rambling, are always 
full, specific, and well arranged. 2. That the loftiest prayer • human lip can utter is 
that of intercession for the welfare of others. 3. That, though the heart of man stands 
in no need of arguments to make it pray, it is not forbidden to employ arguments in 
the act of prayer. 4. That prayer, conceived as the converse of s finite soul with the 
infinite Deity, is the highest exercise of which a creatiire is capable. 6. That long prayers 
do not weary God, though meaningless repetitions do. — W. 

Vers. 40—42. — A prayer for the Church of Ood. L Fob its ooNaBEOATiONS. 1. 
TTtat Ood would make them his resting-plact. " Arise, O Lord God, into thy resting- 
place " (ver. 41). Taken from the battle-cry of the nation when the ark set forward 
to search out a resting-place for them (Numb. x. 33 — 36), the words imply a request 
that Jehovah Elohim, the covenant God of Israel, would make of the temple, and 
therefore of that which it symbolized, the Church of God, collectively and severally, as 
• whole and in its individual assemblies : (1) A place of permanent indwelling, an abode 
of rest, a home or habitation of repose, a mansion or fixed residence, out of which he 
should no more depart. Such had Jehovah promised of Mount Zion (Ps. cxxxii. 13, 14), 
and such has Christ promised concerning the smallest and humblest gatherings of his 
people (Matt. xiii. 20), (2) A scene of gracious manifestation. It cannot be imagined 
that Solomon merely wished to have Jehovah's symbolic presence behind the veil in 
the inner shrine of the temple, in the form of a cloud of smoke and fire. What he 
craved was Jehovah's real, personal presence ; and that he would not have desired (or 
at least could hardly have been much concerned about) had he understood that the 
only way in which God could dwell among them was in silence and in solitude, wrapped 
up in contemplation of his own measureless perfections and shut off from all intercourse 
with his creatures, an 1 even with his chosen and covenanted people. But Solomon 
knew that if Jehovah condescended to pitch his residence among them, it would be for 
jhe purpose of making gracious revelations of himself as a God of love and mercy, and 
gracious communications of himself as the Life and Light of his believing people ; and 
Christians know that this is the specific object God in Christ has in view in establishing 
his real, though unseen, presence in the assemblies and hearts of his followers (John 
xiv. 21 — 23). (3) A spring of Divine satisfaction. Unless it should be this it could 
not prove a resting-place for Jehovah. Jehovah must obtain in it, in its services and 
celebrations, and much more in the dispositions and actions, hearts and lives, of its 
worshippers, that satisfaction which his holy and loving nature demands ; otherwise 
he vrill be constrained to withdraw from their midst, from their hearts and from their 
eonvocations, from their temples and from their altars. So can God in Christ only 
rest in those Churches and individuals where he smells a sweet savour of faith, hope, 
love, penitence, humUity, obedience, rising from such spiritual sacrifices as they offer 
to his Name. 2. ITiat Ood would establish in them the tokens of his power. " Arise, 
Lord . . - thou, and the ark of thy strength." The outwardly mean and insignifi- 
cant wooden box called the ark was a symbol of God's physical almightiness, which 
commonly worked through feeble instruments; of his commanding omnipotence, 
which was ever based on essential holiness ; and of his grace-bestowing power, which 
revealed itself upon and in and through a mercy-seat. Hence, in seeking that the ark 
might find in the temple a resting-place, Solomon practically asked that Jehovah 
would, through it as a medium, manifest to Israel his power (1) in protecting and 
defending them against their adversaries, (2) in ruling and governing them by statutes 
and ordinances, and (3) in forgiving them and enriching them with grace. The same 
three forms of strength Jehovah still puts forth within the Christian Church. He 
dwells within her, as he did in ancient Israel, as Defender and Deliverer (Ps. Ixxxiv. 11 ; 
loi. 1 — 7 ; Isa. xxxL 5 ; Zech. ii. 6 ; Matt. xvi. 18 ; 2 Thess. iii. 3 ; Rev. iii. 10) ; at 
Sovereign and Ruler (Ps. xxiv. 1 ; xliv. 4 ; Ixxiv. 12 ; xov. 3 ; Isa. xxxiii. 22 ; xliii. 15 ; 
MaL i. 14 ; Matt. vi. 13 ; Heb. i. 3 ; Jas. iv. 12 ; Eev. xix. 6) ; and as Redeemer and 
Friend (Isa. xii. 2 ; xli. 14 ; xlvii. 4 ; Luke i. 68 ; John iii. 16 ; Rom. viii. 32 ; 1 Tim. 
d. 3). 3. That Ood would listen to the prayers that in them ascended from the heart* 
^ his people. " Let . . • thine eyes be open, ftnd thine ears be attent unto the prayer that 

n. OHBOmCLES. • 



82 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [ch. vi. 1—42. 

is made in this place." The temple was designed to be a place of prayer for all people 
(laa. Ivi. 7 ; Matt. xxi. 13 ; Mark xi. 17 ; Luke xix. 46), for all people to resort to with 
supplications for themselves and on hehalf of all sorts of people ; the like characteristioi 
belong to the Church of the New Testament (Luke xviii. 1 ; xxiv. 52, 53 ; Eph. vi. 18 ; 
1 Thess. T. 17 ; 1 Tim. ii. 1, 8). 

IL Fob its ministbbs. That they might be clothed with salvation (ver. 41), or 
righteousness (Ps, cxxxii. 9) — the two terms in the Old Testament being synonymoi.s, 
or at least so connected that the one implies the other (cf. Isa. Ixi. 10). Rightly 
understood, salvation is the outcome and result of righteousness. The soul that is 
righteous outwardly and inwardly, judicially or legally, and morally or personally, ia 
saved ; while none are saved by whom that righteousness is not possessed, either in 
whole as by the glorified, or in part as by Christian believers — 

" Whose faith receives a righteousnesi 
That makes the sinner just." 

In seeking, then, that the temple priests might be clothed with salvatioii, Solomon 
desired : 1. ITiat they might he personally good men. Upright and sincere in their 
hearts before God, virtuous and correct in their walk before men — ^men like Noah 
(Gen. vii. 1), Abraham (Gen. xvii. 1), Job (i. 1 ; xxix. 14), David (Ps. vii. 8), and 
Nathanael (John i. 47); since only men themselves righteous, in the sense of being 
justi6ed and accepted before God as well as renewed and possessed of the germ of holi- 
ness, were warranted to minister at God's altar (Exod. xxii. 31 ; Lev. xi. 44 ; Ps. L 16). 
The like qualification the Church of Christ should ever seek in those who serve in her 
pulpits. Anything more calamitous than an insincere and immoral, because unbeliev- 
ing and unconverted ministry, can hardly be imagined as befalling the Christian 
Church. The first requisite of him who would preach the gospel is a hearty acceptance 
of the same in faith and iiumility, love and obeiiieiice — the foundation of all true piety. 
2. That they might be dothed with salvation in their official ministrations. That their 
whole being should be absorbed (and so visibly that meu might behold it) in the work 
of saving God's people. If indispensable as a mark of a true Heaven-appointed priest 
under the Law, much more is this requisite as a qualification of the Christ-sent preacher 
under the gospel. Pastors and teachers in the New Testament Church who aim not at 
the salvation of themselves and their hearers (1 Tim. iv. 16) are intruders into the 
sacred office. The one theme which has a claim to monopolize the time, talents, 
thought, eloquence, zeal of the Christian minister is the gospel of Christ — "the power 
of God unto salvation to every one that believeth " (Rom. i. 1 6). 

III. Fob its people. That they might rejoice in goodness (ver. 41). Notice : 1. 
The designation. Saints (1 Sam. ii. 19 ; Ps. xxx. 4; 1.5; cxlix. 1). The term literally 
signifies kind, excellent, one who shows favour, hence pious (Gesenius) ; or one who has 
obtained favour, hence beloved (Perowne). In both senses were God's ancient people 
" saints." They were objects of Jehovah's favour (Deut. vii. 8 ; 1 Kings x. 9 ; ch. ii. 
11), beloved for the fathers' sakes (Rom. xi. 28) ; and were, or should have been, kind 
and beneficent (Lev. xix. 18 ; Ps. cxii. 5 ; Prov. x. 12 ; Zech. vii. 9). So likewise are 
New Testament believers beloved for Christ's sake (Rom. i. 7; Eph. i. 6), and com- 
manded to love one another (John xiii. 34, 35; xv. 17; Rom. xii. 10; Gal. v. 13; 
1 Pet. iL 17; 1 John iv. 7, 21). The customary sense in which the term "saint" is 
uged is that of separated, or holy one (Deut. xxxiii. 3 ; Job xv. 15 ; Ps. xxxiv. 9 ; 
Acts ix. 13 ; Rom. i. 7 ; 1 Cor. i. 2 ; Eph. i. 1). 2. The emotion. Gladnes*. Nothing 
more remarkable than the emphasis placed by both Testaments upon "joy" as an 
experience which should belong pre-eminently to God's saints (Deut. xxxiii. 29 ; 1 Sam. 
ii. 1 ; Ps. V. 11 ; Ixxxiv. 4 ; c. 1, 2 ; Isa. xxix. 19 ; Rom. xii. 12 ; xiv. 17 ; Gal. v. 22 ; 
Phil. iii. 1 ; iv. 4). Where joy is habitually absent, there is reason to suspect that 
either the individual is no true believer at all, or is under mistaken apprehensions con- 
eeming God or himself, or is affected by some malady, bodily.or mental, which disturbs 
his peace. Yet the primal fountain of all joy for the religious soul is God (Neh. viii. 
10; Job viii. 21 ; Ps. iv. 7; xxx. 11; John xiv. 27; xv. 11; xvi. 22; xvii. 13; Rom. 
V. 2; IV. 13). 3. The occasion. Goodness; i.e. in the highest sense. Not merely 
God'i common gifts of corn and wine, though even in these a saint can exult with a 
propriety which none can feel but those who recognize everything they have as coming 



OH. vn. 1—22.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



83 



from a Father's hand ; but chiefly God's highest gifts of grace and salvation, and in 
particular God's great and unspeakable Gift, Jesus Christ (2 Cor. ix. 15). 

IV. Fob its king. That God would regard hiui with favour (ver. 42). God's 
anointed in the passage under consideration was Sulomou; but the great Anointed, of 
whom he was a shadow, was Christ, whom God anointed with the oil of gladness above 
his fellows (Ps. xlv. 7), and set as King upon his holy hill of Zion (Ps. ii 6). The 
language of the prayer, therefore, may be applied to Christ, the Church's Head and King. 
1. In meaning it may signify that God would continue to regard him with favour, and 
show this by not denying his request (1 Kings ii. 16). As thus interpreted, it teaches 
that Christ's Church has a deep interest in the success of all Christ's prayers on their 
behalf, and should make this a frequent burden of her supplications, that Jehovah 
would hear the intercessions of her anointed Head within the veil for transgressors (Isa. 
liii. 12), for believers (Heb. vii. 25), for the sanctification of his own (John xvii. 17), 
for the conversion of the world (John xvii. 20), for the final consummation of all things 
(John xvii. 24). 2. Tlie arguments by which the prayer may be supported are two : 
(1) The king's relation to God — he is God's anointed (Ps. xlv. 7); and (2) the cove- 
nant engagement which God has made with him as David's son. These were the pleas 
advanced by Solomon ; they are more befitting in the mouths of Christians regarding 
Clirist. 

Learn: 1. The sublimity of true piayer. 2. The comprehensive scope of prayer. 
3. The exalted character of the Church as God's dwelling-place, and as Christ's 
kingdom. 4. The grand aim of the Church as a visible irstitulion to promote salvation. 
6. "The entire dependence of the Church for efBciency on God. — W. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER VII. 

This chapter is occupied with three sub- 
jects. Fint, the description of Heaven's 
acceptance of the dedicated temple by fire 
(vers. 1 — 3). Secondly, the Baoriflces and 
glad feasting of Solomon and all Israel for 
several days (vers. 4 — 11). Thirdly, the 
articulate answer of God to the offering and 
the prayer of Solomon (vera. 12 — 22). 

Ver. 1. — When Solomon had made an end 
of praying. See the parallel, 1 Kings viii. 
54, which verse, however, in a sense, dis- 
appoints us ; for, beginning with these same 
words, it does not go on at all to tell of this 
second occurrence of the fire and the cloud 
and the glory. The fire came . . . and con- 
sumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices. 
So Lev. ix. 24, when the tabernacle was con- 
secrated. The closingversesofourch.v.,coin- 
pared with the first verse of oh. vi., and in 
particular the first word of that verse, "then," 
leave it quite open to conjecture that the 
demonstration of the fire and the glory of 
the Lurd had not ceased, but was continued 
during the prayer of Solomon, though at its 
close they may have been marked with 
added brightness, and then wrought their 
saorifice-consuming work. Such supposition 
may bring us nearest to some tenable expla- 
nation of what otherwise seems the very 
unaccountable omission in the parallel. The 
language of our ver. 2 adils something to 
eoirntensuce this theory, coinciding as it 



does with the language of the last verses of 
ch. V. 

Ver. 3. — For he is good (so ch. v. 13; 
1 Chron. xvi. 34). 

Vers. 4, 5. — These two verses bring us 
again into company with the parallel in its 
vers. 62, 63. Let it be noticed that in both 
these verses the compiler of Chronicle* 
avoids the words, " all Israel," and " all the 
children of Israel," in favour of all the 
people. The [larallel tells us that the sacri- 
fices in part were peace offerings, eatable, 
therefore, by priests and people. Large of 
the numhers of the oxen and sheep sacrificed, 
yet indications in the narrative round about 
do something to sustain them, as e.g. the 
number of people who bad come together ; 
the fact that aU the people are said to offer 
sacrifices ; the fact that iSolomon, because of 
the press for room (ver. 7), hallowed the 
middle of the court, t.e. prolmbly the court 
itself, in order to find place for the " burnt 
offerings, meat offerings, and fat "(ver. 7); 
further, the number of mouths of people 
that certainly would need filling, not only 
on one day, but on days more than one, 
while on the third day (Lev. xix. 6) any 
part of a peax^ offering still left was to be 
destroyed by fire. Nevertheless, the thought 
of the scene of butchery is, to our modem 
imagination, amazing to the last degree. An 
assemblage of people in Jerusalem, all 
making also for its temple, of a hundred 
and twenty thousand people, and a minimum 
of another twenty-two thousand people, is 
startling; but add to these a sheep apiece 



84 



THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. vii. 1—22. 



for tbe former number, and an ox apiece for 
the latter (a computation itself neoeBsarily 
nnder the mark), and allow several days to 
be covered by the killing and sacrificing, 
and one feels that the key and explanation 
of the present words of the Bible text ia this 
very passage are scarcely in hand. The in- 
teresting note in the 'Speaker's Commen- 
tary ' on 1 Kings viii. 63 scarcely assists us. 
Its instanoes of the "profusion" of the 
" sacrifices of antiquity " are altogether and 
immensely distanced by the narrative before 
ui, not only in the number of victims, but in 
respect of the time in which the victims 
had to be despatched and disposed of, and 
the place and space within which, if not the 
■laughtering, yet certainly the offering, had 
to be done. 

Ver. 6. — This verse is not found in the 
parallel (ch. v. 12, 13; 1 Ohron. iv. 16; 
xxiii. 5). 

Ver. 8. — Also at the same time . . . the 
feast; i.e. the Feast of Tabernacles, which 
occupied the seven days from the fifteenth 
to the twenty-second of the month Tisri 
(LeT. xxiii. 34). Thus fourteen days (I 
Kings viii. 65) were occupied by the two 
feasts, that of the temple consecration and 
that of Tabernacles, while on the fifteenth 
day of feasting, viz. the twenty-third of the 
month Tisri, or Ethanim (the seventh 
month), the people went home. The enter- 
ing in of Hamath unto the river of Egypt ; 
i.e. from the extreme north to the extreme 
south of the land. The town Hamath waa 
on the Orontes, through the valley of the 
Lebanon (Josh. xiii. 3, 3 ; also Numb. xiii. 
21 : xxxiv. 8 ; Judg. iii. 3 ; 2 Kings xiv. 25 ; 
1 Ghron. ziii. 5; Amos vi. 2, 11). The 
river of Egypt; or, the river before Egypt 
(Josh. xiii. 3), was the Shihor, or Sihor, 
separating Egypt and Judsea. 

Ver. 9. — Solemn assembly. The word thiu 
translated in the Authorized Version occurs 
(including both its but very slightly dif- 
fering forms) eleven times. Five of these 
times the margin offers, probably unneoes- 
■arily, the optional rendering of "restraint." 
It may be that the root involves this idea, 
and certainly the. word is especially used 
for the seventh or closing day of Pass- 
over, and eighth or closing day of Taber- 
nacles ; but other occasions of its use seem 
to negative this as an essential element 
in the signification or essential condition of 
the use of the word ; 0.g, " Proclaim a solemn 
assembly " (2 Kings z. 20) ; " Call a solemn 
assembly" (Joel i.li; ii. 15). 

Ver. 11.— -(See now for tlie parallel 1 Kings 
ix. 1 — 9.) The king's house ... the hoose 
of the Lord . . . hu own house. The ex- 
pressions that we have in this verse guide 
nt amid some ambiguities to the correct date 
of the consecration of the temple. The verse 



purports to speak of the final completion of 
the temple and the king's house or palace, 
with all whatsoever that was necessary to 
them in the matter of their furnishing. 
And, to say the least, the impression 
naturally produced on the reader ia that 
they are spoken of as being thus completed 
simultaneously, although, beyond doubt, 
there was a sense in which the temple waa 
(not utterly finished but) built long before 
the palace. Accordingly, when the next 
verse tells us of God's answer vouchsafed to 
tlie dedication prayer of Solomon, we are 
not driven to the supposition that several 
years bad elapsed since the final completion 
of the temple and the dedication of it on 
the one hand, nor, on the other hand, a 
similar interval lost between the dedication 
prayer and tlie Divine acknowledgment of 
it. It may be again stated that the main 
structure of the temple (not including courts, 
pillars, furnishing, vessels, etc.) was built 
after seven years' process, in the eleventh 
year of Solomon's reign, but the palace only 
after another complete twelve years (1 Kings 
vii. 1), in Solomon's twenty-fourth year. A 
liberal study of the parallel narrative of 
Kings in its entirety strengthens consider- 
ably this view, inasmuch as there the 
whole account of the palace-building finds 
its place previous to the account of the de- 
dicating of the temple. However, thou^^h 
there can be little practical doubt as to how 
the facts of the case stood and stand, yet 
this occasion must count one to be added to 
the chronological memorabilia of Scripture, 
in that, while both the accounts to which we 
have access leave very vague the very 
things we should naturally expect to have 
been stated concisely, they also both seem 
entirely unconscious of it— a direotest out- 
come of the fact that both writers were 
but picking their own way in the midst of 
borrowed material, neither of them the 
original historian. 

Ver. 12.— See 1 Kings iii. 5; ix. 2; Deut. 
xii. 2, 3, 5 — 7, 11, 14; and, by turning to 
the last of these sets of references, the 
emphasis laid here upon the house as the 
house of sacrifice will be amply accounted 
for without supposing a rather premature 
aside as regards synagogues. Meantime, 
what a feature, manifestly, the eaorifieei 
were I 

Vers. 13 — 15.— These three versee (the 
counterparts of ch. vi. 26, 28, 40) are not in 
the parallel. Although we can scarcely trace 
the principle of their selection from the 
seven parts of the prayer, they would seem 
to have been selected from the originiil 
work, as samples of a reply which pie> 
sumably embraced reference to all the seven. 
When, in ver. 14, it is said, I will heal theix 
land, the telling expression, according to 



CH. TO. 1—22.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



85 



the Authorized Version, must be understood 
to refer to the removing of di-ought by rain. 
On the otlier hand, the Authorized "Version 
is, in ver. 15, unfortunate in the unneces- 
sary and misleading insertion of the italics 
found there, and in tlie use of the preposi- 
tion " in " for of, the simple case eonstruot, 
wliioh is manifestly what is wanted ami in- 
tended. It was not absolutely essential that 
prayer should be made t» the plaue. Uow 
many references there are to priiyer being 
made from a distance toward the place I 

Ver. 16. — This Terse glances, as an answer 
to the contents, or spirit of the contents, of 
the second petition at ch. vi. 18 — 21. The 
beautiful touching condescension in the 
■wording of tlie last clause, Mine eyes and 
mine heart shall be there perpetually, will 
not esaipe notice. 

Vers. 17, 18. — These two verses glance at 
the first petition of Solomon's prayer (ch. vi. 
15—17). (See also ch. iii. 12; 2 Sam. vii. 
12 ; 1 Ohron. xxii 10.) 

Vers. 19, 20.— And forsake. The parallel 
(1 Kings ix. 6) puts it, according to the 
Authorized Version, " If ye shall at all turn 
from following me," etc., which rendering 
on the part of the Authorized Version 
probably errs by excess. Much mercy, much 
forbearing, long-suffering, and slowness to 
anger, were sure to mark the Divine rule ; 
nor would condemnation take eifect, nor 
did it take eifect, till the revolt of the 
people was a thorough revolt, as finally 



testifying itself in the crucifixion of Christ 
(see also, as comments on the expressions of 
these two verses, Lev. xxvi. 14; Deut. iv. 
26, 27 ; xxviii. 37, and generally 15—64). 
The same Hebrew words for a proverb and 
a byword among all nations are fonnd in 
ver. 37, as jus: quoted. 

Ver. 21.-The Hebrew text of the fir*t 
sentence of this verse differs here from that 
in the parallel; but, in fact, neither text reads 
satisfactorily and smoothly. The parallel 
(1 Kings ix. 8) inserts the little wo:^ "at," 
though without italics, and " which " in 
italic type. The " at " is no doubt intended 
to be condoned as supposed to belong to the 
word astonished; the following verb hist 
also permitting, though not requiring, the 
appendage. Not leaning to the text of the 
parallel (which shows no l^K, and which 
shows the substantive verb in the future 
tense n;ri.'), we need not find any particular 
difficulty in rendering our present text. 
And this house, which is most high (the 
word well favours this idea), shall be an 
astonishment to every passer by. The 
Septuugint reads simply, " This lofty house." 
Why hath the Lord done this) (seeDeuL 
xxix. 24 ; Jer. xxii. 8, 9). To the " astonisli- 
ment" prophesied here the parallel adds, 
" shall hiss " — ^in a forcible expression found 
first in ch. xxix. 8, and afterwards in Micah 
(vi. 16) and in Jeremiah (xviii. 16; xix. 8; 
xxT. 9, etc. ; Lam. ii. 15, 16). 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 22. — The testimony by fire, and the vouchsafed glory of the Lord. This 
chapter invites attention to four subjects, no one of which is entirely fresh, but each 
one of which owns to fresh impressiveness by virtue of position, particularity of 
description, and the more touching associations which now surround it. Attention, 
then, may be called first of all and chiefly to — 

I. The mabvbl op the descending fire from heaven. It is remarkable that the 
parallel (1 Kings viii.) does not mention this great event, and that a similar event <s 
again carefully recorded by the writer of Chronicles (1 Chron. xxi. 26). Such a 
descending, kindling, lambent, and consuming fire — what a sign and token it was! 
What a startling testimony — to give a moment's directness of help to our own thought 

such a manifestation of the elder Church would be to some finished effort of our 

later ecclesiastical life ! It is not given, it is not to le given, to us. But never must 
we allow ourselves to forget that its spiritual antitype is to be believed in, sought by 
prayer, beheld in purest vision of the elevated spiritual imagination, and to be regarded 
•8 indispensable. It meant, and its real and more spiritual fulfilment means : 1. Tht 
notice of heaven. What a genuine help to us, to have reason to believe this, and there- 
fore gratel'uUy to cultivate the sense of it J The notice of heaven means nothing, or it 
means the notice of God. As surely as a deep present conviction of that notice is 
calculated to deter from sin, so surely is it adapted to encourage us in worship, prayer, 
praise, meditation, and reading of the Word of God, and to dignify to us the nature 
of every engagement. 2. The approval of heaven. There is much indeed that the eye 
of God unfailingly notices, but as unfailingly disapproves. Descending fire more than 
once was the proof in the history of the people of Israel of thk also, but it was very 
different descent and of altogether differing manifestation. 3. The actital participation 
mmi cooperation of heaven. The dedication of the temple was one thing, but the cod- 



86 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. vil 1—22. 

secration of it was another, and though, indeed, it was not even such fire as this that 
by itself did the conBecration or was of the essence of it, yet it was the evidence of it, 
and the visible sign and act of it. The fire of holy fetlin^r, of devoutness, of devo- 
tion, of love, of pure adoring worship, is not of nature, nor of the ministry of man, nor 
of the ability of the high priest or any priest, to kindle. The kindling must come 
from the throne itself, whither whatsoever it is that we may have to offer is ascend- 
ing. The sacrifices of prayer, of praise, of a poor, broken, contrite heart, need all and 
each the inspiring illumination aiid fire of and from the altar itself. What a thought, 
what a truth, for us 1 Our worship and our works of devotion need to be pervailed 
with this conviction, and if they were so, at how much higher a level would they be 
found, and with how much steadier life would they show tliemselves forth! Moments, 
and sometimes even hours, of our inner consciousness would in no way fall short, for 
impression, conviction, and surpassing joy and peace, of what were present actually 
now, in the rapt, and again the impassioned, experience of all Israel. That moment 
was indeed a moment worth a nation's living for. Bead the verses (1, 2, 3) themselves. 
But the instance is but one of a thousand, that tell how soon impression fades away, 
of what may be most grand, most significant of all, when its source comes from with- 
out. The deeper things of our hearts may last longer. Let us therefore seek, honour, 
prize, fhem rather 1 

II. The fact that, with the finishing, dedication, and consecration of the temple, the 

FULL COMPLEMENT OP THE 8EEVICBS OF KBLIQION WAS ESTABLISHED. In four parti- 
culars this is noted, viz. the unanimous effort of king and people to accomplish the full 
number of sacrifices; the falling of the priests into their places, and the filling of their 
regular ofBces; the same of the Levites with their instruments of music; and lastly, 
the hallowing of the middle of the court before the house, as an auxiliary place for the 
offering of burnt ofi'erings and of the fat of the peace offerings. This was by no means 
the one solitary time, or the last time, that has illustrated the general principle of the 
utility of having the outer lorm and the outer institutions of the Church order in their 
place and in distinct prominence. While the Church is on earth, at least, the things 
of the eye, the things of the ear, memories, associations, company, and the stronger 
kinds and forces of anticipation — all help religious fidelity ; they are naturally fitted 
to do so, and, as thus naturally adapted to high use, are not justifiably to be neglected, 
slighted, underrated, or presumptuously regarded, as either optional in all cases, or 
quite dispensable in the case of those who credit themselves with a larger measure 
of spiiitual power and principle than belongs to others. This very assumption is, 
per se, too generally decisive of an opposite state of things. We have at present com- 
paratively little to do with what may prove to be the mode, the infinitely grander 
mode, of worship and service up above. But here the fm-m Jias its importance; and if 
80, the Tighter form, or more perfect form, or more beautiful form lemains to be studied 
and sought. Have we not even here an instance of the educative genius of sincere 
religion, however simple it may be? It certainl}- insists on " cleanliness." It certainly 
insists on order. And as matter of fact, and lying iu the whole course of the history 
of the Church for eighteen oi nturies, how unmistakably and undeniably it lias nourished 
all " things lovely," sights of beauty and sounds of beauty, — postulating and necessi- 
tating m turn whut underlie these, viz, thoughts and feelin;j:s of beauty and of truth ! 

III. The distinct notice recorded ok the satisfaction the whole people 
BXPEHIEKCED WHILE THEIR RELIGIOUS FESTIVAL LASTED — some fourteen to fifteen days 

AND THEIR GRATEFUL, HAPPY MEMORIES OF IT, ON THE HIGHEST GROUNDS, as they 

returned and journeyed home. It was no doubt, in countless instances, on countless 
occasions, true that there was a humble rehearsal of the saying of the two disciples 
(who had journeyed to Euimaus in the holiest of company, and in the most sacred of 
religious instruction, and finally service of breaking of bread), " Did not our heart 
burn within us ?" The people now returned to tent and home, "glad and merry in 
heart for the goodness that the Lord had showed to David, and to Solomon, and to 
Israel his people." There is no higher joy than religious, no better company, and no 
better cheer of good company. 

IV. A frebh Divink vision granted to SoLOittON. This vision was granted for 
the threefold purpose of assuring Solomon : 1. That his temple-prayer had been heard, 
and that it thcndd he implicitly and explicitly answered from time to time. The accepted 



OH. VII. 1—22.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 87 

and hallowed " house of prayer," dedicate now and consecrate, should be a perpetual 
living oratory. There was everything now about the house and in the house to con- 
Btitute it fitly such, and it is now written with authority and with promise, "My 
house shall be called the house of prayer." What a centre of life, of hope, of refuge, 
for that people unto all generations if they know and remember the day of their 
merciful visitation! 2. That the Divine covenant with him should not fail, should 
never fail, and the Divine promise to him should be established for ever, if he remem- 
iered, and remembered to do his part involved in, the covenant. Here ancestral memories 
were drawn upon, and brilliant promises of the future were called in, to exercise their 
powerful influence, and both for the service of offering direction and warning and 
encouragement. 3. l^at exemplary and certain and most notable retribution would 
be the portion of the nation if they turned away to idolatry. With simflest grandeur 
and force is this dread reverse (in a possible, alas ! too probable future) announced, if 
haply the announcement may be an eflfectual deterrent. The people shall be plucked 
up by the roots, like plants from the land ; the sanctified house shall be repudiated, 
made a by-word and a proverb, and the very mark of astonishment to all by-passers. 
It shall excite and awake the wondering questions of many a nation — those questions 
to receive one simple, faithful, but dreadful answer : " Because they forsook th« Lord 
God . . . and laid bold on other gods, and worshipped and served them." 



HOMILIES BY VABIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 3. — The Divine approval. The incident here recorded was one that must 
have lived for ever in the memory of those who witnessed it. The occasion itself 
was of surpassing interest; all the accessories were fitted to deepen the impression; 
and when the miraculous fire ca-ne down from heaven upjn the altar, there was an 
event which every present Israelite must have delighted to describe in after-days to 
those who did not witness it. Its significance was twofold. It was — 

I. A MANIFESTATION OP THE DiviNB PRESENCE AND OLOKY. Por that fire, and th« 
" glory of the Lord " filling the house of the Lord, spake of the present God and of his 
glory; and before it the priests retired and the people bowed down in reverential wor- 
ship, "with their faces to the ground." The scene carries with it a summons to 
constant reverence. 1. Reverence in all worship ; for God is as truly, though not as 
miraculously and manifestly, present in his sanctuary to-day as he was on this " high 
day " at Jerusalem. 2. Reverence of spirit at all times and everywhere. For may we 
not say that the whole earth is " the house of the Lord," and that it is filled with his 
presence and his glory ? All the objects of nature that we are looking upon, all the 
processes of nature that we are watching, all creature life and gladness, attest his 
presence and his power. " The earth is full of the goodness of the Lord," and therefore 
of the glory of the Lord (Ps. xxxiii. 5 with Exod. xxxiii. 19). Reverently, therefore, 
should we walk through the world, as those who feel that God is very near us, that 
we " stand before Gud," that his baud is working for us in the air and on the earth, 
that he is the One " with whom we have to do " always, in whom everywhere we 
live and move and have our being. 

II. An absubance op the Divine approval. The descending flame was the surest 
and strongest possible indication that all the work of the past years had been approved, 
and that Jehovah accepted the house which had been built as his own. It was right 
enough, therefore, for the assembled multitude to be not only affected with awe, but 
to be filled with thankfulness and sacred joy, as they sang, " The Lord is good ; his 
mercy endureth for ever." The approval of God was everything to Israel. It was 
much, very much indeed, for what it was in itself; it was much also as an absolute assur- 
ance of national prosperity. Respecting the Divine approval, it : 1. Should be the first 
object of our heart's desire. For if we do not possess the favour of God, our heavenly 
Father, all other advantages are of little worth, and should wholly fail to satisfy us ; 
while, if we do possess his favour, all difficulties, and even all distresses, may be patiently 
borne and even cheerfully accepted. To be the children and the heirs of God (Bom. 
viii. 17) is to be and to inherit that which is of transcendent worth. 2. Must ba 
sought in the divinely appointed way ; and that is, by the cordial acceptance of his 



88 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHBONICLES. [ch. vii. 1—22. 



Son as our Saviour, Lord, and Friend. 3. Will awaken our deepest joy and call forth 
our most fervent praise. We too shall celebrate the " goodness " and the " mercy " of 
the Lord; his praise will be continually upon our lips. 4. Must be maintained by 
fcithfulness unto the end. For it is only when we " abide in him," and continue 
to "keep his commandments," that his love and his joy "abide in us" (John XT. 
6— 11).— 0. 

Vers. 4, 5. — Sacred overflow. What meant this great slaughter of sheep and oxen ? 
Why such a large, such a lavish expenditure of creature life ? With our modem ideas 
of the sacredness of life, animal as well as human, we naturally inquire what purpose 
was served by sacrifices on such a scale as this. Clearly it was — 

L Not in obbdibncb to a Divine command. There was no precept of the Law 
applicable to the case ; the matter was entirely axceptional, and Solomon was cast on 
the resources of his own judgment and feeling. A very large part of our service must 
be spontaneous. We are continually placed in circumstances in which no biblical 
statute can be quoted. We need to be possessed of such broad and deep religious 
principles that these will serve us in any position in which we may be placed. It is 
not a vast array of precepts, but a few inclusive and suggestive principles, which pre- 
pare us for the eventualities of our life. 

XL Not to enrich one who knows no necessitt. Whatever idea the heathen 
nations around may have bad of their sacrifices as an enrichment of their deities, the 
Israelites had no such vain thought (see Ps. 1. 8 — 13). We cannot enrich by our 
material presentations One who claims and holds the entire earth as his possession. 
Tet is there that which we can give to God which will, in a true sense, add to his 
possessions — our hearts and our lives ; our own true selves ; our trust, our love, our joy 
in him. May we not say that by the filial response of his children he is enriched? 

III. Not to appease an inexorable One. It might be well enough that the priests 
of Baal should have recourse to all the arts and devices of a passionate importunity 
in order to secure his attention and enlist his aid (1 Kings xviii. 26 — 29). But the 
Divine Father whom we worship has not to be approached thus in order to be atten- 
tive to the voice of our prayer, or in order to grant us his merciful regard. He may, 
indeed, for a time withhold from us a sense of his favour in order to draw forth our prayer 
and to deepen our faith, and thus to enlarge and bless us. But as he did not require 
a vast multitude of beasts to be slain on his altar that his anger might be appeased, 
BO does he not require any multiplied devotions, or incessant entreaties that his for- 
giving love may be extended to ua. On the othei- hand, he waits to be gracious, and is 
prepared to go forth to meet the spirit that returns to him. It was, then — 

IV. A desire to render added honour to the holt and the gracious One, 
1. Solomon and those who were about him may have been powerfully affected by the 
near presence of the Holy One of Israel ; and they nmy oonseque itly have been disposed 
to offer these sacrifices which purified them from all uncleanness and made them less 
unworthy to stand before him ; thus regarded, these lavish offerings were the over- 
flow of their humility. We are in no danger of guing too far in this direction. We 
may, indeed, sometimes use language of shame and ijenitence which is in advance of 
our inward thought and actual spirit lal condition. That is a great mistake. It is not 
acceptable to God, and it is misleading to ourselves. But we are never in danger of 
having; too deep a sense of our own univorthiness; by all means lei humility of spirit 
have free course, both in fact and in expression. "Blessed are the poor in spirit: for 
theirs is the kingdom of heaven." 2. Solomon and his attendants may have been keenly 
touched by a sense of God's great and special goodness to them, and they may, therefore, 
have presented these offerings in gratitude and devotion. They were thus the overflow 
of their zed. It is right that our zeal in the worship and service of God should be 
unbound by limits, should be free to utter itself in large and even lavish contributions. 
We are not to be tied to the tenth of our produce and our income; we may be free and 
eager to contribute a fifth, a half, two-thirds of all that we possess " for the furtherance 
of the gospel." We are not limited to one-seventh of our time for devotion, or to any 
prescribed times in the day for communion with God ; we do well to let our hearts 
ascend in prayer and holy fellowship every day and at all hours of the day. If we 
have the consciousness of God's aboundins, kindness, of our Saviour's surpassing love, of 



OH.VU. 1— 22.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 89 

the Holy Spirit'B grace and patience which we should have, to which we may all of u* 
attain, we shall let there be a glad and generous overflow of offering unto God, W« 
■hall let our praise, our contribution, our endeavour, be multiplied. There will be no 
narrow regulation, but a broad and open spontaneity in our service of Jesus Christ.— <3. 

Vers. 8 — 11. — Sunshine. A very happy time it was when the temple was opened 
at Jernsalem. It may be said that the city of God and the people of God dwelt in th« 
sunshine of his presence and his fovour. It was a protracted period of sacred joy and 
gladdening prosperity. 

L Solemnities and festivities are fittinolt associated. " At the same time," 
<.«. in close conjunction with tbe solemn rites that were observed within the temple, 
" Solomon kept the feast seven days, and all Israel with him." The slaying of the 
devoted animal on the altar and the spreading of the table for a common feast, sacrificial 
worship and festive delights, went hand in hand. This was quite in keeping with the 
provision of the Law. And it is in perfect accord with the spirit, the institutions, 
and the precepts of the gospel. 1. The spirit of the gospel enjoins humility before 
God, and then trust and joy in God. 2. The principal institution of the gospel is a 
common participation at a table — a table at which the living, loving Host meets his 
friends, welcomes them with joy, and invites them to rejoice in him. 3. The precept of 
the gospel is, " Humble yourselves before God," and " Rejoice in the Lord alway," At 
our most solemn engagements and in our most sacred hours the note of holy joy should 
never be absent long ; indeed, it should be the prevailing note in Christian service. 

IL Saobed joy should be unselfish in its chabaoteb. These men were glad at 
heart " for the goodness that the Lord had showed unto David, and to Solomon, and 
to Israel his people." They were filled with joy because their departed sovereign's 
deepest desire was fulfilled, and because (they thought) if he were present his heart 
would be enlarged ; they were gladdened because their present king was elated with 
an honourable pride and a profound satisfaction, and they made his joy their own. 
Moreover, their patriotism was stirred within them, and they rejoiced because they felt 
that their nation was now in the sunshine of the Divine favour. It is well to be able 
to say, "Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me;" it is better to be able to sing, 
" Surely God is good to Israel." Our piety rises to a higher altitude when concern 
for ourselves passes into solicitude for the welfare of our fellow-men, when gratitude 
for personal favours is lost in thankfulness to God for his mercy to onr race. 

III. Piety is buke to find its way home. The people went back to "their 
tents" with this abounding exultation. They carried it home; they shared it with 
those with whom they dwelt; they communicated it to those who could not derive it 
from the temple-scenes themselves. This is a simple Christian obligation. All that 
we have from God we should carry home with us ; and particularly those inspirations 
and exaltations which we gain in his house and from his worship we should impart to 
our kindred and our friends. We are closely related to one another for the express 
purpose that we may communicate to one another the best and highest that is within 
us — our purest thoughts, our worthiest feelings, our highest aspirations, our most sacred 
joys. 

IV. Piety and pkospbritt abb vert closely allied. It was very right that 
the building of the king's house (ver. 11) should /oKow the erection of the house of the 
Lord ; it was quite natural that the one should lead to the other. We are not surprised 
to read that in all Solomon's undertakings he " prospered effectively." He was living 
and labouring in the fear and the love of God ; he was walking in the light of God's 
countenance. While the reward of piety is inward and spiritual rather than outward 
and material — ^is in peace, hope, rectitude, Christ-likeness of spirit and character rather 
than in " riches and honour," yet is it true that " godliness has the promise of the life 
that now is;" it tends constantly to virtue, to prudence, to thrift, to comfort, to 
prosperity. — -Q. 

Ver. 16. — The temple, the Temple, and the temples of the Lord. We are reminded in 
these words of successive manifestations of the Divine to the children of men. Wa 
have first— 

L The temflk at Jkbusalbm. This was for many generations and for many cen- 



90 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. tii. 1—22. 



tunes the chosen place and method of Divine manifestation. It was : 1. The sacred place, 
" chosen and sanctified " of Grod, the recognized spot where God was to he approached, 
where his presence was markedly and peculiarly felt, where sacrifice and prayer were to be 
offered to him, and where paidon and grace were to be gained from him. 2. The place 
of revelation, where the nature and the character of the Supreme was to he known, and 
whence it was to be made kmwn. God's " Name [was to be] there for ever." There he 
was to be known as the one Divine Spirit, as the Holy One, the Just One, the Merciful 
One; there he revealed himself in such wise that his worshippers " knew the Lord ; 
knew him so that they could truly honour him, obediently and acceptably serve him, 
attain towards his own character and spirit. 3. The place where God manifested 
himself in peculiar kindness. " Mine eyes and mine heart shall be there perpetually. 
Not, indeed, that this Is not applicable, in a very true sense, everywhere. For " the 
eyes of the Lord are in every place," and there are none of his children or of his 
creatures in whom he is not interested. But upon his people worshipping him in 
his house he would look down with peculiar kindness ; and towards them, as they 
reverently and obediently poured forth their praises or brought their grateful oiTeringi, 
his heart of love would lean. 

II. The One greatbb than the temple, who yet was the Temple of the Lord in 
his day. For Jesus Christ was he in whom and through whom God manifested himself 
to mankind, in whom he dwelt and from whom his glory shone. 1. Whoso approached 
him drew nigh to God and stood in the Divine presence. 2. He made known "the 
Name " of God, for he revealed the Father unto the human race ; has caused us all 
to know and to feel that God is, above everything else, the Divine Father, who cares 
for all his children, and who, whatever their wanderings may be, earnestly remembers 
them still and is seeking their return. 3. He was the One toward whom " the eyes and 
the heart " of God were peculiarly directed, the " beloved Son in whom he was well 
pleased," and for whose sake his eye of pity and his heart of love are directed to man- 
kind. Not the magnificent Herodian structure on Ziou, but that Son of man who often 
walked about its courts, was the Object in which, in whom, God was to be sought and 
found. 

III. Ourselves the temples of the Lord. " Know ye not that ye are the 
temple of God?" (1 Cor. iii. 16). What Christ was when he was in the world, that wo 
are to be now. He was the Light of the world, and he said to us, " Fe are the light 
of the world ; " so he was the temple of God, the One in whom God dwelt, and through 
whom his Name (his character and his purpose) was made known ; and now he charges 
us to be the " temples of the Holy Ghost ; " as men regard us and our life they should 
be reminded of the Divine, of the truth and the sjiirit and the character that are of 
God. We i-hould be living to make God known to all whom we can anywise reach 
and teach. Upon us his eyes are fixed, and toward us his heart is ptoing in all Divine 
tenderness and love. We do not fulfil the end of our Christian life except it be true of 
us that we are the temples of the living God. Not to any sacred place or any consecrated 
building need men go to find the truth and the Spirit of God ; it is (or it should be) 
enough that they approach the nearest Christian man ; they will find what they svek 
in his words, his bearing, his character, his life. — C. 

Vers. 17 — 22. — The Divine promise. This is very large and generous, but it is 
always conditional. God never makes a promise which is absolutely unconditional. 
We can readily see that it is morally impossible for him to do so ; it would be 
unrighteous, unwise, and, in the end, unkind so to do. He must and does say, " If . . . 
then I will ; if not ... then I will not." So was it (or so is it) with — 

L The rotal family. God's promise to David and to Solomon that the royal 
house should be established and should continue to reign was conditional on their 
allegiance to himself (1 Chron. xxii. 13 ; xxviii. 7) : " If thou wilt walk before me," etc. 
(rer. 17). The melancholy issue proved only too well that there was no possibility of 
the fulfilment of the hope apart from obedience to the will of God. 

n. The nation. God's promises to Israel were great, but they were conditional on 
its fidelity. In this passage the possibility of forfeiture is very fully stated (vers. 19 — 22). 
And in the long exile which the Jews suffered in Babylon, and in the terrible dispersion 
after the destruction of Jerusalem and the extinction of Israel as a nation, we find • 



OH. vn. 1—22.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 91 



fearful fulfilment of the solemn warning of the text. God deals with families and with 
nations now as he did with his own people. If they walk in truth, in wisdom, in 
righteousness, in godliness, they are established ; but if they depart from faith and purity, 
they fall. History will furnish ample illustration of the doctrine ; the observation of 
one long life will supply strong corroboration of its truth 

III. The iNDiviDDAii SOUL. God makes very great promises to us all ; they are 
" exceeding great and precious " (2 Pet. i. 4). They include the forgiveness of sins, 
restoration to perfect sonshlp, guidance and provision through all our earthly course, 
the preservation of our spiritual integrity in trial and temptation, a full response to our 
prayer and our Christian effort, peace in death, everlasting glory. But not one of these 
is promised to us irrespective of our attitude or our action. We must repent of our 
sin, and believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, if we would be forgiven and restored ; we 
must seek first the kingdom of God, and ask honestly and sincerely lor Diviue help, if 
we would receive all needful blessings for the life that now is; we must shun the 
spiritual peril which we are not called upon to face, and strive against the enemy we 
have to encounter. If we would prevail against our adversaries ; we must abide in Christ, 
if we would bear the fruits of tlie Spirit of God ; we must be prayerful and persevering 
and devoted, if we would work a good work for our Lord and our race ; we must he 
faithful unto death, if we would wear and win " the crown of life." — 0. 

Vers. 1 — 7. — The acceptance of Solomon's prayt-r. I. The a ns weeing God. (Vers. 1, 
2.) By himself set forth (Isa. Ixv. 24 ; Jer. xxxiii. 3), by his people recognized (Ps. 
Ixv. 2; xcix. 8; Isa. Iviii. 9), and by Christ revealed (Matt. vii. 7 — 11; xviii. 19; 
John xvi. 23) as a Hearer of prayer, Jehovah responded to the intercession of Israel's 
king by a twofold sign. 1. By fire from heaven. " The God that answereth by fire," 
said Elijah upon Carmel, " let him be God " (1 Kings xviii. 24) ; and in this case " the 
fire came down from heaven and consumed" — not the people, as it did Nadab and Abihu 

SLev. X. 2), and Azariah's captains with their fifties (2 Kings i. 10, 12, 14), and as 
ames and John wished it to do to the Samaritans (Luke ix. 54) ; but the sacrifices, as it 
did with Moses (Lev. ix, 24), Gideon (Judg. vi. 21), David (1 Chron. xxi. 26), and Elijah 
(1 Kings xviii. 38). Ihat this fire was that which symliolized Jehovah's presence at 
the bush (Exod. iii. 2), on Mount Sinai (Exod. xix. 18), at Horeb (1 Kings xix. 12), on 
the Chebar (Ezek. i. 4), in Babylon (Dan. vii. 9), and now also in the temple, may be 
assumed. That as a symbol this fire pointed to the holiness and judicial wrath of God 
against sin seems plausible and indeed probable (see Delitzsch's' Biblical Psychology,' p. 
225, Eng. trans.) ; if so it becomes apparent, without comment, why the sacrifices and 
not the people were devoured. The victims on the altars were the peojile's substitutes, 
the bearers of the people's sins ; hence on them rather than on the people the fire from 
heaven fell. The consumption of the sacrifices was an intimation that tlie people were 
accepted. Or, if fire be taken as the symbol of God's ntining and sanctifying power 
(Kurtz, ' Sacrificial Worship ol the Old Testament,' p. 155, Eng. trans.), the notion is 
haidly difierent, since God refines ami sanctifies by burning up and destroying (legally 
by his judicial wratli, and spiritually by his gracious influences within the soul) all that is 
sinful, and therefore obnoxious to his holiness and justice alike (cf. Heb. xii. 29). So 
God still accepts the Inward spiritual sacrifices of his people by sending down upon 
them fire from heaven, by annihilating and destroying the sin that attaches to them, 
through the fire of Christ's Passion, and by refining the hearts that offer them through 
the fire of his Spirit (Matt. iii. 11). 2. By the glory-cloud. This, which appears to 
have taken possession of the holy of holies, and indeed of the entire shrine immediately 
on the close of the ceremony of the introduction of the ark (ver. 14), is again said to 
have filled the house. Not that it had withdrawn from the house and afterwards returned 
when Solomon had ended his prayer ; but merely that the two things are now brought 
together— the fire upon the altar and the glory in the house as parts of one and the 
same complex phenomenon, which indicated the acceptance of Solomon's temple and 
prayer. The heart which God accepts he stills fills with his glnry — the glory of his 
presence as a prayer-hearing, sin-forgiving, love-manifesiing, holiness-working, glory- 
preparing God (John xiv. 21, 23; Eom. v. 5; 2 Cor. vi. 16; Col. i. 27; Rev. iii. 20). 

U. The woBSHiPPiNG people. (Ver. 3.) Overawed by the spectacle they beheld, the 
people adored the presence of their covenant God and condescending King, presenting 



92 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. vn. 1—22. 

before him their supplications. 1. With reverent humility. " Bowing themselvea with 
their faces to the ground upon the pavement," as they did in the wilderness when, on 
Aaron's first offerings heing presented, "a fire came out from hefore the Lord, and con- 
sumed upon the altar the burnt offering and the fat " (Lev. is. 24), and as Moses and 
Aaron did when the former interceded for the people (Numb. xiv. 6), as the Israelites 
on Carmel (1 Kings xviii. 39), Christ's disciples on the holy mount (Matt. xvii. 6), and 
the four and twenty elders of the Apocalyptic vision did (Kev. zL 16). Humility a 
foremost characteristic of all who would approach God in prayer (Gen. xviii. 30), 
or with whom God would dwell (Isa. Ivii. 15). 2. With/ervent acclamation. "Praising 
the Lord and saying ; " for though prayer and praise without audible speech are not 
impossible (1 Sam. i. 13 ; Eph. v. 19), when the heart is hot the tongue cannot well be 
silent (Fs. xxxix. 3). Men that are in earnest, like David, cry and weep in their 
prayers (Ps. vi. 8; xviii. 6), while in their praises they dance and sing (2 Sam. vL 
14 ; Ps. Ixxi. 22). 3. With true faith, recognizing his Divine goodness and believing 
in the imchangeableness of his mercy (see on vers. 13, 14). 

III. The thanksgivino eingi. (Vers. 4, 5.) Besides the people, Solomon was specially 
affected by the great sight. His heart swelled with °;ratitude, which he expressed : 1. 
By sacrifices. Gratitude which overflows merely in lip-service may well be suspected. 
The true index of a heart's feeling of indebtedness is its willingness to part with some- 
thing belonging to itself f 'r the sate of him towards whom the feeling is cherished. 
Hence the emphasis laid by Old Testament Scripture on the duty of offering the 
sacrifices of thanksgiving (Ps. 1. 14; cvii. 22). 2. By repeated sacrifices. Solomon and 
his subjects had already offered victims on the altar (ver. 6) ; but these were presented 
in addition because new mercies had evoked new occasions of thanksgiving. As the 
saint's gratitude should not be a momentary feelino;, cherished tor a little season and 
then dismissed till some more convenient opportunity shall arrive, but a perennial 
emotion continually welling up within the breast ; so should the saint's sacrifices not be 
occasional acts, but deeds that are constantly being repeated and renewed. 3. By large 
sacrifices. Solomon offered 22,000 oxen and 120,000 sheep — ^indeed, so abundant were 
the victims that the brazen altar was not spacious enough, large as it was (ch. iv. 1), to 
receive the burnt offerings and the meat offerings and the fat ; yet, rather than that any 
of I hem should not be presented to the Lord, the pavement in the middle of the court was 
" hallowed," i.e. extemporized into an altar (ver. 7), and the victims slaughtered and 
burnt thereupon. Solomon had no notion of being stinted in his " givings " to Jehovah. 
Neither should Christians in their offerings to the God of the Christian Church. The 
Lord still loveth a cheerful giver (2 Oor. ix. 7), and never fails to reward a liberal giver 
(2 Cor. ix. 6). 4. By timdy sacrifices. The king chose the right moment for his 
offerings — " then " (ver. 4), when his eye was arrested and his heart affected by the 
sight of the fire and the glory, and by the contemplation of Jehovah's goodness and 
grace. Had he delayed, the offerings might not have been so numerous as they were, 
if indeed they had not been omitted altogether. « Strike while the iron is hot " is » 
proverb apphcable to all good resolutions. Bis dat qui eito dat. Evil purposes 
should be delayed till the passions exciting them have cooled; good intentions 
should be carried through while the spirit glows with the holy enthusiasm that has 
given them birth. 

IV. The assisting priests. (Ver. 6.) In addition to the king and commons, the 
ministers of the sanctuary bore their part in the great act of worship. 1. The priests 
taaited on their offices, or stood, in their stations — ^not according to their divisions 
(Bertheau), but in their ofiSces (Vulgate) ; t.«. they preserved the ranks and functions 
which had been assigned them by David (1 Chron. xxiv. 7). They also sounded 
trumpets before them. 2. 2T4e Levites acted as instrumentalists and singers. They 
used the instruments of the song of Jehovah which David had invented and appointed, 
and with which David himself had praised God by their service, i.e. by makinc use ol 
their playing, as he did when fetching up the ark out of Obed-edom's house fl°Chron. 
XV. 16—28). ^ 

Learn: 1. The certainty that God can answer prayer. 2. The duty of Divine 
worship. 3. The joyous character of true religion. 4. The necessity of practisins 
Christian liberality.— W. 



OH. yn. 1—22.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 93 

Vers. 8 — 11. — A great festival. I. The ocoabion. 1. The dedication of the altar. 
Probably a part is here put for the whole. The writer means by the dedication of the 
altar the dedication of the whole temple. That this should have been followed by a 
feast was appropriate, since (1) all labour carried to a successful termination, as the 
temple had been, is fitted to occasion joy ; and (2) the fact that sinful man is permitted 
to consecrate anything to Jehovah ought ever to excite within the heart glad emotions. 
2. Ute Fe<ist of Tabernacles. It would seem that the solemnities connected with the 
dedication were commenced sevea days at least before the fifteenth of Tisri, the date of 
the Feast of Tabernacles, and that on the fifteenth this latter feast began, and was 
celebrated with unusual magniliceDce. 

II. The otTESTB. 1. Solomon the king. So is Christ himself ever present at the 
banquets he provides for his people, whether on earth within the Church militant, or in 
heaven in the Church triumphant. With reference to the former Christ says, " I will 
sup with him " (Rev. iii, 16) ; as regards the latter it is written, " The Lamb who is in 
the midst of the throne shall be their Shepherd " (Rev. vii. 17) ; " I will drink it," the 
fruit of the vine, " new with you in my Father's kingdom " (Matt. xxvi. 29). 2. All 
Jtrad with him, from the entering in of Hamath, the northen boundary of Palestine, to 
the river of Egypt, its southern limit. So will all the followers of God, the spiritual 
children and subjects of the heavenly King, be admitted to the banquet of salvation, 
both here and there — " he with me " (Rev. iii. 16). 

III. The ddbation. Seven days. 1. Preceded hy a seven days' dedication serviee, 
daring which the multitudes of victims were slain by the king and the people — not by 
the priests, who were merely employed in sprinkling the blood upon the altar. 2. Fol- 
lowed hy a solemn assembly on the eighth day, the last and the great day of the feast 
(John vii. 37). On the twenty-third day of the seventh month the assembly broke up, 
and the people returned to their homes. 

IV. The gladness. 1. Its character. The people's joy was sincere, deep, and 
exhilarating. Not only at the termination of the festal season, but throughout its 
continuance, the celebrants were merry in their hearts. 2. Its cause. Diflferent from 
the mirth which stirred the heart of Nabal (1 Sam. xxv. 36), theirs proceeded from a 
contemplation of Jehovah's goodness to David, who had been the originator of the 
temple-building scheme, to Solomon, who liad carried it out, and to them who were to 
profit by it. 

Learn : 1. That national feastings are as proper to religion as national fastings. 2. 
That sovereigns and their subjects should at times unite in public expressions of 
religious feeling. 3. That good rulers are often long remembered by their people. 
4. That God's goodness can be displayed to his saints long after they are dead. 5. That 
the greatest good a king or his people can receive from Heaven is religion, and the 
means of sustaining and advancing it. — W. 

Vers. 12 — 22. — A covenant concerning the Church of Qod. I. The pabties. 1. I7i» 
Lord. Jehovah, the supreme and self-existent Deity (Exod. iii. 14), the God of nature, 
who can " shut up heaven," " command the locusts," " send pestilence " (ver. 13), as 
well as the God of grace, who can hear prayer, forgive sin, and heal not only land, but 
Bouls (ver. 14) ; the God of providence, who can pluck up nations by the roots, and 
scatter them abroad upon the face of the earth (ver. 20); the God of law and order, 
who issues statutes and commandments (ver. 19) ; the God of faithfulness and truth, 
who both maketh and keepeth covenant with his people (ver. 18); the God of believing 
families, who, as " the Lord God of their fathers, remembereth them the children for 
good (ver. 22) ; the God of justice, who is able to fulfil his threatenings as well aa 
promises (ver. 20) ; the one living and true God, who will not tolerate the rivalry of 
such as are no gods (ver. 22). 2. Solomon the King of Israel. The prince of peace, 
the head and representative of his people, their intercessor and mediator, who by iaori- 
fices and supplications interposed between them and the all-glorious Jehovah who 
dwelt between the cherubim; in this respect a type of Jesus Christ, the heavenly 
Solomon, the true Prince of Peace (Isa. ix. 6), the King of Israel par excellence (John 
i. 49), the Head and Representative of the Church of God (Bph. i. 22), the Advocate 
and Intercessor for his believing people (Heb. vii. 25; 1 John ii. 1). 

II. The basis. Two acts of grace on the part of Jehovah towards Solomon. 1. Th« 



94 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE OHBONIOLES. [oh. vm. 1—18. 



acceptance of his prayer on behalf of Israel. "I have heard thy prayer" (ver. 12), 
On a similar basis Jehovah grounds his covenant with Christ concerning the Church of 
the New Testament, viz. his acceptance of Christ's mediation and intercession — " Thou 
art [or, ' this is '] my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased" (Matt. iii. 17 ; Mark i. 11 ; 
Luke iii. 22) ; " Father, I know that thou hearest me always " (John xi. 42). 2. 2'he 
choice of his temple as a place of sacrifice. (Ver. 12.) There can be no covenant except 
on a sacrificial basis (Heb. ix. 16 — 20). For this reason emphasis was laid upon the 
choice of the temple as a house of sacrifice. The " house of sacrifice " in the new 
covenant was the temple of Christ's body (John ii. 21 ; Heb. x. 19, 20). 

III. The pkomises. 1. For the people. That penitential prayer, accompanied with 
«n earnest seeking of the Divine favour, and a genuioe work of reformation among them , 
should be followed by forgiveness and its attendant signs (ver. 14). 2. For the temple. 
That God's heart should be there perpetually (ver. 16), that his eyes should be open 
towards it, and his ears attent unto whatever prayer should in future years be made in 
it (ver. 15). So God still engages to observe every suppliant and hear every prayer 
made to him in Christ's Name, or with an eye to his atoning sacrifice; because his eyes 
and his heart are ever on the Son. 3. For the king. That God would establish his 
throne according to the covenant made with David, that the throne of Israel should 
never want a ruler (ver. 18) ; always provided that he, the king, followed in the footsteps 
of David, doing all God commanded him, and observing God's statutes and judgments. 

IV. The thebateninqs. All covenants have penalties attached to them to be 
inflicted as alternatives in case the covenanting party or parties fail to implement the 
condition on which alone the promise or promises can be bestowed (see Gen. ii. 17). 
Here the penalties for disobedience were explicit, if severe. 1. For the king. Failure 
of the royal line, which would terminate with himself or with a near descendant. 
This a clear deduction from the terms of the Davidio covenant. 2. For the people. 
Plucking up by the roots from the land of their inheritance, and dispersion among the 
nations of the earth as a proverb and a byword (ver. 20). 3. For the temple. Destruc- 
tion and desolation, which should make of its lofty walls an astonishment to every one 
that passeth by. 

Learn : 1. That God's promises of grace and salvation are all conditioned by the 
faith and obedience of those who receive them. 2. That God's threatenings are as 
certain of fulfilment as his promises. 3. That God's judgments can always vindicate 
themselves to those who reverently inquire concerning them. — W. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER Vra. 
This interesting historical chapter may 
very well be described as by Professor Dr. 
James G. Murphy, in his ' Bible -Olaas 
Handbook,' " The Acts of Solomon," or at 
any rate, some of the miscellaneous acts, for 
which time was found now that the " two 
houses " were out of band. 

Ver. 1 (parallel, 1 Kings ix. 10). — Twenty 
years, wherein Solomon had built the house 
of the Lord, and his own house. The de- 
scription is intended to be, what it is, chro- 
nologically exact. Four years of Solomon 
had passed when he began the Lord's house, 
seven were spent in building it, thirteen in 
finishing and furnishing it, and in building, 
finishing, »nd furnishing the king's house — 
in all twenty-four years. 

Ver. 2. — The cities which Eoram had 
restored to Solomon. I Kings ix. 11 ex- 
plains the force of (lie word " restored " here. 



telling how it was Hiram had come by 
" twenty cities in the land of Galilee " by 
way of payment, or part payment, for the 
"cedar," "flr," and "gold" which he had 
given Solomon. It is evident that tliese 
cities were in need of repair ; possibly they 
had not been previously in the occupation of 
the Israelites ; if they had been, the trans- 
action was scarcely legitimate on the part of 
Solomon (Lev. xxv. 12 — 38), and we may 
suppose they had become largely deserted 
when made over to Hiram. It would not, 
however, be necessary to suppose either 
that Solomon had given them because they 
were poor property in his eyes, or that 
Hiram, whose good will and generous dis- 
position are elsewhere specially notified, had 
returned them as a thankless gift or as a 
bad payment, but for the language of vers. 
12, 13 (1 Kings ix.), which distinctly tells 
us that when Hiram inspected them they 
did "not please him," and that he named 
them "the land of Cabul" (see Dr. Smith's 
'Bible Dictionary,' L p. 237). The proba- 



OH. vm. 1—18.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



96 



bility is that, as cities on the borderland, 
they were what had been at present un- 
occupied by Israelites, were all the likelier 
in bad repair, and, unvalued by Hiram, 
were, when put into good repair by Solomon, 
such that Solomon might justly cause the 
children of Israel to dwell in them. 

Ver. 3. — Hamath-zobah, Hamath (when 
the name occurs separately) was «. place 
both of great geographical note (occupying, 
whether regarded as a larger region or a 
town, an important position in the northern 
end of that broad valley of Coele-Syria 
which separates Lebanon and Antilebanon, 
and through which passed the river Orontes) 
and of great historical note fiom the time of 
the Exodus to that of Amos. The town, or 
city, is to be understood to be the Great 
Hamath (Amos vi. 2). But the kingdom, 
or district, or county, was almost contei- 
minous with Ccele-Syria. Zobah, also a 
portion of Syria, amounted to a small king- 
dom, and is read of alike in Saul's and in 
David's times, as in Solomon's time. It 
probably lay to the north-east ' of Hamath 
(1 Sam. xiv. 47 ; 2 Sam. viii. 3, 7, 8, 10 ; x. 
9, 16, 19; 1 Chron. xviii. 4; xix. 16). But 
Hamath-zobah of this verse was probably a 
place called Hamath, in the region of Zobah, 
in which also two other cities are mentiontd, 
Berothai and Tibhath, or BetHh (2 Sam. 
viii. 8 ; 1 Chron. xviii. 8). These two king- 
doms of Hamath and Zobah, contiguous as 
they were, seem as though they purposed to 
compliment one another — Zobah by naming 
one of its towns Hamath, and vice versa. It 
is said that the Assyrian inscriptions show 
that they remained, after Solomon, distinct 
kingdoms. 

"Ver. 4. — Tadmor in the wilderness. Tad- 
mor, one with the classical Palmyra, lay in 
the desert of Syria, about half-way between 
the rivers Orontes and Euphrates, and dis- 
tant from Damascus about a hundred and 
forty miles to its east-north-east. Stanley 
(' Sinai and Palestine,' p. 8, note 1) says, 
"Is it quite certain that 'Tadmor' and 
•Palmyra' are words derived from the 
' palms ' ? A palm is in Hebrew tamar . . . 
and in Greek . . . phoenix." Solomon was 
probably not the originator, but rather re- 
builder, of the place. Its fame was great 
under Zenobia, the Queen of Odenathus ; she 
was taken captive by the Emperor Aurelian, 
A.D. 273, when the city was subdued. It is 
now little better than the haunt of a few 
Arabs. Splendid ruins remain, specially of 
the great temple of the sun. The Hebrew 
text of 1 Kings ix. 18 has apparently 
Tamor, or Tamar, and it has been suggested 
by Movers on that passage that possibly a 
Tamar in the south, and that is found in the 
neiglibourhood of some of the other places, 
auch as Baalath, Beth-horon, and Gezer, all 



in the south (Bzek. xlvil. 19 ; xlviii. 28 ; ch. 
XX. 2), is intended. Our text, however, in the 
present place offers no choice, while that in 
Kings (compare Chethiv and Keri) is doubt- 
ful. And finally, our writer is here evidently 
in the neighbourhood of Hamath, which of 
course best suits Tadmor. Although there 
is an apparent disjointedness between thii 
and the parallel, closer notice may rather 
bring confirmation of substantial agreement 
between them. For instance, the store cities 
here spoken of as belonging to Hamath (but 
not individually named here and not corre- 
sponding with those that are named ia 
Kings) are accounted for by the words, "and 
in Lebanon," in 1 Kings ix. 19. 

Ver. 5. — Beth-horon the upper . . . Beth- 
horon the nether. The parallel mentions 
only the latter (1 Kings ix. 17). They were 
both in Ephraira (1 Chron. vii. 24 ; Josh. x. 
10, 11 ; xvi. 1—6 ; xviii. 13, 14), but were 
assigned to the Kohathite Levites (Josh. 
xxi. 22 ; 1 Cbidn. vi. 68). The name means 
"the hollow place." The upper Beth-horon 
was about four miles from Gibeon, and the 
lower about three miles further on. The 
Roman general Cestins Gallus was defeated 
here in the last Jewish war; Judas Mao- 
cabsBus conquered here (1 Mace. iii. 13 — 25). 
Other interesting references may be made to 
1 Sam. xiii. 18 ; 1 Kings ix. 7 ; ch. xxv. 13. 

Ver. 6. — Baalath (parallel 1 Kings ix. 18). 
This place belonged to Dan (Josh. xix. 40 — 
45). Nothing is known about it ; some take 
it to be one with Baalah of Josh. xv. 9, 10. 
Store cities . . . chariot cities . . . cities 
of the horsemen (see ch. xvi. 4 ; xxxii. 28 ; 
1 Kings iv. 26; ix. 19). In the parallel 
some of the names of the places built, or 
rebuilt, or repaired by Solomon in this con- 
nection are given as " Millo and the wall of 
Jerusalem" (MUlo's foundations occupied 
the hollow at the south-west comer of the 
hill of the temple), " and Hazor and Megiddo 
and Gezer" (1 Kings ix. 15). AU that 
Solomon desired to build; t.e. for purposes 
of personal enjoyment or ornament. 

Vers. 7 — 10. — These verses, corresponding 
very nearly exactly with the parallel (1 Kings 
ix. 20 — 23), betray how it was a thing never 
to be forgotten, if only as a fact, that the 
extermination of the old possessors of the 
land had not been entire ; so that allusion 
to it is not omitted even by a post -Captivity 
compiler. The parallel charitably reads, 
" whnm the children of Israel were not able 
to destroy utterly," where our text shows 
with exactor fidelity, whom the children of 
Israel consumed not. The parallel aiso 
uses the words, "levy a tribute of himd- 
service," for our more ambiguous make to 
pay tribute (Judg. iii. 1 — 7). In the words, 
until this day, the copyist, shall we say, too 
slavish, is again detected (ver. 9). The 



*6 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. vm. 1—18. 



" levjr " in ver. 21 of the parallel probably 
explains the suddenly mentioned similar 
Itmgnage of its fifteenth verse, and again 
betrays the collected and copied nature of 
the historio material, the carefulness of 
Bequenoe not being as observable in selec- 
tion as might be desired. The distinction 
between the remnant of aliens and the 
people of Israel was manifestly that the 
menial and the laborious fervioe was put on 
the fcirmer. Useful but familiar references 
to this whole subject are found in Judg. i. 
21—36; iii.1— 5; 1 Chron. xxii. 2 ; 1 Kings 
V. 13—18. For our two hundred and fifty 
(which gives the number of overseers over 
Israelites only) the parallel reads, "five 
hundred and fifty." It will be remembered 
that an analogous difference occurs between 
our ch. ii. 18 and 1 Kings v. 16. Whether 
it were the determining reason or not in 
these two places, it is very imaginable that 
it would be of less importance in the ages of 
the post-Captivity annalist to dwell on the 
minutite of the different treatment of the 
•liens. 

Ver. 11 (parallel, 1 Kings ix. 24).— As 
the vrriter of Chronicles has not before 
alluded to the marriage and the circum- 
stances ol it involved in this verse, his 
account and assignment of Solomon's motive 
for the removal of his wife, Pharaoh's 
daughter, is given something more speci- 
fically (see 1 Kings iii. 1 ; vii 8). The 
valley of Tyropeum lay between the temple 
on the eastern hill and Solomon's palace, 
which was on the western side of it. The 
name of this wife was probably Psusennea, 
last of the twenty-first dynasty. 

Vers. 12, 13. — ^Parallel in compressed form 
1 Kings iz. 25. After a certain rate every 
day; Hebrew, dV— a^iai; the probable mean- 
ing is, according to the fixed appointment of 
day after day (Exod. xxiii. 14 ; xxix. 23, 
38; Numb, xxviii. 3; Deut. xvi. 16). 

Ver. 14. — The courses of the priests . . . 
the Levltes to their charges . . . the porters 
also by their courses at every gate. (For the 
particulars of this verse, see, with the ex- 
position to them, 1 Chron. xxiv. 1 — 35 ; xxv. 
1—7; xxvL; ix. 17—28.) David the man 
of Ood. This title occurs only once in 
1 Chronicles, viz. xxiii. 14, where it is used 
of Mosea; and six times in 2 Chronicles, 
viz. here to David; xi. 2, to Shemaiah; 
tliree times, xxv. 7, 9, to an unnamed pro- 
phet; and once again to Moses, xxx. 16; 
the expression occurs much more freouently 
in Kinga. 



Ver. 15.— Considering the last elanae of 
the previous verse, the king probably designs 
David, not Salomon. The oommandment . , . 
oonceniing the treasures. (See, with the 
exposition, 1 Chron. xxvi. 20 — 32. Comp. 
also our ch. xxxv. 3 — 5.) 

Ver. 16.— Was prepared. This is the 
niph. of 113 ; and occurs eight times in 

Chronicles, but in other conjugations forty- 
two times. The evident signification is. 
Thus teat all the work of Solomon tleadily 
ordered to the day of foundation of the home 
. . . and on uninterruptedly till it wai 
finished; i.e. there was no remitting of dili- 
gence and care from the beginning to the 
end of the grand undertaking. For of this 
the Chronicle-history has told us, first in 
ch. ii., and then in ch. iii. — viii. 

Ver. 17.— Ezion-geber . . , Eloth. Pa- 
rallel, 1 Kings ix. 26, which describes the 
former of these ports as " beside " the latter, 
" on the Eed Sea," i.e. at the extremity of 
the eastern gulf of the Bed Sea, called the 
Blanitic Gulf by Greeks and Romans, but 
DOW the Gulf of Akabah (Nmnb. xxxiii 
35—37; Deut. ii. 8; 2 Sam. viii. 14; 1 Kings 
xxii. 48 ; 2 Kings xiv. 22 ; xvi. 6 ; ch. xx. 
36, 37). David's conquest of Edom was the 
occasion of its coming into the po-isession of 
Israel. 

Ver. 18. — The first impression created on 
reading this verse no doubt would be that 
Hiram sent ships to Solomon, at Ezion- 
geber and Eloth. But it is almost impos- 
sible to see how he could do so. The 
parallel much helps us, by saying that 
" Solomon made a navy," and Hiram assisted 
by manning it with competent sailors; he 
" sent in the navy his servants," etc. (1 Kings 
ix. 26, 27). Some have suggested that the 
explanation is that Hiram gave materials, 
workmen, and models for Solomon's ships, 
possibly having ships lying in the Bed Sea. 
The parallel, however, meets all difBeulties, 
and saves the necessity of going far for far- 
fetched explanations. Ophir. This was the 
name of the son of Joktan (G«n. x. 25 — 29), 
who, it is supposed, gave his name to the 
place or land in the south of Arabia, It is 
still quite an unsettled question, however, 
where Ophir was situated, though an Ara- 
bian situation is on every account the most 
probable (see Exposition 1 Chron. xxix. 4; 
and Dr. Smith's ' Bible Dictionary,' ii. 637— 
642> Our four hundred and fifty talents H 
gold reads in the parallel (1 Emga ix. 28) 
as " four hundred and twenty." 



HOMILETIOS. 

XtTM, 1 — 18. — TTiefifrmative influence of the Church. In the exceeding abundance 
of Buggestion of homiletic matter that characterizes Scripture, and even its historic books, 
there is naturally so much the less temptation to strain its eacred oontents (which at 



OH. vm. 1—18.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 97 

all times serve their own purposes) by laying them under forced contributions to this 
particular service. It may be, therefore, perhaps best to say at once that this chapter 
does not proffer anything specially suitable for homiletics proper. None the less is it 
true that the chapter does exhibit certain points which look this way, and worthy of 
notice— as, e.flr., once the central religious institution of the Church and nation has found 
its settled place and established form, many other things seem even predisposed to seek 
and to find their settlement too, their order, and their abiding strength. The building 
of cities regained or restored, and the rebuilding, repair, and fortification of others — 
■tore cities and chariot cities and horsemen's cities (vers. 1 — 6, the language of the last 
of these verses reading, it will be noticed, specially emphatically); the assigning of the 
payment of tribute to the descendants of the original inhabitants (who, contrary to Divine 
direction, had not been thoroughly outrooted from the land) whose privileges there, as 
resident in and amid Israel, were cheaply bought by that tribute; the assigning of 
independence and posts of authority to others, of the people and officers of Israel itself 
(vers. 7 — 10) ; the apparently growing spiritual perception of Solomon, in what might 
presumably be regarded as a somewhat critical step, the removing of his wife, Pharaoh's 
daughter, from an abode that was " sacred," to one that was a palace indeed of palaces, 
but not sacred (ver. 11); the fuU observance and reviving from Moses' time and stand- 
point of all religious ritual and ceremony (but supremely of all which concerned the 
altar) for daily service and sacrifice, and sabbath and new moon service and sacrifice, 
and for those of the triple solemn feasts, to wit, of Unleavened Bread, of Weeks, and of 
Tabernacles, with the necessaiy courses of priests, Levites, musicians, and porters ; — aM 
this came of the " perfecting of the house of the Lord " (vers. 12 — 16), as though it 
were actually complementary to it. Does it not read, when all taken together, for the 
imsophisticated and devout mind, like some forecast of these two things, which we 
now, in the modem Church, so often say or hear said : 1. That the welfare of the diocese 
follows its bishop and its cathedral service, taking its tone and deriving no little of its 
health from them? This is abundantly conspicuous in the history of a newly carved 
out diocese. 2. And that, one thousand to fifteen himdred years ago, the formative 
influence of the Church over the nation was indisputable ; that the Church made the 
nation far more than the nation the Church, conspicuously lending to it, nay, giving to 
it a strength of foundation, variety of elements, and those in especial that make for 
durableness? Nineteen centuries ago a theocracy, which may with most reverent 
intention be called comparatively mechanical, passed away. Let us hope, pray, and 
work that the centuries from then to the present hour may be but superseding it, 
with that founded on the new and better covenant. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — Wise work. David had done excellent work for his country by unit- 
ing all the tribes of Israel in a strong band of attachment to himself, and thus to one 
another; also in defeating and subjecting the neighbouring powers, and thus giving 
peace and tranquillity to the nation. Solomon, coming after him, seconded and sustained 
him, not by acting on the same lines, but by " a new departure." We very often show 
the truest regard to those who have been before us by illustrating their spirit in a very 
different method from that which they adopted. Solomon, like the wise man he was, 
set about building. He "built the house of the Lord and his own house" (ver. 1), 
taking time and building well. He then built cities, which were either strongholds 
or emporiums, serving useful purposes in war or in peace. He seems to have accom- 
plished much by so doing. 

I. What Solomon achieved by BuiLDisa. 1. He increased the security of hii 
dominions. Those " fenced cities, with walls, gates, and bars," must have added con- 
siderably to the defensive power of Israel. 2. He took effectual means for the enrich- 
ment of the country. The " store cities " would do much to promote communication 
and trade with other states, would increase his imports and exports. 3. He immor- 
talize! himself. He caused his name to be associated with many places that fur long 
centuries remembered him as their founder, and with one city (Tadmar) that will never 
be lurgotten. 4. He made a deep mark on the future. Some of these cities have absd- 

n. OHRONICLEB. B 



88 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHBONICLES. [oh. viii. 1—18. 



lutely perished ; the ruins of one of them still remain. It is impossible to say how much 
tuB enterprise had to do, but it certainly had much, with the brilliance, the power, and 
the political and moral influence of Palmyra. The effects of this building went far 
beyond the satisfaction of the desire of his heart (ver. 6) ; they reached to remote cen- 
turies, and told upon people that were afar off. 

II. What is open to va to accomplish. 1. Hie structure it is possible we may 
raise. This may be a house in the sense of a family (see 2 Sam. vii. 11) ; or it may 
be a house in the sense of a business establishment ; or it may be a church, wherein 
God shall be worshipped and his Son exalted for many generations ; or it may be a 
society which shall receive and sustain many hundreds of human hearts. One thing 
there is we may all be building, and are indeed all bound to build with utmost care — a 
human character; a character which shall be/a«r in its proportions, rich in its equip- 
ments, and strong in its defence against all assault 2. The moral and spiritual 
materials with which, or of which, we should build. These are uprightness, truth, 
patience, courage, persistency. 3. The spirit in which we should work. This is the 
spirit of obedience, of resignation, of devotedness ; so that we are not seeking our 
own personal aggrandizement, but the honour of our Divine Lord. — 0. 

Ver. 11. — Bouht/id marriage alliance. There was more astuteness than wisdom in the 
alliance which Solomon effected between the daughter of Pharaoh and himself. It ia 
probable that he congratulated himself greatly thereupon, and that at first it was a source 
of much gladness of heart to him. But the end did not justify his hope. The political 
alliance with Egypt, which it was intended to confiroi, was very soon broken ; in the 
very next reign the king of that country came up against Jerusalem (ch. xii. 9). And 
though the daughter of Pharaoh may herself have conformed, in part if not altogether, 
to the religion of Jehovah, it may be taken for granted that many of her retinue did 
not; that they brought up from Egypt idolatrous rites, superstitious practices, immoral 
usages. We gather from the text that Solomon himself felt that there was an unsuit- 
ableness and even an impropriety in having such a court in the rooms where David had 
prayed and sung, beneath the roof under which the ark of God had rested. If he felt 
thus, we may be sure that there was not a little about the new queen's ways and those 
of her attendants to scandalize the simple faith and conscientious scruples of the people. 
And this was tlie beginning of that departure from the simplicity and purity of Hebrew 
faith and morals which ended in corruption and disaster (1 Kings xi. 31). This 
matrimonial alliance was not a fine piece of policy ; it was a distinct mistake. Perhaps 
the king may have begun to think so when he found that, instead of gracing his father's 
home, his new wife could not take her place there without profaning it. In such 
alliances as these it is well to remember — 

I. That apparent advantages mat easily be overestimated. To the one side 
or the other, to the husband or the wife, there may he the prospect of social standing, 
or of wealth, or of personal attraction; there may be the inducement of one or more of 
those favourable conditions which belong to the lower plane of life. But experience 
has proved again and again, in so many cases and with such startling and overwhelm- 
ing power that all may see and know, that these worldly advantages are no security 
whatever against disappointment, against misery, against melancholy failure. Their 
worth and virtue only stretch a little way ; they do not go to the heart of things ; 
they only touch the outer fortifications, they cannot take the citadel. 

II. That common principles and spiritual affinities are the true basis on which 
this alliance should be founded. It is a poor prospect indeed when the wife is felt to 
be morally unworthy to be mistress of the old home ; when it has to be acknowledged 
that her principles and her practice will dishonour rather than adorn the rooms where 
the Bible has been accustomed to be read and the praises of Christ to he sung. Surely 
it is not from fellowship with her spirit and not from the influences which will flow 
from her life that a blessing will come to the heart and to the home. It is not the 
full hand but the pure soul that brings joy and gladness to the hearth. It is a common 
love for the common Lord, and the walking together along the same path of eternal life, 
— it is this which has the promise of the future. The splendid palace which Solomon 
built for Pharaoh's daughter may have been little more than a fine mausoleum for a 
hope that soon withered and died : the humblest roof that shelters two true, loving. 



OH. VIII. 1—18.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 99 

holy hearts will be the home of a happiness which grows and deepens with passing 
years, with mutual service, and with united efforts to train and bless. — (J. 

Vers. 12 — 16. — Perfecting the mnctv/iry. It was indeed a great thing to be able 
to write that " the house of the Lord was perfected " (ver. 16). Much had to be done, 
however, before that could be written. It was necessary — 

I. That the material should bubsbrvb the spiritual. Though the last stone 
had been carved and carried, and the last piece of furniture placed in its position, 
though the temple stood and shone before the eyes of Israel in all architectural com- 
pleteness, yet was it not truly " finished " (ver. 16) until it was made a right use of, 
until sacrifice smoked on its altar, until " Solomon offered burnt offerings unto the 
Lord" (ver. 12). No edifice or erection of any kind, no work of art, nothing that is 
visible and material, can be said to have attained its end as an instrument of worship 
until it has been the means and medium by which the soul of man ascends to the 
Spirit of God and makes its offering " unto the Lord." Until that point is reached, it 
is as the sacrifice without the consuming fire ; it is essentially imperfect. It is the 
wise, the true, the spiritual use we make of them that crowns and completes all 
instrumentalities in the service of God. 

II. That method be employed as well ab inspiration called forth. " After • 
certain rate every day, according to the commandment" (ver. 13); "according to the 
order " (ver. 14). It is well, it is needful, to do everything to elicit zeal, to call forth 
spontaneous service ; without this there is no life, and therefore no acceptance with God. 
But there must be method also. That Christian Church (or that Christian man) that 
thinks it (he) can dispense with regulation and order in its (his) devotion makes a 
serious mistake. The waters of a river are more essential than the banks ; but the 
river would do very ill without these — ^it would soon be lost in diffusion. Piety that 
is not regulated is liable to be thus lost. Method is far lower down than inspiration, 
but it is an aid which the strongest and the worthiest can by no means afford to 
despise or to neglect. 

III. That attention be given to the humble and minute. Provision was made 
for "the courses of the priests;" but the "porters also" were considered and cared for 
(ver. 14). These humbler ministrants had a part to play, a service to render, as well, 
as the higher officials, and their work was specified and recorded. And all arrange- 
ments were made " as the duty of every day required ; " regai d was had to hourly 
necessity, and no smallest service was overlooked. In the worship we render and in 
the work we do for so great a Lord as our God, for so gracious a Master as our Divine 
Friend and Saviour, there is nothing actually small. One post may be lower than 
another, one duty may be slighter than another; but everything we do for him 
" that loved us and gave himself for us " is redeemed fi:om insignificance ; and if we 
have the true spirit in us we shall leave nothing of any kind undone which will make 
the smallest contribution to the perfecting of his service ; we shall give heed to the 
humble and the minute as well as to the lofty and the large. 

IV. That opfbrino be presented to God as well as blessings asked of him. 
The priests and the Levites were to " praise " as well as to " minister " (ver. 14). They 
were to sing as well as to sacrifice, to offer gratitude to God as well as to seek mercy 
and grace of him. And surely the service of the sanctuary will by no means be per- 
fected until we bring to God the best we have to offer. We seek greatest things of 
him, let us bring greatest things to him; let us bring to his house and to himself our 
most reverent thought, our warmest gratitude, our most serious and fixed resolution, 
our sweetest and purest song. Unto him that loved us we will yield the richest and 
worthiest offering our heart can render, our voice can raise. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — Solomon's building operations. I. Palage-buildino. Like Seti L, 
Bameses II., and other Pharaohs (Brugsch, ' Egypt,' etc., ii. 14), like Uruk, Eham- 
murabi, and other early Chaldean kings (' Records of the Past,' i. 3 ; iii. 9), like ancient 
Oriental monarchs generally, Solomon was a great builder. The first twenty years of 
his reign were occupied in erecting " palaces," or royal residences. 1. A house for 
Jehovah, the King of kings, i.e. the temple on Moriah, which required seven years for 
■erection (1 Kings vi. 37, 38). In according precedence to the temple, Solomon acted 



100 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. viii. 1— 18. 

both becomingly and rightly. In all undertaking's, national, political, social, commercial, 
as well as individual and religious, not only should Gnd's glory be the govemiDg aim 
(1 Cor. z. 31), but God's claims should receive the earliest recognition. God first and 
self second (not vice versa) is the true order, whatever the business in which man engages. 
" Honour the Lord with the firstfruits of thine increase " (Prov. iii. 9) ; " Seek first the 
kingdom of God and his righteousness " (Matt. vi. 33). A recently published memoir 
famishes the following illustration : " ' Before we began business,' writes a Christian 
merchant of his deceased partner, ' we had naturally to arrange articles of partnership. 
I remember with what earnestness he proposed that we should set aside a certain 
percentage of our profits for religious and benevolent purposes before any division was 
made among the partners. His wish was cordially assented to, but the generous pur- 
pose originated with him " (' Alexander Balfour : a Memoir,' by E. H. Lundie, M. A., 
pp. 37, 38). 2. A house for himself, Solomon, the King of Israel, the vicegerent and 
representative of Jehovah in the midst of the theocratic nation (1 Kings vii. 1, 2). 
Though kings as well as other men may be sinfully prodigal in personal expenditure, 
in the mansions they dwell in, the luxury they revel in, and the pageantry they appear 
in, it is nevertheless not demanded by religion either that all should stand upon a level 
of equality in respect of " manner of life," or that any should practise asceticism. Bach 
station in society has a corresponding " fitness of living," which Christianity allows, 
and prudence should attempt to discover and maintain. If beggars cannot live in 
palaces, kings are not expected to dwell in hovels. 3. A house for the daughter of 
Pharaoh, whom Solomon had espoused in the beginning of his reign (1 Kings vii. 8), 
and had hitherto lodged in the city of David (1 Kings iii. 1) until a permanent abode 
for her should be erected. This Pharaoh is supposed to have been Pashebensha II., 
the last of the Tanitic or twenty-first dynasty (Lenormant, Winer, Kleinert in Eiebm's 
' Handworterbuch '), though a claim has been advanced for an earlier potentate of that 
line, either Pashebensha I. or Pinetem II. (Rawlinson, ' Egypt and Babylon,' p. 331). 
That he should have given his daughter to Solomon is not surprising when the weak- 
ness of the Tanitic dynasty is remembered, and receives confirmation from the fact 
that an earlier Pharaoh married his daughter Bithia to an ordinary Israelite (1 Chron. 
iv. 18). As a dowry for his daughter, Gezer (Josh. xii. 22), an old Ganaanitish town 
whose king, Horam, was slain by Joshua (x. 33), without being itself destroyed, and 
whose inhabitants were not expelled, but only made tributary (Josh. xvi. 10), was con- 
quered by the Egyptian monarch and presented to Solomon. " Sargon (of Assyria) 
tells us in one of his inscriptions that, having conquered the country of Cilicia with 
some difficulty, on account of its great natural strength, he made it over to Ambris, 
King of Tubal, who had married one of his daughters, as the princess's dowry" 
(Rawlinson, ' Egypt and Babylon,' p. 331). On first marrying the princess, Solomon 
lodged her in a separate house in the city of David, until this residence was ready for 
her reception in connection with his own palace (see homily on ver. 11). 

II. CiTT-BuiLDiNG. The Subsequent years of Solomon's reign were so employed. 
1. Old cities repaired. (Ver. 2.) In the north-west of Galilee, not far from Tyre, 
Either they were those Solomon offered to Hiram in payment for the building material, 
timber and gold, received from him (1 Kings ix. 10 — 14), and Hiram declined to accept 
(Keil), as either an insufScient recompense, being in his estimation mean and con- 
temptible, whence he called them Gahul (Josephus,- viii. 6. 3), or as being unsuitable 
to the commercial habits of his subjects (Jamieson) ; or they were towns Hiram gave 
to Solomon in exchange for those he had obtained from Solomon (Jewish interpreters). 
That the Chronicler has transformed the statement in Kings, because it seemed to 
him inconceivable that Solomon should have parted with twenty cities standing on 
Israelitish soil (Bertheau), while a possible hypothesis, is not demonstrable. These 
towns Solomon, having first wrested them from the Canaanites, repaired and peopled 
with the children of Israel, to whom, in virtue of God's promise, they really belonged- 
2. New cities founded. (1) Tadmor, or Tamar, "a palm tree" (1 Kings ix. 18), in the 
wilderness, identified with the rich and flourishing city of Palmyra, " the city of palms," 
in the Syrian desert (Bertheau, Keil, Jamieson), distant " two days' journey from tb* 
Upper Syria, and one day's journey from Euphrates, and six long days' journey from 
Babylon" (Josephus, 'Ant.,' viii. 6. 1), and still called by the Damascenes Tadmor 
(Conder, 'Handbook to the Bible,' p. 281); though Tamar, mentioned in Ezekiel 



OH. VIII. 1—18.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 101 

(xlvii. 19; xlviii. 28) as forming part of tlie southern boundary of Palestine, has been 
claimed as the Tadmor here alluded to (Thenius, Bahr, Schrader), on the ground that 
in 1 Kings ix. 17, 18 the building of Tamar is associated with the building of Gezer, 
Beth-horon, and Baalath, and that Tamar is stated to have been in the wilderness in 
the land. But the first of these arguments is not conclusive, while the second has 
force only if Palestine, and not Hamath, is the land meant. (For a description of 
Tadmor or Palmyra, see Biblical Cyclopaedias.) 3. Existing cities fortified. (1) Beth- 
noron, or '' the house of the narrow way," an old double town of Ephraim, said to have 
been built by Sheerah, a daughter or descendant of Ephraim (1 < hron. vii. 24) ; but as 
the two Beth-borons, the present Beit-ur-el-Foha and Tachta (Robinson), the upper 
and the lower, situated in the tribe of Ephraim on the borders of Benjamin, existed in 
the days of Joshua (x. 28), it is probable that Siieerah was " an heiress who had 
received these places as her inheritance, and caused them to be enlarged by her family " 
(Keil). Solomon transformed them into garrison cities, with walls, gates, and bars. 
(2) Baalah, a town in the tribe of Dan (Joshi. xix. 44), not far from Beth-horon and 
Gezer (Josephus), perhaps the modern village Bel'ain (Conder). Though mentioned 
along with Tadmor, there is no grourd for identifying it with Baal-bec or Heliopolis 
(Bitter and others). This also the ting fortified to protect his kingdom against the 
Philistines. 4. Store cities, etc., e rected. (1) In Hamath-zobah, which Solomon con- 
quered (ver. 3). This territory comprised the well-known town Hamath on the 
Oroiites, ruled over by Tou, and the adjoining state of Zobah, whose king, Hadar-ezer, 
David smote when he went to estalilish his dominion by the river Euphrates (1 Chron. 
xviii. 3). Both kings appear to have been rendered tributary to the Israelitish throne 
as the result of that expedition, and their territories practically annexed to the Israel- 
itish dominions under tbe composite name employed by the Chronicler. (2) In 
Palestine proper (ver. 6). These " store cities " were not so much dep6ts of merchandise 
(Ewald, Jamieson) as magazines for victuals, laid up for the convenience of travellers 
and their beasts (Bertheau), perhaps also for materials of war to aid in the protection 
of the empire (Bahr). Along with these were chariot cities (cf. ch. i. 14), and cities for 
the horsemen, probably not diflFerent from the former (see ch. ix. 25 ; 1 Kings x. 26). 

Learn : 1. Kings should be patterns to their subjects of religion and industry. 2. It 
is legitimate for princes to look well to the safety of their dominions. 3. The best 
defences for kingdoms are not muniments, but men. — W. 

Vers. 7 — 10. — Hie subjects of Solomon. I. Non-Israelites. 1. Their nationalities. 
Descendants of five of the seven nations in the promised land anterior to the conquest, 
remnants of which were left instead of being utterly consumed as enjoined by Moses 
(Dent. vii. 1). (1) The Hittites, sons or descendants of Heth, the second son of 
Cfmaan (Gen. x. 15), who iu Abraham's time dwelt in and around Hebron (Gen. xxvi. 
34), in Moses', along with the Amorites and Jebnsites, occupied the mountains^ of 
Judah and Ephraim (Numb. xiii. 29), and in Solomon's, resided north of Palestine 
(1 Kings ix. 20 ; x. 29 ; xi. 1 ; 2 Kings vii. 6). Identified with the Cheta of the 
Egyptian monuments (Ebers, ' Egypt and tlie Books of Moses,' pp. 285, 286), and the 
Chatti of the cuneiform inscriptions (Schrader, 'Die Keilinschriiten,' p. 107, etc.), they 
have finally been discovered by Sayce ('Fresh Light from the Ancient Monuments,' 
p. 5) and Brugsch (' Egypt,' etc., i. 338) to be a large and powerful nation " whose 
two chief seats were at Kadesh on the Orontes, and Carchemish on the Euphrates." 
Ebers and Schrader doubt whether the northern belonged to the same family as the 
southern Hittites; but evidence tends to the conclusion that they did. "That the 
Hittites formed part of the Hyksos forces, and that some of them, instead of entering 
Egypt; remained behind in Southern Canaan," is confirmed by the statement of Manetho, 
thlit Jerusalem was founded by the Hyksos after their expulsion from Egypt, and by 
that of Ezekiel (xvi. 3) that Jerusalem had a Hittite mother (Sayce). Traces of thefr 
existence have been left in two places in Palestine — in Eattin, the old Caphar Hittai of 
the Talmud, above the Sea of GaUlee ; and in Kefr Hatta, north of Jerusalem (Conder, 
' Handbook to the Bible,' p. 235). (2) The Amorites. Mountaineers, as the nun« 
imports, found on both sides of the Jordan, from north tosouth of Palestine, thoogh 
their principal habitat was the Judsean mountains (Gen. xiv. 13, 17, 24 ; Numb. mIL 
30 ; Josh. X. S\. they were among the most; powerful of the ancient Canaanitish tribes. 



102 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHKONICLES. [ch. vih. 1— IK 

Mamre, an Amorite chieftain, with two brothers, was confederate with Abraham 
(Gen.xiv. 13). (3) The Perizzites. Either highlandeis or dwellers in the hills and 
woods of Palestine (Josephus), or rustics living in the open country and in villages, as 
opposed to the Oanaanites, who occupied walled towns (Kalisch) — if they were not, 
rather, a tribe of wandering nomads whose origin is lost in obscurity (Keil) — they were 
found by Abraham in the centre of Palestine (Gen. xiii. 7), and by Joshua in Lower 
Galilee (Josh. xvii. 15). A trace of them has been found in the present villnge of 
Perasin, north-west of Sheohem (Conder, ' Handbook to the Bible,' p. 235). (4) The 
Hivites. Translated " villager " (Gesenius), or " midlander " (Ewald), the one of which 
renderings is as good as the other, since both are conjectural, the Hivite is first heard 
of in the time of Jacob as a settler near Shechem (Gen. xxxiv. 2), and afterwards in 
Joshua's day further south at Gibeon (Josh. ix. 1, 7), though Hermon, in the land of 
Mizpeh (Josh. xi. 3), and Mount Lebanon (Judg. iii. 3) were probably their principal 
abodes. (5) Jebusites. A primitive branch of the Oanaanites, who held the country 
round Jerusalem as far down as the time of David (2 Sam. v. 6, 7). At the peiiod of 
the conquest their king was Adonibezek, or " Lord of righteousness " (Josh. x. 1). 2. 
Their condition. Practically bond-servants, paying tribute to Solomon, they had no 
part in the civil commonwealth or religious theocracy of Israel. They illustrate the 
relation in which the world's inhabitants stand to the Church. Those have no share 
in this ; yet to this, against their will, they pay tribute and render important service- 
compelled, not by Christians, but by the King of Christians, who maketh all things on 
earth subserve the Church according to the counsel of his will (Eph. 1. 11, 22 ; Dan. vii. 
14). 3. Their occupation. The working-class population of those days, the artisans 
and labourers, Solomon employed them in the construction of his temple, palaces, and 
cities, just as the Pharaohs of former times had employed the progenitors of his people 
in making bricks and erecting store cities in the land of Ham (Bxod. i. 11). It was the 
custom then and long after to subject prisoners of war and the populations of conquered 
territories to servile work. Thothmes III. of Egypt carried labourers saptive to build 
the temple of his father Amon (Wilkinson, ' Ancient Egyptians,' i. 344 : 1878). The 
employment of foreign captives in such tasks was an ancient practice in Egypt 
(Brugsoh, ' Egypt,' etc., i. 417). An inscription of Esarhaddon states that the custom 
prevailed in Assyria, he himself saying of his captives from foreign lands, " I caused 
crowds of them to work in letters in making brick " (' Records of the Past,' iii. 120). 
Not even Solomon, and far less the Pharaohs of Egypt or the kings of Assyria, were 
acquainted with the golden rule. 

II. Israelites. 1. Their ancestry. Descendants of the twelve tribes, whose heads 
were the sons of Israel, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham, their ancestry was 
honoured as well as ancient. 2. Their industry. The warriors of the kingdom, they 
did the fighting needful for the empire's protection and extension. Judged by the 
Christian standard, war is always an evil and often a sin ; but in certain stages of 
civilization it appears to be inevitable, if neither necessary nor excusable. 3. Their 
dignity. Prom them were chosen the officers of the king's army, the captains of his 
chariots and of his horsennn, the chiefs of his ofBcers, and the superintendents of his 
workmen (1 Kings ix. 22). 

Lessons. 1. The sin of slavery, 2. The dignity of labour. 3. The nobility of 
free men. — W. 

Ver. 11. — The consort of a king. I. The queen's person. The daughter of Pharaoh. 
As to which Pharaoh, see homily on vers. 1 — 6. If the Song of Solomon was an 
epithalamium in honour of his wedding with this lady, her personal attractions, after 
making allowances for the rhapsody peculiar to a lover and the luxuriance of fancy 
characteristic of an Oriental, must have been considerable (Cant. L 8, 10; iv. 1 — 7; 
vii. 1—9). 

II. The queen's chakacteb. A heathen. However charming externally, there is 
no reason why her inward graces may not have been attractive. Like Egyptian ladies 
of rank, 8h« would probably be skilled in needlework, perhaps also in using the spindle 
and in weaving. But still she was not acquainted with the true religion, being • 
worshipper of the gid Ea, and the nther divinities that claimed the homage of her 
countrymen^ rather than of Jehovah the one living and true God. Physical loveliness 



OB. vni. 1— 18.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE OHKONICLES. 103 

may be a precious gift of Heaven, and moral sweetness desirable in one who is to be a 
wife; but notliing can compensate for the absence of religion. " Favour is deceitful," 
etc. (Pniv. xxxi. 30). 

III. The queen's wedding. 1. Celebrated early in the hing\ reign (1 Kings iii. 1), 
and doubtless with becoming splendour. It is not good for princes any more than for 
peasants to be alone, and " he that findeth a wife " (provided she be a woman that 
feareih the Lord) "findeth a good thing" (Prov. xviii. 22). 2. Politically advantageoua 
for the state, though this is questionable. Israel required no buttress, either from 
Egypt or Assyria, so Ions as she remained true to Jehovah (Isa. xxx. 3 ; Jer. ii. 18 ; 
xlii. 19). In any case, neither political expedience nor social convenience is a proper 
motive for contracting marriage, which should always be inspired by love between the 
parties (Eph. v. 25 — 28). 3. Possibly against the Law of Ood. On the one hand, it is 
argued (Keil, Bahr) (1) that the Mosaic statute (Exod. xxxiv. 16 ; Deut. vii. 3) pro- 
hibited only marriage with Canaanitish women ; (2) that not prohibiting, it may bo 
understood to have allowed, alliance with Egyptian maidens; (3) that such marriages 
were contemplated by Moses as possible (Deut. xxiii. 7, 8) ; (4) that Pharaoh's daughter 
may have become a proselyte to the Jewish relij^ion ; and (5) that the marriage is 
nowhere in Scripture explicitly condemned. On the other hand, it is contended (Adam 
Clarke) (1) that the principle of the law which forbade marriage with a Canaanitish 
maiden applied equally to an Egyptian princess, inasmuch as both were foreign or 
outlandish women ; (2) that Pharaoh's daughter is classed with the outlandish women 
who caused Solomon to sin (1 Kings xi. 1 ; Neh. xiii. 26) ; and (3) that there is no 
proof that Pharaoh's daughter was a proselyte. The affirmative, however, of this last 
assertion is supposed to be justified by the following considerations: (1) That Solomon, at 
the commencement of his reign, would hardly have married Pharaoh's daughter had she 
not been a proselyte, he being at the time a lover of Jehovah and an observer of his 
ways ; (2) that Pharaoh's daughter is not named in ch. xi. among the king's wives who 
seduced their husband into idolatry ; (3) that there is not a trace of Egyptian worship 
to be found in Israel during this reign ; and (4) that the Song of Solomon and the forty- 
fifth psalm would not have been composed in honour of her wedding, and far less admitted 
to the canon, had she been an idolatress. But none of these is convincing. (1) Solomon 
had already an Ammonite wife— Naamah, the mother of Rehoboam (ct. 1 Kings xi. 42 
with xiv. 'zl and oh. xii. 13) : was she a proselyte ? (2) Ch. xi. is regarded by some as 
placing Pharaoh's daughter among the outlandish women who catised Solomon to sin. 
(3) Egyptian idolatry may have been -practised in the queen's house, though not in the 
land ; and (4) it is not certain that either the song or the psalm was written in honour 
of this lady. To these may be added (5) that, had she been a proselyte, Solomon 
would not have needed to exclude her from the stronghold of Zion where the ark was, 
and (6) that Pharaoh's daughter was certainly an outlandish woman. 4. Extremely 
unadvised on Solomon's part. It led to his decline into idolatry, if not directly yet 
indirectly, by hading him to add more wives and concubines to his harem. 

IV. The queen's residence. 1. In a separate house in the city of David. On her 
wedding, Solomon did not bring her into his father's palace where himself resided — 
though some hold he did (Berth eau)— but lodged herin a temporary dwelling (Keil, Bahr), 
assigning as a reason that the rooms of the royal palace had been consecrated and 
rendered holy by the presence of the ark of Jehovah, and meaning thereby that to 
have introduced into them an Egyptian queen, even though a proselyte, with probably 
an establishment of heathen maids, would have been, to say the least, an impropriety. 
The fact that Solomon could not lodge his wife in his father's house should have made 
him hesitate as to his marriage. That matrimonial alliance must be doubtful the con- 
templation of which leads one to apprehend the Divine displeasure, or which one sees 
to be incongruous with right religious feeling. 2. In a house contiguous to Solomon s 
palace. This house, speciallv prepared for her, not for a harem (Thenius), fomed part 
of Solomon's own dwelling (1 Kings vii. 8), being situated either behind (Winer) or 
above (Keil), or perhaps at the side of it. ,, „ ,r„ j . ^ j,- ■ 

Lessons. 1. Marriage is honourable in all (Heb. xin. 4). 2. The duty of wedding only 
In the Lord (1 Cor. vii. 39). 3. The sin of polygamy. 4. The obligation of husbands to 
maintain their wives. — W. 



104 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHEONICLES. [oh. viii. 1—18. 

Vers. 12 — 16. — The house of the Lord perfected. I. The sacrifices abbangbd. (Vers. 
12, 13.) 1. The place on which these should henceforth he offered. " The altar of Jehovah 
before the porch. Hitherto Solomon and others had presented burnt offerings before 
the tabernacle at Gibeon (ch. i. 3) and elsewhere (2 Sam. vi. 13). Henceforth these 
ghould be laid upon the brazen altar in the temple court. Solomon's doing so at the close 
of the dedication service was a formal inauguration of the practice meant to be followed. 
2. The timss when these should he offered. (1) Every day — in the morning and evemng 
sacrifice. So God demands the devotions and spiritual sacrifices of his people at early 
morn and dewy eve. (2) At special seasons — on the sabbaths, the weekly sabbaths and 
those occurring in the midst of festivals, as on the great Day of Atonement (Lev. xvi. 
31), and on the first and eighth days of the Feast of Ingathering (Lev. xxiii. 39) ; on the 
new moons (1 Sam. xx. 5, 18 ; 2 Kings iv. 23 ; Ps. Ixxxi. 3 ; Isa. i. 13, 14 ; Ixvi. 26) ; 
and on the solemn feasts three times a year, i.e. the Passover, on the fourteenth day of tlie 
first month ; the Feast of Harvest, or of the Firstfruits, in the beginning of harvest ; and 
the Feast of Ingathering, or the Feast of Tabernacles, on the fifteenth day of the seventh 
month (Exod. xxiii. 14—16 ; Lev. xxiii. 4 — 44). Other times might be chosen by the 
worshippper ; these the worshipper was not at liberty to neglect. Under Christianity 
there is an irreducible minimum beneath which one cannot go in serving God and yet 
claim to be a disciple. 3. The measure according to which these should be offered. Accord- 
ing to the daily rate prescribed by Moses (Exod. xxiii. 14 ; Lev. xxiii. 37 ; Deut. xvi. 
16, 17). Though Solomon had been honoured to erect a temple, he did not feel himself 
at liberty to propound a new ritual, and far less to institute a new religion. For him, 
as for all before and after, until the fulness of the times, Moses was the sole authority 
in doctrine and in worship. Since the fulness of the times, Christ, the greater than 
Moses, is ; and will-worship (Col. ii. 23) is as little permissible under the new dispensa- 
tion as it was under the oiii. 

IL The priestly courses appointed. (Ver. 14.) 1. The pattern followed. The 
order of David (1 Chron. xxiv.). Whether, in thus arranging the priesthood, David acted 
under Divine direction or not, is not material. This detail could safely be left to sanctified 
prudence; and David, in effecting it, only showed his sagacity in knowing how to get a 
difBcult work performed with ease and efficiency, as well as his regard for order and 
decorum in all things pertaining to the sanctuary. Solomon, in following David's example 
instead of resorting to new experiments, approved himself wise. 2. The nuniber of the 
courses. Twenty-four (1 Chron. xxiv. 1 — 19). When these were arranged by David, 
twenty-four chief men were found who claimed descent from the house of Aaron. Of 
these, sixteen belonged to the sons of Eleazar, and eight to the sons of Ithamar. Conse- 
quently, these were selected as the heads of the several courses, their order of succession 
being determined by lot — ^to avoid all ground of complaint on the score of favouritism , and 
to lend the sanction of Divine authority to the order so established (Prov. xvi. 33). As 
this arrangement was made in David's old age, and not after the Exile by another than 
David (De Wette, Herzfeld), it is probable that few important alterations required to be 
made. 3. 2%« nature of their services. To conduct the sacrificial worship of the nation. 
The Christian Church has only one Priest, who, having once for all offered himself a 
Sacrifice for sin, and having passed within the veil with his own blood, there to appear 
in the presence of God for us, has been consecrated for evermore (Heb. vii. 28 ; ix. 11, 
12 ; X. 10). 

HI. The Lbvitbs insteuoted. (Ver. 14.) I. ITieir courses. Three — the Gershonites, 
the Kohathites, the Merarites, according to the three great families of the sons of Levi ; 
the first two consisting of nine, and the third of six, the three of twenty-four fathers' 
houses. Hence their courses were probably, like those of the priests', twenty-four in 
number (Josephus, * Ant.,' vii. 14, 7). 2. Their charges. To praise and minister before 
the priests, as the duty of every day required. They were no longer needed to carry the 
tabernacle or any of its vessels for the service thereof, seeing that Jehovah had given 
rest unto his people, that they might dwell in Jerusalem for ever (1 Chron. xxiii. 24 — 
32; XXV. 1—6). 

IV. The porters stationed. (Ver. 14.) 1. Their courses. Twenty-four. At least 
twenty-four men are mentioned as keeping daily guard at the temple gates (1 Chron. 
zxvi. 13 — 19) ; and these, it is conjectured, were the heads of twenty-four divisions. 
2. Their stations. " At every gate." Every day were planted at the east gate six 



OH. VIII. 1—18.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. lOE 

men; at the north, four; at the south, four; at the storehouBes in the vicinity of the 
south gate, two and two, i.e. four ; at Parbar towards the west, six ; in all, twenty-four 
■t the different gates (1 Chron. xxvi. 17, 18). 3. Their work. To keep the gates- 
esteemed an honourable service, and called ministering in the house of the Lord (1 
Chron. xxvi. 12 ; cf. Ps. Ixxxiv. 10). 

Lessons. 1. The necessity and beauty of order in Divine worship. 2. The diversity 
of offices and gifts in the Church of God. 3. The dignity of even the humblest service 
in connection with religion. — W. 

Vers. 17, 18. — The first merchant-shipt. I. To whom they belonged. 1. Solomon — 
who constructed a navy of ships (1 Kings ix. 26). The first mention of ship-building 
by the Israelites. An advance in civilization, it is doubtful whether this was in 
harmony with the calling of the Israelites as a theocratic people, whose business it was 
to keep themselves distinct from other nations. 2. Eiram — who sent the Israelitish 
monarch ships by the hands of his servants. Either Hiram sent to Bloth ship-carpenters, 
who built ships for Solomon (Bahr), or he built ships at Tyre, and sent them by the 
bauds of sailors to join in Solomon's expedition (Bertheau). If the latter, they must 
either have rounded the continent of Africa (Bertheau), or been carried by land transport 
across the Isthmus of Suez (Keil). The former would not have been impossible had 
the circumnavigation of Africa been at that time known. This, however, is doubtful, as 
Herodotus (iv. 42) mentions Pharaoh Necho of the twenty-sixth dynasty (b.o. 612) as 
the first to prove that Africa was entirely surrounded by water, with the exception of 
the small isthmus connecting it with Asia. This he did by sending Phcenician seamen 
in ships from the Arabian Gulf to seek their way to Egypt through the Pillars of 
Hercules and the Mediterranean Sea. Hence the latter method was more probably 
adopted for conveying Hiram's ships to the Gulf of Arabia — a method of transporting 
vessels known to the ancients. Herodotus (vii. 24) states that, while Xerxes cut a 
passage through the Isthmus of Mount Athos, he need not have done so, since without 
difficulty he might have carried his ships across the land. Thuoydides (iv. 8) mentions 
that in this way the Peloponnesians conveyed eighty ships across the Leucadian 
isthmus. (For additional examples, see Exposition.) 

II. The pobt whence they sailed. 1. Ezion-geber, a camping-station on the 
desert march of Israel (Numb, xxxiii. 35; Deut. ii. 8); afterwards the place where 
Jehoshaphat's ships were wrecked (1 Kings xxii. 48). When the town was built is 
unknown. Its name imports "the backbone of a man" (Gesenius); the Greeks 
called it Berenice (Josephus, ' Ant.,' viii. 6. 4). 2. Near Moth, the Ailan^ of Josephus, 
the Ailath of the Greeks, and the Blana of the Romans, the modern Akaba, on the eastern 
bay of the Gulf of Akabah. Whether Ezion-geber was also on the east side of the gulf 
or on the west is uncertain, as no trace of it now exists. 3. On the shore of the Bed 
Sea. The Yam Suf visa the eastern arm of the Arabian Gulf, or the Gulf of Akabah. 
At the present day navigation is perilous in the vicinity of Elath in consequence of the 
sharp and rocky coast and the easily excited storms. 4. In the land of Edom. Mount 
Seir, Edom, Idumsea, the Mount of Esau (Deut. ii. 5; Joel iii. 19; Isa. xxiv. 6; Ohad. 
21) ; in the Assyrian inscriptions, Udumu or CW«7?ii(Schrader, ' Die Keilinschriften,' p. 
149); a desolate region extending from the head of the Elanitic Gulf to the foot of the 
Dead Sea, described by Robinson as "a rolling desert, the surface [of which] was in 
general loose gravel and stones, everywhere furrowed and torn with the beds of torrents 
. . . now and then a lone shrub of the ghddfih [being] almost the only trace of vegeta- 
tion " (' Biblical Researches,' ii. 602, 551). 

III. The sAiLOKS by whom they weeb makned. Servants of Hiram, who had 
knowledge of the sea. The Phoenicians the earliest navigators of the ocean. An 
inscription of Queen Hatasu, of the eighteenth Egyptian dynasty, queen regnaat first 
with Thothmes II. and afterwards with Thothmes III., has presei-ved a record of th« 
construction by that royal lady of a navy on the Red Sea, and of a voyage of discovery 
to the land of Arabia in vessels manned by Phoenician seamen (Brugsoh, ' Egypt,' L 851, 
etc.; 'Reoordsof the Past,' X. 11, etc.). 

IV. The codntby to which they stebbeb. Ophir. By eminent authoritiei 
(Lassen, Bitter, Bertheau) located in India, this gold-producing region was probably in 
Arabia (Knohel, Keil, Bwald, Bahr) — the land of Pun, to which the ships of Hatam 
•ailed for costly treasures. 



106 



THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. ix. 1—31. 



V. The oaego with which thbt bbtttbnbd. 1. Oold. Whether the four hundred 
»nd fifty talents w^re the cargo of one voyage or of all the voyages cannot he determined. 
Beckoning a talent at £5475 sterling, the amount would he £2,463,750, or nearly two 
and a half millions. This precious metal was amongst the treasures fetched from the 
land of Pun hy Hatasu's fleet. 2. Precious stones. Learnt from a later statement (ch. 
ix. 10). These also were ohtainahle in the land of Pun. 3. Algum trees. (Ch. ix. 10). 
What these were is unknown ; prohably they corresponded with the balsam-wood or 
" incense trees " brought from Pun by Hatasu's ships. It was manifestly rare and costly, 
as Solomon made of it " terraces to the house of the Lord and the king's palace, as well 
as harps and psalteries for singers;" "and there were none such seen before in the 
land of Judah." So said Hatasu's scribes of her cargo. " Never has such a convoy 
[been made] like this one by any king since the creation of the world." 

Learn : 1. Man's dominion over nature — he can affront the perils of the sea. 2. The 
advantages (from a secular point of view) of navigation — in increasing the world's 
wealth and comfort, in extending man's knowledge and power, and in binding the nations 
into a mutually dependent and helpful brotherhood. 3. The dangers (from a spiritual 
point of view) of foreign exploration, in fostering the lust of conquest and possession, 
and in bringing God's people into contact with heathen nations. — W. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTEE IX. 
The writer is about to take his leave of 
Solomon and the glowing memories of iiis 
golden reign; and, whether he designed it 
or not, he has done so in a most dramatically 
snccessful manner in this chapter, and 
especially in the episode, that narrates the 
ever-memorable visit of the Queen of Sheba, 
contained in the first twelve verses of this 
chapter )parallel, 1 Kings x. 1 — 13). 

Ver. 1. — The parallel shows very little 
variation oa this narrative. In its first 
verse it adds the words (Authorized Version), 
"concerning the Name of the Lord" (i.e. 
" to the glory of God "), after the words, the 
fame of Solomon, Sheba. This was the name 
of a descendant of Gush, a Hamite (Gen. x. 
7 ; 1 Chron. i. 9) ; also of a son of Joktan, a 
8hemJte(Gen. x. 28; 1 Chron. i. 22); also 
of a son of Jolishan, Abraham's sou by 
Keturah (Gen. xxv. 3 ; 1 Chion. i. 32). It 
ia quite uncertain who of these constituted, 
or preponderated in, the country of Sheba 
here referred to. This is probably Saba, the 
capital of Yemen, an important province of 
Arabia, west of the Bed Sea, north of the 
Indian Ocean, and extending upward nearly 
to Idumsea. The city was reputed splendid, 
the country wealthy, and long as the most 
southerly inhabited part of the world. If it 
were, as is believed, first occupied by Cushites, 
It was afterwards peopled also by Joktanites 
and Jokahanites, as above. In addition to 
the two celebrated allusions to it, ever memo- 
rable, see as other references, Job vl. 19 ; Ps. 
Ixxii. 10, 15 ; Isa. Ix. 6 ; Jer. vi. 20 ; Ezek. 
xxvii. 22, 23; xxxviii. 13; Matt. xii. 42; 



Luke xi. 31 (see also Smith's 'Bible Dic- 
tionary,' iiL 1232). The hard qnestions con- 
sisted in riddles (Judg. xiv. 2) and enigmas 
and primitive casuistry, in which the Arabians 
found some considerable portion of their 
mental gymnastics. These, no doubt, bore 
some mild cousinly relationship to the pro- 
verbs and songs of Solomon, and his treasures 
of botanical and natural history facts (1 Kings 
iv. 29 — 32). Spices; Hebrew, D'pwa, here as 
also in the parallel. This word is used twenty- 
one times, and in a slightly varied form (as 
in the ninth verse of this same chapter) nine 
more times. It is almost always translated 
(Authorized Version) by this same word 
" spice " or " spices " (except Exod. xxx. 23 ; 
ch. xvi. 14 ; Esth. ii. 12 ; Isa. iii. 24). There 
are other Hebrew words for " spices," such 
as ni33 (Gen. xxxvii. 25; xliii. 11), d'DO 
(Exod.' xxx. 7), npn (Cant. viii. 2; Ezet 
xxiy. 10); but the "spice" or "spices" 
designated by our present word, and the 
exact name or nature of which cannot be 
certainly pronounced upon, was in great re- 
quest for domestic, ecclesiastical, funeral (ch. 
xvi. 14), and other purposes, and was a chief 
export from Arabia, Syria, and Persia. Gold 
in abundance. Of course, it is not neces- 
sary to suppose tliat the gold that came 
either now from Sheba, or even from Ophir, 
was obtained from the immediate region ; as 
seen before, there may have been a special 
market or emporium for them there. Precious 
stones. These were used for sacred pur- 
poses, and for domestic and dress ornaments, 
and were graven upon in early tunes by the 
Hebrews. The chief of those mentioned in 
the Old Testament are the carbuncle, sardiua, 
topaz (Exod. xxxix. 10; Ezek. xxviii. 13X 
diamond, emerald, sapphire (Exod. xxxix. 



CH. IX. 1—31.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



107 



11 ; Ezek. xxvM. 13), agate, amethyBt, ligure 
(Exod. xxxix. 12), beryl, jasper, onyx (Gen. 
ii. 12; Exod. xxxix. 6, 13; Ezek. xxyiii. 
13), ruby (Job xxviii. 18; Prov. iii. 15), 
chrysolite, chryeopraBna (Ezek. xxviii. 13). 
The precious stones which the queen brought 
ue likely enough, however, to have comprised 
other varieties (including the pearl from the 
Persian GtUf), such as Pliuy describes ; and 
see in particular 1 Chron. xxix. 2; Ezek. 
xxvii. 16 ; and the ait. " Stones, Precious," 
in Smith's ' Bible Dictionary,' iii. 1382. AU 
that was in her heart. The exprtssion bimply 
means all that she liad so desired to get in- 
formation upun, since she had heard of the 
fame of Solomon. 

Ver. 2.— Nothing hid from Solomon; i.e. 
nothing obscure to him — ^no question too 
knotty for Solomon. 

Ver. 4. — The meat of his table (see 1 
Kings iv. 22, 23). Translating our thoughts 
rather violently into modern language, we 
might picture the queen inspecting the 
kitchens of the palace, and remember that 
the kitchens of an Oriental court did the 
work, not of an individual "table," but of 
those of a very large domestic and official re- 
tinue ; much more these of Solomon now. Keil 
and Bertheau, however, with others, refer this 
expression to the set-out of one meal-table 
(as e.g. that of a modem banquet, wedding 
breakfast, or the like), where both the 
abounding lading of the table and tlie ample 
variety of tlie courses, and the rich foreign 
or home fruits, in season or out of season, 
and the furnishing and decorating of (he table, 
all come in to add their contribution of effect ; 
and tliey quote not inaptly our ver. 20, 
elucidated by 1 Kings x. 21. This was a 
daily glory with Solomon's palace-establish- 
ment. The immediate connection and the 
contents of this verse, though difBcult, favour 
this direction of explanation, as will be seen 
in the succeeding clauses. Ihe sitting of his 
servants. The word here used (a^'iD) occurs 
forty-three times, and is rendered in the 
Authorized Version thirty-two of these times 
as "habitation" or "dwelling." Of the 
remaining eleven times, one or other of those 
•words would be almost the synonym of the 
word used, and in every case the rendering 
" dwelling," if kept to the general idea of 
a dwelling or restins-place more or less 
temporary, would not be inappropriate or in- 
consistent with the evident drift of the con- 
nection; only here and in the parallel is the 
inconvenient rendering "sitting" adopted 
by the Authorized Version. Hence we dis- 
agree with Professor Dr. Murphy's explana- 
tion, the sitting, i.e. " in council of his chief 
ofScera " What the nature of the location 
(to use a term least specific) of the servants 
pointed to here is, nevertheless, still not 
quite clear. It is evidently placed in some 



antithesis with the Handing (i.e. the stand- 
ing-place) here rendered inadequately or 
incorrectly, the attendance of his ministers. 
Tlie attendance, i.e. " the station (IBJJD) (see 
the four other occurrences of this word ; 
1 Kings X. 5 ; 1 Chron. xxiii. 28 ; ch. xxxv. 
15; Isa. xxii. 19). 0/ Ms m?m«iers; Hebrew, 
Vljl^'p, piirticiple of a piel verb, rrw. This 
word, in an amazing majority of the hundred 
occurrences of it, expresses ministry of sacred 
service of some kind. It may, indeed, be 
said that the present passage, with only one 
or two others, are doubtful in this meaning 
or character of explanation. To our next 
clause, referring to their apparel, we find in 
the parallel mention, as here, of the cup- 
bearers, tliough the matter of (heir apparel 
is not included as it is here. Part of the 
difficulty of the verse arises from the con- 
sideration that up to this point the contents 
of the successive clauses of it may compose 
possibly enough a sharp graphic description 
of the daily banquet scene. An apt refer- 
ence to similar description of Arabian ban- 
quets is given in the ' Speaker's Commentary ' 
as to be found in vol. ii. pp. 213 — 215 of 
'Ancient Monarchies.' Our next clause, 
however, brings us back into difficulty by its 
reference to Solomon's ascent by which he 
went up into the house of the Lord (1 Chron. 
xxvi. 16 with our Exposition, ' Pulpit Com. 
mentary '), apparently so unseasonably ; nor 
are we much helped by reading, with (he 
Septuagint, "the burnt offerings which he 
offered at the house of the Lord." The 
obscurity and lack of coherence are not 
formidable, indeed, and perhaps may be 
with moderate satisfaction set down again to 
the account of the occasionally careless selec- 
tion of the compilers from the material of 
the older work. Possibly the allusion in our 
ver. 11 to the terraces, or stairs, or highways 
(see margin) to "the house of the Loril,'' 
and to the king's palace, may hold some clue 
to the ascent being adverted to here. 

Ver. 8. — The abstinence on the part of the 
queen in her mention of the Lord God of 
Israel, and of the lord thy God, of any in- 
dication of a desire that he should become 
her God, is as suggestive as it is noticeable 
(compare Hiram's language in ch. ii. 12). 

Ver. 9. — An hundred and twenty talenti 
of gold. Putting the value of gold at £4 per 
ounce, the value of one talent would be 
£5476, making a total of £657,120. Poole 
makes it £1,250,000; S. Clarke, £720,000. 
From our vers. 13, 14 we learn that in one year 
Solomon received 666 talents, beside what 
merchants brought. Any such spice. The 
parallel has "no more such abundance of 
spices," and "of spices very great store." 
The Arabian spices, and their land and even 
sea borne fragrance, as also the very lucra- 
tive trade they created, are often alluded to 



108 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CUEONICLES. [oh. ix. 1—31. 



by historians (see, among many others, 
Herod., iii. 113; Diod., iii.46; Strabo, Kvi.4, 
§ 19). Much of all this so-termed giving was 
evidently matter of exchange. The queen 
got quid pro quo, while ver. 13 of the parallel 
(1 Kings X.) seems to speak of the other 
truer giving. 

Verd. 10, 11. — Either these two verses are 
misplaced (with their parallel, 1 Kings x. 11, 
12), or they ought to have, though unstated, 
some occult bearing on the queen. There 
are some slight indications pointing to this, 
and the meaning is perhaps that the terraces, 
balustrades, stairs (which possibly is the 
idea in the "ascent," ver. 4), pillars, etc., 
made of the wood which Hiram's and Solo- 
mon's servants had formerly brought with 
gold, were the artificial- work wonders which 
helped to astound the queen. Terraces to 
the house of the Lord, and to the king's 
palace. These so rendered terraces were 
probably stairs, and, as already intimated, 
may have composed the " asoeut " (ver. 4), 
and explain the mention of it in ver. 4. The 
algum trees. This is the Hebrew text order 
of the lamed and gimel alphabet characters, 
as the Authorized Version order in the 
paiallel almug is also the order of its 
Hebrew. The tree is mentioned only six 
times — three times in Chronicles (oh. ii. 8 ; 
ix. 10, 11) and three times in Kings (1 Kings 
X. 11, 12). Apparently this wood did grow 
in Lebanon (ch. ii. 8), though we think this 
not certain. Kimchi thinks it was the buk- 
kum (Arabic word), which Europeans call 
Brazil wood, and which (KeU) was found in 
Ethiopia, as well as India. Some think it 
the Ban(b.l-wood of Malabar. Wljatever it 
was, it no doubt was to be purchased at the 
emporium of Ophir. The intrinsic nature 
of the wood, and its intrinsically valuable 
nature, may easily be inferred from its use 
for the woodwork and sounding-board wood- 
work of musical instruments like the harp 
and psaltery. This fact would much incline 
to the view that the red sandal-wood is what 
is here called algum. The ' Speaker's Com- 
njentary ' quotes Max MuUer (' Lectures on 
Language,' 1st series, p. 191) for the state- 
ment that the vernacular for this wood in 
India is valguka. Harps . . . psalteries (see 
our Exposition on ch. v. 12, and articles in 
Smith's ' Dictionary of the Bible,' and others. 
The sentence, there were none such seen in 
the land of Judah, may be read as an indica- 
tion that they had been part of the exhibition 
made to the Queen of Sheba. 

Ver. 12.— Beside that which she had 
brought unto the king. The parallel has 
not this obscure clause, but has, "beside 
that which Solomon gave her of his royal 
bounty." Professor Dr. Murphy explains our 
clause as purporting to say this: Solomon 
KHve all the queen's desire in the way of 



bounty, "beside" all th»t belonged as an 
equivalent for "what she had brought." 
She got so much sheer gift, beside all that, 
according to the then Eastern custom, was 
her due. 

Ver. 14.— Beside, eto. The preposition 
(|3) left both here and in the parallel, 
before the words " men of," etc., in the com- 
pound English word chapmen (Authorized 
Version), shows clearly the construction of 
this and the following sentence; from the 
previous verse needs to come the words, after 
our "beside," "the weight of gold which 
came," eto. This gold probably came by 
way of tax payments from the merchant 
travellers, and as tribute money from the 
kings of the part of Arabia where the blood 
was mingled, Jewish and Arabian, and uot 
exclusively and independently Arabian (see 
the word used in place of our Arabian in 
the parallel, and Jer. xxv. 24), and from 
those governors (perhaps in some cases super- 
seding older kings) of adjacent countries, 
that had become in some part tributary to 
Solomon. Governors. For this unusual and 
un-Hebrewword (nins), see Ezra v. 6; Efag. 
i. 1 ; Neh. v. 14. Geseniua mentions Turkish, 
Persian, and Sanscrit derivations that would 
well suit it. It is very noticeable that it is 
employed also by the writer of Kin^s. It is 
used of a ruler in the Assyrian empire (2 
Kings xviii. 24 ; Isa. xxxvi. 9), in the Chal- 
dean (Ezek. xxiii. 6, 23 ; Jer. Ii. 23), in the 
Persian (Esth. viii. 9; ix. 3), specially of 
the Persian governor of Judaea (Hag. i. 1, 
14; u. 2,21; Neh. v. 14, 18: xii. 26; Mai. 
i. 8); while Gesenius reads tliis passage in 
our present text and its parallel, to speak 
of governors of Judsea (the country). See 
also 1 Kings xx. 24, where the word is trans- 
lated (Authorized Version) " captains," and 
is in the Syrian king's mouth. The word 
is not used before Kings. It is used by the 
writer of Kings three times ; of Chronicles, 
once; by Ezra, six times; in Neheraiah, 
eight times ; in Esther, (iree times ; in 
Daniel, four times; and in the remaining 
prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Hag»ai, 
Malaohi, ten times in alL The Authorized 
Version, out of the whole number of these 
occurrences of the word, has rendered it 
"captains "thirteen times; "deputies," twice; 
and " governors," twenty times. 

Vers. 15, 16. — Targets . . . shields. The 
Authorized Version " target " is unfortunate, 
though it may with somewhat grim truth 
represent fact. It was a very lai^ solid 
shield, originally made of some common 
material, as basketwork or wood, and covered 
with leather; thete with a plate of gold. 
The absence of the word " shekel " in each 
clause, both here and in Kings, leaves it open 
to us to suppose that the heha, or half- 
shekel, may be the riglit word. Now, th« 



CH. IX. 1—31.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHEONIGLES. 



109 



maneh (see 1 Kings x. 17), or pound, meant 
100 bekas, i.e. 50 shekels. Thus the targets, 
■jt shields, had sis manehs of gold to their 
plating each, and the lesser buehlers (as we 
may perhaps call them) three manehs each. 
On the estimate that the shekel weighed 
9 dwt. 3 gr., since the maneh weighed fifty 
shekels (100 hekas, or half-shekels), the gold 
to a shield (target) may be put at something 
over 11 lbs. troy. The honse of the forest of 
Lebanon ; t.e. an armoury (see 1 Kings vii. 
2 — 5 ; 2 Sam. viii. 7 ; Cant. iv. 4 ; Isa. xxii. 
8). Shishak took these when he conquered 
Jerusalem (1 Kings xiv. 26). 

Vers. 17 — 19. — It Is not necessary to sup- 
pose that the throne was made of solid ivory 
(Ps. xlv. 9 ; Amos iii. 15 ; vi. 4), or that the 
overlaying gold concealed the ivory, whether 
more or less of it. The parallel adds that 
"the top of tlie throne was round behind" 
(1 Kings X. 19). Comparing also tlie two 
accounts, it woidd appear that there were 
twelve lions on each side of the throne, i.e. 
two to each step. When it is said that there 
were two lions standing by the stays (or, 
arms) on each side of the sitting-place, we 
may easily imagine, from ancient modelled 
thrones, that of them the arms were them- 
selves " no small part." It is remarkable that 
the parallel does not take cognizance of the 
footstool. Tlie lion is, of course, as natural a 
symbol as it is an old one of sovereign power 
and place ; and the use of the lion and the 
number of them, reminding of the tribes 
of Israel, were specifically justified to the 
people, whose oracles contained such words 
as those in Gen. xlix. 9 ; Numb, xxiii. 24 ; 
xxiv. 9. Joseph^s tells us that a golden 
bull supported the seat of the throne. If so, 
it is remarkable that the statement should 
be omitted in both of our Old Testament 
narrations. The dimensions of the throne 
we might have looked for, but they are not 
given. That they were well proportioned to 
the height, marked by six steps, may be 
taken for granted. 

Ver. 20. — The house of the forest of leha- 
non. The circumstance of the vessels of 
this house being mentioned in such close 
connection with the drinking-vessels of Solo- 
mon, is another indication of the close con- 
nection of the buildings themselves (1 Kings 
vii. 1, 2 — 5, 6, etc.) ; also that these " vessels 
of the house of the forest of Lebanon " were 
(as may be inferred naturally from the con- 
nection) ' like " Solomon's " drinking-veasela, 
infers the use of the apartments of the house 
for social or, at any rate, state ocoaBions. 

Ver. 21. — To Tarshish. The parallel has, 
in both clauses of its verse (1 Kings x. 22), 
" ships of Tarshish." The order of the words 
in the former clause of our present verse, 
that compels us to read, " going to Tarshish," 
certifies the correct meaning. The word 



" Tarshish " ( the subsequent Tarteanu) 
covered a district in South Spain, as well as 
named a town and river, and stretched oppo- 
site the coast of Africa. Both coasts were 
beneath Phoenician rule, and a voyage to 
Tarshish would most naturally mean calling 
at many a port, and many an African port, 
from one and another of which all the im- 
ports here spoken of would be obtainable. 
The meaning of the Hebrew root of Tarshish 
is " to subjugate." The town lay between the 
two mouths of the river Bsetis, now Guadal- 
quiver. Gcsenius thinks that the writer of 
Chronicles says, in ignorance, " to Tarshish, ' 
and that the ships went to Ophir ! These 
passages do not say that the voyage, what- 
ever it was, took three years; much less that 
that length of time was necessary. Whether 
voyages were in Solomon's time made from 
the Bed Sea, circumnavigating Africa, into 
the Mediterranean, is not certain. If they 
were such voyages, taken at a saimterlng 
pace, with calls at many ports and easy- 
going delays, they may easily have consumed 
as long a space of time as three years 1 The 
theory that Tarshish was Tarsus in Cilicia 
is easily and conclusively negatived. The 
names in Hebrew of " ivory, apes, and pea- 
cooks " have been said to be of Indian origin. 
This is far from proved, and, as regards the 
first two, may be said to be sufBciently dis- 
proved. But if it all were so, still the fact that 
the Hebrew names were of an Indian language 
derivation would go very short way to prove 
that the Hebrew people got the things repre- 
sented by them direct, or at all, from India. 
Ivory; Hebrew, D'iniB'. The Authorized 
Version rendering " ivory " occurs ten times 
in the Old Testament, having for its original 
the Hebrew ]d (1 Kings x. 18; xxii. 39; 
ch. ix. 17; Ps. ilv. 8; Cant. v. 14; vii. 4; 
Bzek. xxvii. 6, 15; Amos iii. 15; vi. 4). In 
all these cases, two of them being in closest 
juxtaposition with the present and its parallel 
occasion, the word speaks of ivory that is 
being used, i.e. as though it were manufac- 
tured material or ready for manufacture. 
But in our passage and its parallel, where 
the diiferent word given above is found, it 
is manifest that it spesiks of the material, so 
to say, in the rough, as just "tooth or tusk 

of ; " but, further, what the d'3T is ia 

not yet ascertained. It is not a word known 
in the Hebrew vocabulary. Gesenius finds 
the Sanscrit ibhat, which signifies an "ele- 
phant;" Canon Eawlinson finds in some 
Assyrian inscriptions a word luMa, used of 
both elephant and camel, but probably bavins 
for its generic signification " a great animal; 
Keil (on the parallel) finds a Coptic word, 
eboy, the Latin elephas, to which he prefixes 
the Hebrew article n. The Targum Jonathan 
shows at once fj'Sp-jt?. Gesenius, in his 



110 



THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. ix. 1—31. 



'Thesaurus,' calls also timely attentlnn to 
Ezek. xxvli. 15, where we read, " They 
brou!!;ht thee a present, horns of Ivory and 
ebony " (Hebrew, Chethiv, QVavj) ; Keri, 
D'ngi ]e? rii3ij3). But no use of " ebony " 
happens to be mentioned in the connection 
of our present passages or subject. Thus it 
will be seen that no little ingenuity has 
been employed to hunt down this little 
word, though as yet not quite successfully. 
More may be seen in Smith's ' Dictionary of 
the Bible,' i. 906. Apes ; Hebrew, D'Sip. 
Condor ('Handbook to the Bible,' 2n'l edit.. 
p. 390) s.iys, " This word is identical witli the 
name of the monkey in Tamil." Keil con- 
ileots it with the Sanscrit Itapi, but does not 
believe, with Gesenius, that the animal came 
from India, but Ethiopia. In » valuable 
note in the ' Speaker's Commentary' we read, 
"It is found" (not stated where) "that the 
word was an Eu;yptian word, signifying a kind 
of monkey, in use in the time of Thoth- 
mes II., i.e. about the time of the Israelites' 
exodus." (For Herodotus's testimony respect- 
ing ivory and apes in North Africa, see his 
•Hist.,' iv. 91.) Peacocks; Hebrew, Q';3)?. 
Conder ('Handbook to the Bible,' p. 393) 
says a Tamil word, tokei, means " poitcock." 
Keil proposes to consider it one of the later 
Romans' luxurious deliencies, uvea Numidicie, 
from Tucca, a town in Mauretania or Numi- 
dia. Some translate it "guinea-fowl," and 
some " parrots." The peacock did not be- 
long to Africa, yet still it may have been 
purohaseable at some port there. 

Vers. 22, 23.— AU the kings of the earth; 
i.e. of the land of tributary sovereignties, 
from Euphrates to the borders of Egypt, and 
to the Philistines (1 Kings iv. 21 ; also note 
Gen. XV. 18 ; Exod. xxiii. 31 ; Numb. xxiL 
5; Josh. i. 4; 2 Sam. x. 16). 

Ver. 24. — Every man his present ; Hebrew, 
innjD; which word represents the tribute, 
paid partly in money, partly in kind (2 Sam. 
viii. 2 ; 2 Kings xvii. 3, 4 ; and the parallel). 
A rate year by year; Hebrew, rp^-iaT. 
which might be simplv rendered, -'a yearlv 
thing." ". J / 

Ver. 25. — Four thousand stalla Not forty 
thousand, as by error in 1 Kings iv. 26. 



The parallel mentions one thousand foor 
hundred as the number of the cliariots (oh. 
i. 14). Both agree in twelve thousand as 
the number of borsemen. Chariot cities (1 
Kings ix. 19; ch. i. 14). Some of the horse 
and chariot dep8ts were kept near the king, 
but the rest in those specially chosen and 
prepared cities, which might be nearest or 
fittest against time of war-need. 

Ver. 27. — The foundations of the evil oi 
exceeding mt-tropolitaa centralization were 
being too surely laid now. Silver . . . syco- 
more trees (see l Chron. xxvii. 28; ch. i. 16). 

Ver. 28. — The parallel mentions horses 
from Egypt only, but adds that " linen yarji " 
was brought. The all lands alluded to with 
us, would manifestly include Armenia (Ezek. 
xxvii. 14) and Arabia. The parallel eJso, in 
its ver. 29, states the prices of a chariot from 
Egypt as "six hundred shekels [ga. bekas] 
of silver" (i.e. about either £90 or £45) ; and 
of a horse for the cavalry, perhaps, not for the 
chariot, as " one hundred and fifty shekeU 
Iqu. bekas] of silver " (i.e. £22 lOg. or £11 5p., 
estimating the shekel as worth three shil- 
lings with us). Otiier estim dea (see ch. i. 
17) would make the prices £70 and £17 (see 
our Exposition, oh. i. 15 — 17). 

Ver. 29. — Hathan the prophet . , . Ahijah 
the Shilonite . . . Iddo the seer. For these 
original authoritiesof the history, see our Intro- 
duction (vol. i. p. viii. 2, and p. ix. 3). The pre- 
sent quotation of the name of Ahijah in con- 
nection with his work, and the brief allusion 
to himself in our ch. x. 15, are the only 
appearances of Ahijah in Chronicles. He 
and the importance of his work are clear 
enough from 1 Kings xi. 28—40 ; xiv. ] —20. 
As the compiler of Chronicles evidently by 
a law omits any even reference to the defec- 
tion of Solomon, it is natural that the name 
and special ministry of Ahijah should fall 
into the shade with him. Uniformly it is 
observable in Chronicles that the personal ig 
not enlarged upon where it is not directly 
and indispensably ancillary to the eccle- 
siastical and national history. On the other 
hand, the writer of Kings does not once 
mention Iddo the leer, whereas we read ot 
him again twice in Chronicles (oh. xiL 15; 
ziii. 22). 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1—31.— .4 study in the matter of fame. The first twelve verses of thii 
chapter— a chapter which otherwise offers little homiletic matter— put before us a very 
favourable instance of the legitimate operation of a great force in this world, the force 
called fame. It may sometimes be more pleasantly viewed under the description and 
title of an attraction, but it is a force under any circumstances, and often a very great 
one. The mstance before us is a "favourable" one, because it is exhibited and it is 
occupied in matter which we are glad to think of, and to think of as availiu'- itself of 
whatever advantage may lie within reach. And its "operation" is " le^'itimate " 



OH. IX. 1—31.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. Ill 



because there is nothing in the motives and methods brought into play in the effective 
short history on the page but what we readily sympathize with. These even add 
interest to the main subject. The instances of the action of fame in unfavourable 
matWr may perhaps seem to preponderate ; but perhaps, also, this may rather seem to 
be the case than really be so. Notice — 

I. Some qeneeal facts charagtekizing the action op fame. 1. It is in fame to 
travel the longest distances. 2. It travels at no appreciable expense. 3. The greater 
distance absolutely lends generally the greater bulk. 4. Hie travel is swift, silent, and 
very difficult to track. 5. It may serve great and useful ends, as in the present instance, 
and in the greater instance involved in the history of the Wise Men of the Hast. 6. 
The fame of a person or of some exploit travels and spreads in obedience to what seem to 
be almost principles in human nature — the love to hear and to tell in proportion to the 
novelty and the strikingnessfor any reason of the tidings in question. 

II. The paeticulae facts that oharactbrizbd this instance of fame. 1. It 
was the fame of wisdom. The picture suggested to our mental vision is most interest- 
ing and most unusual. For a moment the Solomon of Scripture is the Socrates of 
Greece. For great stress is laid on the queen's communing with Solomon of the thing* 
in her heart, and questioning him on them. The wonders of human lite individually 
and of human history may have been debated. The casuistry of those days may have 
been very real and perplexing, even though to our day it should seem trifling and 
simple. It is emphatically said that the queen laid herself out to prove Solomon with 
hai"d questions. 2. The fame was also that of knowledge and what we might call learn- 
ing. Elsewhere we read of Solomon's knowledge of natural history, and of his amazing 
command by memory of proverbs. 3r It was the fame of wealth, sphndour, magnifi- 
cence ; and these not lavished altogether upon himself. 4. And not least, it was the 
fame of one on whom rested supereminently the blessing of the Lord his Ood. The 
queen, by whatsoever means, and these are not altogether hard to imagine, had learnt 
of the delight that God took in Solomon and his throne and his people, inextricably 
and prophetically one. Whether she knew more or less, much or but very, very little, 
of the relation of earth to heaven, of the dependence of man on God, and of the practice 
of a reasonable, intelligent, and acceptable worship of him, it is evident that she 
recognized and rejoiced in the fact that she had come to see a man on whom the 
Spiiit of God rested. 

III. The character, at least in some fbatdres of it, on which the fame of 
Solomon took such effect. 1. The Queen of Sheba was one of those who have an ear 
to hean: This does not mean an ear to hear necessarily everything. It does not mean 
an ear to hear the loudest sound or the nearest sound. It does mean an ear opened to 
hear the most important sounds, though they may be very distant, or very high, or 
from deepest depth. It means a discerning, instinctively selecting, discriminating ear, 

2. She had an earnestly inquiring disposition. Suggestions are often the best of 
thoughts, as sketches are often the best of pictures, and as seeds have all growth, flower, 
fruit, concealed in them. We can follow here the birth from a suggestion of thought, 
resolve, patient, long expectation, faith in her journey's reward, and all the final realiza- 
tion vouchsafed to her enterprise. How many sounds enter the ear which might well 
waken us! How many suggestions proffer activity for the powers and fruit tor the life 
within us, and fall like chilled flowers, withered fruit-settings, because of the barren 
nature, the absolute uninquiringness of our disposition! The best seed asks soil, and 
good soil; the highest thoughts ask prepared minds; and the purest truth, pure hearts. 

3. The queen was willing to expend labour, to endure fatigue, to exercise long patimee, 
in order to satisfy hersdf at to the trustworthiness and the very facts of the fame nf 
SoUmum. Labour, fatigue, and patience were all worthily encountered. The object 
was worth them, even though it were no greater and higher than it was. It wot far 
greater and higher than the objects which otten exert far greater attraction for men, 
when for them, being things destitute of any heavenward aspect whatsoever, they will 
rise up early, go to rest late, and eat the bread of sorrow continually. 4, Whm th» 
queen had seen and heard Solomon, and had satisfied herself of all, she feels no envy, 
seeks no points of detraction, suspects no elements of weakness, but gives to all the display 
her heartiest, most wnafected praise and umgratulation. She can make the prosperity 
xnd blessedness of others joy and matter ot thanksgiving for her own heart. She can 



112 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. ix. 1— 3i 

genuinely rejoice with those who rejoice — that rarer thing, even, than to weep with 
those who weep ! And, after bestowing her lavish Eastern gifts, can return to her home, 
alike wiser and happier. Amid all the dim liglit of knowledge, and dimmer light of 
religion, of faith, md of love, we cannot doubt that we have an example in this 
woman of some of the best qualities possible to human nature ; of a large mind, a no'ilo 
and pure heart, of generous apprehensions of faith and love, and of — in one word — 
a graciousness that cometh only from above. 

IV. The ohibf lessons of this history foe ourselves. The history is referred to 
by our supreme Teacher himself (Matt. xii. 42 ; Liike xi. 31). His powerful reference 
to it is to point us to a lesson for good and timely example and imitation. 1. We are 
to seek ; to seek earnestly ; to seek simply, purely, and without envy ; to seek vnth labour 
and fatigue, with patience and faith, with strong expectation and love unfeigned; and 
to seek, withfidl, ungrudging gift, his wisdom, his knowledge, his surpassing and mofst 
real splendour, and his solution of all our hard questions. The very existence of the 
example declares and pronounces its claim upon us. Its look, its tone, its matter, all 
speak forth its meaning. 2. But we are pointed, not merely to a kindly lesson and 
attractive example, but to a forcible warning. For if we will not follow, do not follow, 
the Queen of Sheba, her example will follow us, even to the pursuing of us, to the 
great judgment! She will condemn us, whose expectation, and effort, and interest, and 
liberal generosity were all inflamed by the fame of Solomon, while all the fame of 
Christ fails to waken our zeal. Hearts are cold. Effort is feebleness itself, or even as 
nought. Patience is intolerable. Fatigue cannot be contemplated. Gold must be 
hoarded, and Christ and heaven must be lost ; while she, of dim ages and dim know- 
ledge, and but most broken rays of revelation, shall, because she used them to the best, 
rise up in the judgment and condemn those whose privileges and opportunities were 
immense, immeasurable! Warning and lesson both are pressed upon us by the 
"Greater than Solomon," the infinitely greater! Who will not wish to eschew the 
condemnation of which he is here warned? Who will not be guided and attracted by 
the lesson which is here offered to him ? 



HOMILIES BY VAEI0U8 AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 12. — " Solomon in all his glory." Nothing so strikingly illustrated the 
glory of Solomon as the visit of the Queen of Sheba, coming from " the uttermost parts 
of the earth to hear his wisdom," conferring great gifts upon him and receiving valuable 
presents in return (see Matt. xii. 42). We have, among many things — 

I. Israel fulfilling its function, viz. magnifying the Name of the Lord. One 
great end, tlie great end of its existence as a nation, was to bear witness to the Name 
and character of Jehovah. By the wisdom and the energy combined with the piety of 
Solomon, this was being accomplished. The works of the Lord were known and 
celebrated even in remotest lands, 

II. God fulfilling his word to his servant Solomon. He promised him wealth 
and honour, inasmuch as he had asked for something better than these (see oh. i. 
11, 12). In this most gratifying episode Solomon must have felt that the promise 
made hitn at Gibeon was graciously redeemed. So shall we find also. To those that 
seek ^rs< the kingdom of God he ensures all needful earthly good, and they may count 
confidently that he will make good his word (see Matt. vi. 33). 

III. The true blessedness of possession — to communioatb. Solomon had great 
knowledge, large faculty, much penetration, as well as extensive worldly wealth. He 
probably had some enjoyment in the consciousness of their possession. But he found » 
better and wiser use of them in communicating; to others. When he enlightened the 
mind (ver. 2) and enriched the hands (ver. 12) of the queen, he was then and thus 
experiencing the true excellency of possession. It is not as we are able to retain, but 
as we succeed in employing and in imparting our wealth, whether of truth or treasures, 
that we are really and truly rich (Acts xx. 35). 

IV. The worth of wisdom. The queen was no donbt partly prompted by cariosity 
to see the magnificence of Solomon ; but what largely induced her to take that long, 
tedious, expensive journey was her desire to learn what "the wise man" could teach 



<JH. IX. 1—31.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 11a 

ier. She desired " to commune with him of all that was in her heart " (ver. 1), and 
she did so ; and she gathered from him a great store of knowledge and of truth. She 
doubtless learned for the first time the fundamental truths of religion — perhaps also the 
elements of pure morality. It is probable that she went back to her own country 
mentally and even spiritually enriched far beyond her highest expectations. As sha 
crossed the desert a second time she would feel that she had been repaid a thousand 
times for all her toil and outlay. Wisdom is always worth our purchase, whatever wa 
may expend upon it. " Buy the truth," even though it cost much in travel, in money, 
in patient laborious study, even in fellowship and friendship. It is well worth whila 
to " sell all that we have " in order to become possessed of " the pearl of great price," 
heavenly wisdom, the knowledge which is eternal life (Matt. ziii. 46 ; John xvii. 3). 
Many earnest pilgrims have traversed land and sea, many anxious students have 
searched books and inquired of sacred teachers, many hungering and thirsting soula 
have wrought and wrestled in thought and prayer for many years, that they might 
find rest in truth, that they might find a home for themselves in the knowledge of the 
living God. And when they have found what they sought (see Matt. vii. 7, 8), they 
have gladly and gratefully acknowledged that the blessedness of acquiring heavenly 
wisdom is a most ample recompense for all they have expended in its pursuit. Wisdom 
is more precious than rubies ; it is the absolutely incomparable good (Prov. iii. 15). — 0. 

Vers. 4 — 6. — The unimaginable. The Queen of Sheba was completely overwhelmed 
by what she saw at the court of Jerusalem. When she had seen and heard everything 
there was to see and hear, " there was no more spirit in her." She was " astonished 
with a great astonishment." She bad not credited what she had been told (ver. 6) ; 
but she found that there was a great deal more to find than anything that had been 
described. What she realized altogether surpassed her anticipation. Her experience 
was very remarkable of its kind, but in this particular it was by no means exceptional. 
We have much to do with the unimaginable. It meets us or awaits us in — 

I. The matebial creation. What wholly unanticipated wonders have been 
disclosed by the advance of human science I The men of remote generations had not 
-the faintest notion of the powers we have discovered to reside in the material universe. 
And what still undiscovered forces await our inquiiy and investigation as we patiently 
plod on in the paths of knowledge I Surely one-half hath not been told us or imagined 
•by us. 

II. Our human experience. We have our expectation concerning the life that is 
before us ; but it is very little like the reality, as experience will prove. Many things 
we may picture to ourselves which will find no fulfilment; but many other things 
there are, of which we have no discernment, that will find their place on the page of 
our biography. Of these some are vmexpected sorrows — flosses, disappointments, 
separations, struggles^f which we can form no idea ; others are unanticipated bless- 
ings — comforts, relationships, joys, triumphs — exceeding and excelling our hopes. We 
do not anticipate, for good or evil, one-half of the bright or dark reality. 

III. The gospel op the grace op God. " Eye had not seen, nor ear heard, nor had 
it entered into man's heart to conceive " one-half of " what GU)d had prepared for them 
that love him." No man could or did imagine that such wealth of grace and goodness 
as that which the gospel of Christ contains would be brought to us by the Anointed of 
God, would be purchased for us by a Saviour's sacrifice, would be pressed upon us by a 
heavenly Father's urgent and persistent love. 

lY. The globt which is to bs beyealed. In that " land of great distances " we 
are one day to traverse, in that home of love in which we are soon to dwell, what 
unimaginable good is in reserve 1 What joy and what glory ; what rest and what 
activity ; what realization and what hope ; what knowledge of God and what pursuit 
of that knowledge ; what royalty and what service ; what purity and what progress ; what 
unanticipated and inconceivable blessedness to satisfy but not satiate the soul 1 — 0. 

Vers. 13 — 20, 27. — Gold and eilver. The chronicler who records these events of 
Solomon's reign dwells upon the abundance of gold and silver as one who takes a 
delight in his story. And there was something in which to triumph, if not to rejoice; 
for it spoke of a certain excellency and strength which has its own value. But what 

IL CHBONICLBS. T 



114 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. rs. 1—31. 

was (oi is) the value of it? We may consider the extent to which the plentifulness of 
silver and gold is — 

L A BotJBCB or PBEBENT GBATTFiOATioK. Undoubtedly Solomon, his courtiers, and 
his subjects did find a pleasure in the fact that all these objects were " of beaten gold," 
that gold and silver met their eye everywhere. At first that pleasure may have been 
keen enough. But it was one of those joys that pall and pass with time ; familiarity 
with it maHe it to lose its charm ; it must have become less delightful as it became 
more common, until it became literally true that "it was not anything accounted of" 
(ver. 20). Splendid surroundings are pleasurable enough at first, but their virtue fades 
with the passing years and even with the fleeting months ; and it is not long before 
that which seemed so brilliant and promised so much enjoyment is " not accounted of " 
at alL 

II. A LABTiNa ENRICHMENT. Abundaucc of material wealth often proves a transient 
good. In the nation it becomes a prey for the spoiler, a temptation to the neighbour- 
ing power that can come up with a victorious army and go back with a well-stored 
treasury (see 1 Kings xiv. 25, 26). In the man it often allures the fraudulent adventurer 
and becomes his possession. No one can be sure that he will hold what he has gained. 
" Securities " are excellent things in their way, but they go down before some of the 
forces which no finite power can control. 

III. A SEAL ENLABQEUENT. Great wealth does not go far to enrich a nation when 
it does nothing more for it than provide targets and shields, drinking- vessels and ivory 
thrones overlaid with gold with golden footstools — nothing more than multiply 
splendours about the royal palace. When it promotes healthful and remunerative 
activities among the people, when it facilitates and quickens the exjjenditure of profit- 
able labour in agriculture, in seamanship, in manufacture, in art, in literature, in 
worship, then it is really and truly serviceable. So with individual men. Wealth 
that only ministers to luxury does very little good to its owner. But when it enables 
a man to put forth mental and physical powers that otherwise would slumber for lack 
of opportunity, when it stimulates to worthy and elevating enterprise, when it opens 
the door of usefulness and helpfulness, then it is a blessing indeed, a real and true 
enlargement. 

IV. A SPIRITUAL PBKiL. Serious and strong indeed are the Master's words (Mark x. 
23 — 25). But they are amply verified by human history, both national and individual. 
Wealth tends to luxury; luxury to indulgence; indulgence to deterioration; deteriora- 
tion to ruin. Much gold and silver may be attractive enough; but they need to be well 
fortified with sacred principles who would stand the test of them, and be quite 
unscathed by them. 

y. PlOTOBIAL OF A WEALTH THAT IS TBUEB AND BETTEB. It IS possible tO be- 

endowed with those resources that make rich and that add no sorrow thereto ; it is 
possible to be "rich toward Gk)d;" to have treasures within our keeping which the 
strong thief of time has no power to steal. These are to be had of the ascended Lord. 
He counsels us to buy of himself "gold tried in the fire, that we may be rich." Of 
him we may gain the riches of a reverence that ennobles, a faith that saves, a love that 
blesses and beautifies, a hope that strengthens and austains, a joy that " satisfies and 
sanctifies " the soul.— 0. 

Vers. 21 — 31. — Qrandew without godliness. These words and ihose that precede 
them are as suggestive by reason of what is absent from them as by that which is 
contained in them. They are significant of — 

I. Gbandbub WITHOUT OODLINESS. The historian is drawing his records of the 
reign of Solomon to a close ; and, in taking his view (or his review) of it, he has much 
to say of the splendours of his throne and of his surroundings ; of the multitude of his 
horses and chariots, with their stalls and stables ; of his store of gold and silver ; of his 
apes and peacocks ; of his ships and his cedars ; but he says nothing of his serviot of 
Jehovah ; nothing of the gratitude he showed to God for the very bountiful blessings 
he had bestowed upon him, and the high estate to which he had raised him, and the 
special gifts of mind with which he had endowed him. Here there b a painful absence,, 
a silence that speaks only too forcibly. When Solomon came to review his own life and 
to examine his own career in the light of early influence and special privilege, he must 



OH. IX. 1—31.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 116 

have felt constrained to be silent, or, if he spoke at all, to use the language of confession. 
There had been much gramleur but little godliness in his reign. And what had been 
the proved value of it P 1. The delight it had ministered to him had been of a less 
noble and less elevating kind, if not actually ignoble and injurious. 2. It had led his 
mind away from sources of joy which would have been far worthier in themselves and 
fiir more beneQcial in their influence. 3. It had raised a standard of excellency before 
the eyes of his subjects which can have had no enlarging and elevating effect upon 
their minds. 4. It must have awakened the cupidity of surrounding sovereigns and 
the envy of many among his subjects. 6. It must have been in painful, not to say 
guilty, contrast with much poverty in many hundreds of Hebrew homes. 6. It 
entailed a heavy penalty on the people in the shape of burdensome taxes. Grandeur 
without godliness is a serious sin and a profound mistake. It is as guilty as it is 
foolish. And so we find the man who " passed all the kings of the earth " in wealth 
and in a certain order of wisdom (ver. 22), going down into fault and failure because 
he lost that " fear of God " which he ought to have understood was " the beginning of 
wisdom." Unfaithfulness to the principles he learned in youth sent him down into hii 
grave " prematurely old," his kingdom weakened, his character corrupted, his reputation 
bearing upon its face a dark and ineffaceable stain. How unspeakably preferable is — 
II. SiMPLiciTT AND SACKED SERVICE. Rather than have grandeur viithoui godli- 
ness, who would not live in obscurity with a name that does not travel beyond hii 
" native hills," in a home unfamiliar with ivory and gold, living on homeliest fare and 
dressed in plainest raiment, with the love of the heavenly Father in the heart, the 
•ense of his abiding favour in the soul, Christ's happy and holy service for the 
heritage of the life, and his nearer presence the promise of the future ? Before honour 
is humility, before grandeur is godliness, before gold and silver is a noble and a useful 
life.— 0. i 

Vers. 1 — 12. — Salomon's queenly visitor. I. Hbb journey to Jebusalbm. (Ver. 1.) 
1. I%e coimtry whence she came. Sheba. Not Meroe, or Ethiopia, as Josephus (' Ant.,' 
Tiii. 6. 5), Grotius, and others say, following Abyssinian legend ; but Sabaa, a country 
in Arabia Felix. Its capital Sal S, or Mariaba, still exists rmder the name Marib, six 
days east of Sanaa. The district was t xtremely fertile, and abounded in frankincense, 
gold, and precious stones (Jer. vi. 20; Bzek. xivii. 22; Isa. Ix. 6 ; Ps. IxxiL 15). Its < 
inhabitants had become, through extensive commerce, among the most prosperous of 
Arabian tribes. The caravans of Sheba brought costly products to the markets of the 
world — to Tyre, Egypt, Syria, and Mesopotamia (Job vi. 19; Ezek. xxvii. 22). That 
a high degree of civilization prevaileci from an early period in South Arabia is attested, 
not only by the so-calleri Himarytic inscriptions found in that region, in which the name 
Sheba frequently occurs, but by the above-mentioned ruins of Marib, which, according to 
Arab tradition, was destroyed, probably in the second century after Christ, by the bursting 
of a great dam in the upper part of the valley (Ritter). Arabian tradition, more commu- 
nicative than Scripture concerning this queen, names her Balkis, and makes her a wife 
of Solomon (Koran, ' Sur.,' 27). 2. The occation of her journey. The fame of Solomon. 
In 1 Kings x. 1 the words, " concerning the Name of Jeiiovah," are added ; but whether 
inserted by the author of Kings or omitted by the Chronicler cannot be determined. 
If the latter, they were probably intended to suggest that Solomon's lame rested 
chiefly on his temple-building for the Name of Jehovah (ch. vi. 10), which showed him 
to be pre-eminently endowed with wisdom (ch. ii. 12). (For other explanations, see 
Exposition.) There is reason in the conjecture that Solomon's voyages to Ophir were, 
in part at least, the means of extending Solomon's fame and bringing it to the ears of 
the queen. 3, The object of her visit. " To prove Solomon with hard questions." It is 
hardly supposable that the queen simply aimed at a trial of wit between herself and 
Solomon in propounding riddles, resolving enigmas, and untying word-puzzles, such 
as, according to Menander and Dius (Josephus, ' Ant.,' viii. 5. 3), Solomon once had 
with Hiram, and such as in ancient times formed a common pastime with the Arabs. 
The " hard questions " doubtless related to deep and important problems in religion 
and life. The serious words addressed by her to Solomon (vers. 7, 8) make this the 
most plausible hypothesis. Great, rich, cultured, and powerful as she was, she waa 
obviously troubled at heart about the solemn mystery of existence, and wished to have 



116 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. nc 1—31. 



her doubts resolved, her questions answered, and her anxieties allayed by one who 
Memed specially upraised as an embodiment and teacher of wisdom. 4. The grandeur 
of her train. Attended by " a great company " of followers, courtiers, and servants, 
as well as by a numerous cavalcade of camels bearing the products of her country — 
gold, spices, and precious stones — intended for presents to Solomon (cf. Gen. xliii. ll), 
this royal lady, setting forth in search of wisdom, accomplished her long and painful 
journey, and eventually reached Jerusalem. 

II. Heb inteeview with Solomon. (Vers. 2 — 8.) 1. Th« wisdom the "heard. " Of 
all that was in her heart she communed with Solomon ; and Solomon told her all her 
questions." If these did not include gravissimas et sacraa gucestiones, i.e. questions 
relating to the mysteries of religion and the worship of God, one fails to see why they 
should exclude these, as has been suggested (Keil). That they concerned not meta- 
physical problems may be conceded. The story bears upon its surface that the wisdom 
she chiefly inqnired after and Solomon principally discoursed about was that whose 
beginning is the fear of the Lord, and whose end is the keeping of his commandmenta 
(Ps. cii. 10 ; Prov. i. 7) — that which concerned the dignity and glory of human life, 
and promoted the attainment of human happiness (Prov. ii. 2 — 12 ; iii. 13 — 18 ; iv. 
6^13 ; ix. 9 — 12). But whatever her queries were, they w^re all answered. None 
were too abstruse or recondite for this Heaven-endowed king to explain. 2. The 
splendour she beheld. She saw the wisdom of Solomon embodied in his works as well 
as heard it distilling from his lips. " The house that he had built" — not the temple, 
bat the palace, which had occupied thirteen years in construction, and upon which he 
had lavished all that the architectural and decorating arts of the time, assisted by his 
enormous wealth, could procure — this royal residence which, in magnificence, rivalled, 
if it did not eclipse, the dwelling of Jehovah, was looked upon with wonder and 
astonishnjent. In particular she was f iscinated by the splendour of the royal table. 
(1) " The meat of his table," i.e. the variety and sumptuousness of the fare, perhaps 
also including the costliness and beauty of the vessels in which it was served (ver. 20 ; 
cf. 1 Kings X. 20) ; " the sitting of his servants," i.e. of his high o£Scials at the royal 
table (Bertheau, Babr), or " the places appointed in the palace for the ministers of the 
king" (Keil); "the attendance of his ministers," either the standing, {.e. waiting, of 
his servants at the table (Bertheau, Bahr), or, as above, the places appointed for them 
in the palace (Thenius, Keil); the apparel of his attendants, which would no doubt be 
distinguished for its splendour ; " the cupbearers also," whose office was to pour out wine 
for the king (Gen. xl. 11 ; Neh. i. 11 ; Xen., ' Cyrop.,' i. 3, 8, 9), " and their apparel," 
which would be correspondingly resplendent ; — all these left upon her mind an impres- 
flion, not so much of Solomon's wealth and power as of his transcendent wisdom. A 
second thing she witnessed confirmed this, viz. (2) the stair which led from the palace 
to the temple. The old translators (the Chaldee, the Syriac, and the Latin as well as 
the Greek) thought the words in the Hebrew referred to the burnt offerings which he 
offered in the house of Jehovah — an opinion in which they have been followed by some 
modem interpreters (Luther, A. Clarke, Bertheau). These, however, he would hardly 
have shown to one not a proselyte. Besides, had she beheld the magnificence of the 
temple service, some allusion to this in her address to Solomon would most likely have 
appeared. Hence the opinion is to be preferred that the reference is to the arched 
viaduct which led from his palace to the temple (Keil, Bahr, Winer, Bwald, Jamieson), 
the remains of which, recently discovered, show it to have been, "for boldness of con- 
ception, for structure and magnificence, one of the greatest wonders in Jerusalem." 
That such a communication between the palace on Zion and the temple on Muriah 
existed seems hinted at in 2 Kings xvi. 18 and in ch. xxiii. 20; while Jcsephui 
speaks of a passage from the temple to the king's palace which led over the inter- 
mediate valley (' Ant.,' xv, 11. 5). If the ruins described by Robinson are those of 
this bridge, it must have contained five arches, each sixty feet wide and a hundred 
and thirty feet high. " The whole structure," says Isaac Taylor, " when seen from the 
southern extremity of the Tyropceon, must have had an aspect of grandeur, especially 
as connected with the lofty and sumptuous edifices of the temple and of Zicn to the 
right and to the left " (quoted by Jamieson, in he.). 3. 2%e admiration she felt. 
Sincere and intense. Solomon's wisdom had been (1) in complete accordance with the 
report she had heard of it in her own country (ver. 5) — rumovir had not lied ; (2) it 



OH. DC 1—31.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. IIT 

had equalled her expectations — fancy had not deceived ; (3) it had far exceeded both 
the report of it and her own expectations regarding it (ver. 6) — her sense of wonder 
was more than satisfied ; (4) it was so overpowerin.; that it left no spirit in her (ver. 
4)— her hope of rivalling it was gone. 4. The sentiments she expressed. (1) She 
pronounced happy Solomon's courtiers and attendants because of their proximity to 
his throne and person, which enabled them to hear his wisdom. In so doing she took 
for granted both that Solomon would never discourse otherwise than wisely, and that 
Solomon's servants and ministers would always feel disposed to listen to and profit 
by their master's speech ; in both of which she reckoned before the mark. (2) Slie 
praised Jehovah for his goodness to Solomon in giving him such a throne, i.e. for 
making Solomon his vicegerent in Israel, and for his favour to Israel in furnishing 
them with such a king — ^in her eyes a proof that Jehovah loved them and purposed to 
establish them for ever (ver. 8). In neither of these utterances did she err. Stable 
thrones and good kings are of God's making. (3) She instructed Solomon as to the 
kingly work such a one as he was raised up to do, viz. to execute judgment and justice 
(Ps. Ixxii. 2). If from these utterances it cannot be inferred that she was either 
assisted by inspiration or converted to Jehovah's religion, it is open to conclude she 
was a deeply reflecting and far-seeing woman, second only to Solomon in wisdom and 
sagacity. 6. The presents she made. (1) " A hundred and twenty talents of gold " — 
equivalent to £657,000, valuing the talent at £5475. (2) " Spices in great abundance," 
and of unsurpassed excellence, the principal of wliich was probably the Arabic balsam 
Josephus ('Ant.,* viil. 6. 6) says his countrymen derived from this queen. (3) 
" Precious stones," the names unknown. 6. The gifts she received. Besides the solu- 
tion of her questions, she obtained handsome and valuable presents from Solomon, 
partly in compliance with her own request (ver. 12), partly in payment of the costly 
gifts brought to him by her, and partly over and above out of his own royal liberality 
(1 Kings X. 13). 

III. Heb eetubn to Sheba. (Ver. 12.) 1. TJie termination of her visit. How 
long this visit continued is not recorded, but at length the queen departed on her 
homeward journey, attended by her servants and accompanied by her train of camels, 

2. The spoils of her visit. Besides carrying home the presents given by Solomon, she 
bore vfith her, what was of greater moment for herself and her subjects, the impressions 
she had received upon her travels and the lessons of earthly and heavenly wisdom she 
had derived from her interview with the king. 3. The historicity of her visit. That 
the preceding narrative is no' fable is guaranteed by Christ's use of it in the First Gospel 
(Matt. xii. 42), and by recent archaeological research (see ' Ancient Arabia,' by 
Professor Sayce, in Contemporary Beview, December, 1889). 

Lessons. 1. The privilege of Christians in having as King a greater than Solo- 
mon — him " in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge " (Col. iL 
3). 2. The obligation of the world to hear the wisdom of him who, besides being 
greater, is also nearer to them than was he to the Queen of Sheba (Matt. xii. 42). 

3. The blessedness of such as hear Christ's wisdom, waiting at his throne and standing 
in his presence, first on earth and afterwards in heaven (Prov. viii. 34). 4. The 
certainty that Christ will give to them who seek his wisdom all that they ask and 
more of his royal bounty (Bph. iii. 17). 6. The duty of those who come to know 
Christ's wisdom to carry the tidings of it back to their own country (Matt. v. 19, 20). — W. 

Vers. 13 — il.—The glory of Solomon, I. Thb vastness of his wealth. (Vers. 
13, 14, 21, 24.) 1. Its sources. (1) The contributions of merchants and traderi 
towards the imperial revenues (ver. 14) ; (2) the presents of kings and governors in 
Arabia and elsewhere ; and (3) the cargoes brought by his fleets from Ophir yearly 
(ver. 10), and from Tartessus, or Tarsus, in Spain, every three years (ver. 21). 2. Its 
amount. 666 talents of gold per annum, not reckoning the silver as abundant as 
stones (ver. 27). Estimating a talent at £5475 sterling, the gold would reach the 
immense total of £3,646,350 sterling per annum. 3. Its use. It was employed: 
(1) In making state shields — 200 larger, to each of which 600 shekels of gold were 
devoted ; and 300 smaller, to each of which 800 shekels were assigned. The shields, 
probably made of wood and covered with gold instead of leather, were hung in Solomon'a 
palace, " the house of the forest of Lebanon " (1 Kings viL 2), where they remained 



118 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [ch. ix. 1—31. 

until plundered by Shishak (ch. xii. 9 ; 1 Kings xiv. 26). (2) In fashioning a state 
throne, made of ivory and overlaid with pure gold (ver. 17); i.e. the woodwork, not 
the ivory, was covered with the metal. The throne had six steps and a golden foot- 
stool (ver. 18) ; each step had on either side a lion, probably of cast metal gilded. On 
each side of the seat was an arm or stay, beside which sat another lion. Thus there 
were in all fourteen gilt lions. No wonder the historian adds, " there was nothing like 
it in any kingdom." Yet many modern thrones surpass it in splendour. (3) In con- 
structing state cups or drinking-vessels for the palace. All were made of pure gold — 
gold of Ophir, Tarshish, or I'arvaim ; " not one of silver, which was nothing accounted 
of in the days of Solomon." 4. Its credibility. The above account is rendered trust- 
worthy by comparing it with well-known recorded facts. " When Nineveh was 
besieged, Sardanapalus had 150 golden bedsteads, 150 golden tables, 1,000,000 talents 
of gold, ten times as much silver, while 3000 talents had been previously distributed 
among his sons. No less than 7170 talents of gold were used for the statues and 
vessels of the temple of Bel in Babylon. Alexander's pillage of Bcbatana was valued 
at 120,000 talents of gold ; Cyrus's pillage was 34,000 pounds of gold and 500,000 
pounds of silver, besides an immense number of golden vessels " (Bahr, in loco, Lange's 
series). 

II. The bxcblIiEnce op his wisdom. (Vers. 22, 23.) Solomon's wisdom was 
excellent in respect of : 1. Origin. It was God-inspired. All wisdom proceeds from 
the same source (Job xxxii. 8), and " a man can receive nothing except it be given 
him from heaven (Joiin iii. 27); but in Solomon's case wisdom was a special endow- 
ment (ch. i. 12). 2. Measure. Solomon surpassed all the kings of the earth in the 
quantity as well as quality of his wisdom — not easy to do. The Queen of Sheba was a 
proof that royal personages in that era were not fools; while the monumental histories 
of Egypt and Assyria have revealed the existence of wise and powerful princes long 
before Solomon. There were brave men before Agamemnon. 3. Manifestation. 
Solomon's wisdom expressed itself in a variety of ways : in temple-building and other 
architectural undertakings ; in the pronouncing of judgments and the utterance of 
apothegms; in the acquisition of knowledge, and more especially of natural history; 
and in literary compositions both prosaic and poetical (1 Kings iv. 29 — 33). 4. 
Fame. It spread abroad through all countries, and attracted kings and queens to his 
court to hear his oracular utterances and make trial of his insight, as well as to gaze 
upon the splendour ol his court and the magnificence of his person (1 Kings iv. 34). 

III. The extent of his empire. (Ver. 26.) 1. Its eastern boundary — the Syrian 
desert, in which Tadmor or Palmyra was situated. 2. Its western — the Mediterranean, 
or, more correctly, Phoenicia and the country of the Philistines, with the strip of 
Mediterranean coast between 3. Its northern — the river — the Euphrates, in its 
upper reaches, from Tiphsah, or Thapsacus, a large and populous town on the west 
mink, a place where armies crossed over the stream, and where was a quay for landing 
and shipping wares coming from or going to Babylon (Winer, ii. p. 612). 4. Its 
$outhem — the border of Egypt (1 Kings iv. 24). Within these limits he either 
exercised sovereign power directly, as over his own subjects in Palestine, or indirectly 
through receiving tribute from the reigning kings who expressed their fealty to him 
by bringing, year by year, every man his present — vessels of silver and vessels of gold 
•nd raiment, harness and spices, horses and mules (ver. 24). 

IV. The dubation of his bbion. (Ver. 30.) Forty years. 1. A great priviltge. 
Long life a mark of special favour under the old dispensation (Prov. iii. 16); under the 
new, a valuable blessing to those who enjoy it (Eph. vi. 2). 2. A large opportunity. 
Life not for personal enjoyment merely, but for religious and philanthropic activity. 
A long life means a long time for doing good. What benefits Solomon might have 
conferred upon his people during that extended period! 3. A high responsibility. 
" To whomsoever much is given," etc. That Solomon did less than he mi.;ht with his 
great wisdom, vast riches, immense power, extended fame, and protracted life, entailed 
upon him deeper guilt. 4. An evident mercy. Considering the bad use Solomon 
madeof his numerous years, declining in his old age through love of women into 
debasing idolatries (1 Kings xi. 1 — 8), it was a proof of the Divine patience and 
long-suffering that he was not earlier cut off. 

V. The close of his oarebb. (Vers. 29, 31.) 1. His biography was written hy 



on. X. 1—19.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



119 



the hand of prophets. (Ver. 29.) Nathan the prophet, who had announced his birth 
to David (2 Sam. vii. 12 — 14; 1 Chron. xvii. 11), and who had called him, when a 
chilli, Jedidiah, "Beloved of the Lord" (2 Sam. xii. 25), in all probability began it; 
Ahijah the Shilonite (i.e. inhabitant of, or prophet from, Shilo, an Ephraimite town), 
who predicted the division of the kingdom (1 Kings xi. 29), it may be supposed, 
carried it on; and Iddo the seer, a contemporary of Rehoboam and Jeroboam (ch. 
xii. 15 and xiii. 22), finished it. Being prophets of the Lord, these writers would 
" nothing extenuate, nor set down aught in malice," but would deliver " ? plain 
unvarnished tale " of the great monarch's acts and words, of his wise speeches and 
foolish deeds. 2. His corpse was huried in the tomb of his father. (Ver. 31.) It was 
well that he had a tomb to lie in ; better men than he have had none. He had sat 
upon his father's throne, worn his father's crown, extended his father's kingdom, 
improved upon his father's vices, declined from his father's piety ; now his lifelesi 
dust was consigned to rest in his father's sepulchre. 3. His throne was filled hy hit 
own son. No man likes to be succeeded by a stranger. It must have been a comfort 
to the old monarch that Rehoboam was to wear his crown. 

Learn : 1. The vanity of earthly glory — the magnificence of Solomon unequal to 
the raiment of a lily (Matt. vi. 29). 2. The worthlessness of all earthly things without 
religion : Solomon had everythin;; that could satisly ambition, and yet he declined 
from the worship of Jehovah (Matt. xix. 20). 3. The certainty of death: if a Solomon 
eould not evade the king of terrors, how shall common men ? (Eccles. viii. 8). — W. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER X. 



This chapter begins the fourth and last 
great division of the work once called in 
its unity, " The Chronicles." This fourth 
and last division, therefore, will see us to 
the end of our ch. xxxvi., where we find, 
by an historical anticipation of above fifty 
years, the memorable proclamation of Cyrus, 
which authorized the return of the captive 
Jews, and sanctioned the rebuilding of the 
temple. This stretch of history, divided in 
our Authorized Version into twenty-seven 
ehapters, covers, therefore, a period of about 
four hundred and fifty years ; it ignores almost 
totally the career of Israel, and, in clearest 
•coord with its jjost-captive and j>rophetic 
objects, abides uninterruptedly by that of the 
•acred dynasty of Judah. The kings are 
in number twenty, beginning with Eeho- 
boam, ending with Zedekiah, of whom, how- 
ever, the last four can be credited with but 
little semblance of independent authority, 
for they were the alternate vassals of the 
rival and antagonistic powers of Egypt and 
Assyria. Tlie longest reigns of the twenty 
were those of Manasseh (fifty-five years, B.o. 
697 — 642); of Uzziah or Azariah (fifty-one 
years, b.o. 809 — 758); of Asa (forty-one 
years, B.C. 959 — 918); of Jehoash (forty 
years, B.C. 878 — 838) ; of Josiah (thirty-one 
years, B.o. 640 — 609) ; of Hezekiah (twenty- 



nine years, B.o. 726—697) ; of Amaziah 
(twenty-nine years, b.o. 838—809) ; of 
Jehoshapliat (twenty-five years, B.o. 918 — 
893); and of Rehoboam (seventeen years, 
B.O. 979—962). The last of the mournful 
procession was Zedekiah, who was mocked 
with the title for eleven years (b.o. 598 — 
587). In the dates of this chronology, 
though slight differences are found, there is 
little room for variation when once the 
initial and, in consequence, final dates are 
fixed. The line of succession is hereditary 
throughout, and almost entirely of strict 
lineal descent, {.e. from father to son, if ws 
except, ^r«(, the interruption caused by the 
Queen Athaliah, mother of her predecessor 
Ahaziah ; secondly, Joash, her grandson and 
successor, who was eon of Ahaziah ; thirdly, 
Jehoiachim (so named by the Kingof Egyp^ 
but formerly named Eliakim), who was 
brother of his predecessor Jehoahaz; and, 
fourthly, Zedekiah (or Mattaniah), who waa 
the paternal uncle (2 Kings xxiv. 17) of hia 
predecessor Jehoiaehin, and who was put 
on the throne by Nebuchadnezzar, against 
whom he in due time rose in rebellion, and 
by whom he was sent captive to Babylon, 
after seeing his sons slain, and having there- 
upon his own eyes put out. After him there 
was no more a king in Judah. It will b« 
obvious that, if the yeais marking the dnr»- 
tion of the succeeding reigns be summea 



120 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. x. 1—19. 



np, we Eball obtain too large a result, as 
they often or always overlapped one another, 
and, of coiuse, did not fall into exact 
years. The initial date we take aa b.o. 979, 
and the final date at the end of Zedekiah's 
eleven years, oulminatlng in the destruction 
of Jerusalem, as b.o. 587. Some chrono- 
logies quote these dates, however, b.o. 975 — 
588. Side by side with these preliminary 
notes respecting Judah, it may be stated 
that the initial and final dates for the 
separate kingdom of the ten tribes, Israel, 
with their nineteen kings, were b.o. 979 
(975) to the date of Samaria taken, b.o. 
719, or (as some would date the overthrow 
of Israel) b.o. 722 or 721. It need scarcely 
be said that, if forty years are added for the 
leign of Solomon, and forty years for that of 
David, we shall be conducted to the date 
of either b.o. 1059 or 1055 as the beginning 
of the Davidic royal line, and may count 
the duration of that royal line as numbeiing 
about 472 years. An interesting table, 
showing some slight differences of date, may 
be found in pp. 53, 54 of the second edition 
of Gender's ' Handbook to the Bible.' 

The verses of this chapter, nineteen in 
number, correspond with those of 1 Kings 
xii. 1 — 19. They so correspond as to con- 
vince ns that both writers took &om one 
original, or, at any rate, one former source. 
But they are particularly instructive also in 
another direction. Our vers. 2 and 3 are 
in order, and quite intelligible. Vers. 2 
and 3 of the parallel are not so, and con- 
vince us either that the carelessness of 
copyists was more than usual (even when 
our Authorized Version " of it " is cancelled) 
or, which is a by far less acceptable supposi- 
tion, that the carelessness of the compiler 
or writer was great. Though these two 
lengths of nineteen verses each so closely 
correspond as to show both indebted to one 
former source, they also evince clearly that 
neither vniter absolutely bound himself by 
the exact words of his pattern, but took the 
meaning, and slightly altered, so to say, gram- 
mar and syntax of sentences. 

Ver. 1. — This verse would have been far 
bstter placed last in the previous chapter, 
but now, left without note of time, it purports 
to tell us that (whereas by the last clause of 
the previous chapter "Eehoboam reigned 
in hii " fiither Solomon's " stead." and had 



been presumably accepted as his heir and 
successor in Jerusalem and all Judsaa) Beho- 
boam, now somewhat later on, repairs to 
Shechem (the ancient capital and the 
prized position of the high-spirited tribe 
of Ephraim) to receive some final recognition 
as king from "all Israel." Eehoboam. Solo- 
mon's son byNaamah, an Ammonite princess 
(1 Kings xiv. 21, 31). Eurydemiu may be 
considered as a close reproduction in Greek 
of the Hebrew name Behoboam. To his 
son Abijah, by his favourite wife Maachah, 
who was the third of the wives that belonged 
to the house of Jesse, he bequeathed the 
kingdom. Wanting any positive Scripture 
statement of the matter of Behoboam going 
to Shechem, we believe the explanation 
given above is the most probable, and that 
it was not any designed stroke of policy, 
with the view of conciliating or flattering 
Ephraim. Though no formal statement of 
it be made here, yet it is quite intelligible 
that the opinions, feelings, and readiness to 
express them on the part of Ephraim and 
" Israel " were well enough known, and had 
to be reckoned for. Shechem. For many 
reasons one of the most interesting geogra- 
phical names in all the Old Testament. It 
was the ancient capital, as Shiloh, near to 
it, was the ancient seat of the national 
worship. It was situate in Ephraim, with 
Ebal to the immediate north, and Gerizim to 
the immediate south. Its upper slopelands 
(its position on which is possibly the origin 
of the name, vqa, "a shoulder") com- 
manded a view of the Mediterranean. It 
was the half-way resting-place, at the end of 
the second day's journey, for travellers from 
Galilee to Jerusalem, and hence bore the 
name in later times, it is thought, of Ma> 
bortha, or Mabartha (Nn^ajjo), Pliny's Ma- 
mortha. Vespasian subsequently named it 
Neapolis, the modem Nablous. The Autho- 
rized Version synonyms of Shechem appear 
as Siehem, Syehem, Syehar (John iv. 5, 20). 
In post- Captivity times, a new temple on 
Gerizim was the cathedral of Samaritan 
worship, which was levelled by John 
Hyrcanus, b.o. 129. Jacob's well is a half- 
mile south-east, and Joseph's tomb two 
mUes east (Josh. xxiv. 82). Almost every 
one of the references to Shechem are of great 
interest on one account or another, and to 
turn to each of them in order is to read the 
Scripture narrative of the place. The lead- 
ing references are subjoined (Gen. lii. 6; 
xxxiiL 18, 19 ; xxxiv. ; xxxv. 1^ ; xxxvii 
12, 28; xliii. 22; xlix. 5— 7; Deut. xxvii. 
11; Josh. is. 33—35; xx. 7; xxi. 20, 21; 
xxiv. 1, 25, 32; Judg. ix. 7, 22, 34—45 ; xxi. 
1 ; 2 Kings xvii. 5, 6, 24 ; xviiL 9 ; 1 Chron. 
vi. 67; vii. 28; Ezra iv. 2; Jer. xli. 5; 
John iv. 5; Acts vii. 16; viii. 5). The 
article " Shechem," by Dr. Haokett, in Dr. 



OH. X. 1—19.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE OHKONIOLES. 



121 



Smith's 'Bible Dictionary,' vol. iii. pp. 
1284 — 1240, is of exceptional interest. All 
Israel. No doubt this expression may mean 
even here the assemblage of the federated 
twelve tribes. Considering the immediate 
recurrence of the expression in ver. 3, it 
must be, however, that the Jeroboam party 
of the ten tribes (headed by the strong and 
self-conscious Ephraimites) are especially in 
view; in point of fiust, of course, all the 
twelve tribes were lepiesented in the gather- 
ing of ver. 1. There can be no division of 
opinion about this, though the meeting be 
represented as one demanded or occasioned 
by the attitude of Israel, in the lesser com- 
prehension of the name. 

Vers. 2, 3. — ^In these verses the compiler 
brings up lost time. He has not mentioned 
before the name of Jeroboam, just as he has 
not mentioned the lustful sins of Solomon 
that led to idolatry, and those sequel idolatries 
of his, that heralded the shattering of his 
kingdom immediately on his decease. So 
we ore now told all in one how Jeroboam, 
in his refuge-retreat in Egypt (1 Kings xi. 
2&— 40), " heard " of Solomon's demise, and 
apparently (see first clause of our third verse) 
heard of it in this wise, that '* they," i.e. the 
" all Israel " (of our first verse) " had sent 
and called him." Probably the growing 
sense of discontent and the ranl^ling in those 
tribes that were not closely breathing the 
atmosphere of Jerusalem and the one home 
county, because of their burdens and taxation, 
and possibly also Ephraim's ancient and 
famed rivalry, knew instinctively that this 
hour of Solomon's death -was tlie hour, if any, 
of their redemption. The laeunss in the 
history speak for themselves; for though the 
tribes, after the long seething of their com- 
plainings and sufferings, needed but short 
time for deliberation, Solomon's death must 
have been an accomplished fact before they 
(whoever the "they" were) sent to Egypt 
to Jeroboam; and that sending and his 
retomiug or otherwise, at any rate his hear- 
ing and consequent returning, must have 
taken time. Considering all this, it is re- 
markable that no note of time is found. 
But had only our first verse been placed 
as the last of the foregoing chapter, the 
ambiguity would have been less. For the 
strange variations on the history of Jeroboam 
(a name, together with that of Behoboam, 
new to Solomon's time, meaning "many- 
peopled," while Kehoboam signifies "in- 
creaser of people"), as found in the Hebrew 
texts, and additions to it, see the Septuagint 
Version, 1 Kings xi. 43 ; xii. 24 ; and A. P. 
Stanley's article, "Jeroboam," in Dr. Smith's 
•Bible Dictionary,' i. 979, 980; and oomp. 
again 1 Kings xi. 26 — 40 ; xii. 25 ; xiv. 13, 
17, 18. Stanley's faith in the Septuagint 
notwithstanding, its variations and additions 



are not reconcileable enough with either the 
Hebrew text or themselves to command 
anything like unfeigned acceptance. One 
thing may be considered to come out with- 
out much obscurity or uncertainty — that 
Jeroboam was the acknowledged rather than 
tacit leader of an opposition that was tacit 
at present ratlier than acknowledged; nor 
is it at all improbable, under all the circum- 
stances, that the Behuboam party in, know- 
ing well how the ground really lay, were 
as content to let the coronation, so to call it, 
at Shechem linger awhile for Jeroboam's 
return, as Jeroboam's opposition party out 
desired and perhaps compelled the delay. 
Of course, Jeroboam knew well, none better 
than he, as of old the overseer of the forced 
labour and taxation of Ephraim (1 Kings 
xi. 28; ix. 15), how grievous the service 
and how heavy the yoke to his people, even 
when he had acquitted himself as the most 
"industrious" of taskmasters. 

Ver. 4. — The grievous servitude . . . 
heavy yoke. These may, for conciseness' 
sake, be supposed to correspond with the 
naturally enough hated "forced labour" 
(1 Kings iv. 6, 7; v. 13—16; xi. 27, 28) 
and the burdensome "taxes" (1 Kings iv. 
19—28) which had not failed to become 
more odious to the people as familiarity 
with them grew. The refreshing New 
Testament contrast to all this (Matt. xi. 
28 — 30) will occur to every memory. 

Ver. 5. — This first reply of Eehoboam was 
not necessarily inauspicious. Yet sometimes, 
as it proved now, the caution that takes time 
to consider heralds fatal mistake. This ia 
when either a generous, instinctive impulse, 
asking an instantaneous obedience, is chilled 
by some self-regard ; or yet worse, when the 
offended Spirit is restrained, and no inner 
guiding voice is heard, as Saul found, to his 
ruin. 

Ver. 6. — The old men who had stood before 
Solomon his father while he yet lived. The 
first practical step now taken by Rehoboam, 
if he delay at all, is the right and far from 
inauspicious step. ei tie omnia that fol- 
lowed after 1 The "old men" here spoken 
of, and not before distinctly spoken of, need 
not necessarily be regarded as professional 
advisers of Solomon, nor as a privy council 
of state; they may designate those of like 
age with him, or but little his juniors, and 
with whom he had chiefly associated for hia 
own society. 

Vers. 7, 8. — Behoboam was now (1 Kings 
xiv. 21 ; ch. xii. 13; but of. xiii. 7) forty-ona 
years of age ; he was just too old to find any 
excuse for inability to gauge either the ex- 
perience, and value of it, of the "old," or 
the inexperience, and foolishness of it, of the 
immature human heart. According to the 
modem phrase, he was just ripe to have 



122 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. x. 1— 19. 



known and bethought himself of this. But 
all rashly Behoboam casts the die. The 
sound judgment, real knowledge, opportune 
and practical advice of the "old men," 
uttered evidently off so kind a tongue, 
■hould have been indeed now " aa good as 
an inheritance ; yea, better too " (Eccles. vii. 
11, margin). The reading of the parallel is 
well worthy to be noted (1 Kings xi. 7), 
vith its manifestly pleasantly and skilfully 
worded antithesis, " If thou this day will be 
a servant to this people . . . then they will 
be thy servants for ever." Qui words, 
however, have their own exquisite beauty 
about them. If thou wilt be kind to this 
people, and please them, and speak good 
words to them. One might fenoy that Saul, 
and David, and Solomon, and angels them- 
selves bended over the scene, and looked and 
listened and longed for wisdom and love and 
right to prevail. The young men that had 
grown up with him. 'While this expression 
throws I'ght as above on that which speaks 
of Ethoboam's old men counsellors, it wakens 
the question how men of forty-one years of 
age can be called "young," as Behoboam 
was not living in patriarchal aged times. 
And the question is emphasized by the 
language applied to Behoboam in eh. xiii. 7, 
where he is described as " young and tender- 
hearted, and" unable, for want of strength 
of character and of knowledge, to " withstand 
vain men " (as he surely shows too clearly 
now). It has been suggested (' Speaker's 
Commentary,' ii. 562, Note 0) that ttD (21) 
should be read for nd (41) in the two passages 
quoted above (1 Kings xiv. 21 ; ch. xii. 13). 
The suggestion seems good, and it is cer- 
tainly reasonable for the requirements of 
both matter and manner. 

Vers. 10, 11.— Language perhaps never 
spoke more clearly what was in man. And 
it spoke in this case the mad infutuation of 
Insolent temerity itself. 

Ver. 12. — It may be worth observing that 
the history is silent of what of hope and fear 
or other thought and feeling transpired with 
Jeroboam and his party these three critical 
days of suspense, as also it was so silent as 
to what transpired with them during the 
three days, three weeks, three months, be- 
fore the first interview with Behoboam at 
Shechem. 

Ver. 13. — ^Eoughly; i.e. Behoboam had 
not "heard the instruction of a father," and 
had been an ill pupil indeed of him who 
vfrote and taught, "A soft answer turneth 
awiiy wrath" (Prov. xv. 1). 

Ver. 15. — So the king hearkened not . . . 
for the cause was of God ... his word, 
which he spake by . . , Ahijah (see, as before, 
1 Kings li. 29—31, also 9—39). Behoboam 
hearkened not, as Pharaoh hearkened not, 
but hardened his heurt. The Divine word 



foretold, as the Divine mind fore7:new, the 
inevitable course of the stream, that took its 
source in and fiom Solomon's faithless heart 
and life. Solomon "being dead yet" bears 
his full sliare of the responsibility of what 
Behoboam was, and shortly came to thou) 
he was. Everything must fall out as God 
foretells it shall fall out, not because " the 
cause is from him " in thU sense that he haa 
made it, but in the sense that he has pro- 
nounced it, through knowing it with an 
absolute knowledge. It were but a thing 
to be expected also, that just in the measure 
that the Bilile is the Word of God, it shall 
exhibit and pronounce plainly the phenomena 
of his own ultimate fiats, rather than linger 
to track or describe the uncertainties of 
human im irality or conduct. Let but that 
result appear, which God has with his sure 
and abidiug Word declared, and the practical 
attitude and language of Scripture are that 
it is vain to fight against it ; for the thing 
is of God. It was known of him and said 
of him. And it carries its punishment or 
its recompense in it^ as of him. It will be 
noticed, again, how our compiler refers to the 
incident of Ahijah, as though he had re- 
corded it, which he had not done. 

Ver. 16. — What portion have we in 
David t (see 2 Sam. xx. 1). To your tents, 
Israel; t.e. there is nothing more to be 
done here; all may as well go }iome. The 
use, and especially repeated use, of the names, 
David, Jesse, David, plainly speaks tribe 
rivalry, if not jealousy. 

Ver. 17.— To the tribe of Judah the family 
of David belonged. There was .less inclina- 
tion on this ground, to begin with, among 
them to go to the length of revolting. 
Though they too are pressed with burden 
and taxation, yet royal expenditure, resi- 
dence, magnificence, are all near them, and 
are some solatium doubtless to them. God 
said that this tribe and (as is abundantly 
evident from Ahijah's forcibly dramatis 
parable of the rent garment) Benjamin also 
should be saved to Behoboam and for ever 
to David's line, and again it is evident that 
he works in the midst of human event, and 
moral cause and effect. Israel would not 
have revolted but that Jeroboam was of 
Ephraim, and Judah would not have re- 
mained steadfast but that, with other deter- 
mining influences also, to Judab belonged 
Behoboam and Solomon and David. 

Ver. 18. — Hadoram that was over th* 
tribute . . , stoned him . . . Behoboam 
made speed ... to flee. Hadoram was 
perhaps th« same as Adunirara, son of Abda 
(1 Kings iv. 6; v. 14), but ou the arbitra- 
ment of age this is less likely, and certainly 
it is very unlikely that he was one with 
Hadoram of 2 Sam. xx. 24. Behoboam must 
be supposed to have sent Hadoram either ta 



OH. X. 1—19.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 



123 



make some "tribute" summons, or try some 
urrangement respecting it, or respecting 
conciliatory steps. The reception he met 
warns Behoboam to make the quickest 
•scape possible, and no donbt opens his eyes 
fiilly to what he has done. It was the 



remanet of his delusive self-confidence to 
send this collector of taxes to those who had 
begged some remission of taxation. 

Ver. 19. — Unto this day. So our compiler 
of Captiyity and post-Captivity date tran- 
scribes the literal words of his copy. 



HOMILETIOa 

Ten. 1 — 19. — A notable and very mournful instance of lacking wisdom through not 
miking of Ood, The compiler of the Chronicles, in the pursuit of the special objects 
which he had in view, feels that he need lose no time in details, or in parts of the 
whole history, which were to be found elsewhere, but which were less important to his 
own object. The fifteenth verse of this chapter supplies us with an instance of this, 
its reference to Ahijah the Shilonite finding full explanation in the fuller parallel 
(1 Kings xi. 29 — 40). Our own famih'arity with the mournful history and mournful 
needlessness of the schism, and the method in which it was brought about, which is 
the subject of this chapter, seems to lose for us nothing of that same moumfulness. 
Men may make use of the contents of this portion of the history of Israel (as of other 

Sortions of Holy Scripture, which seem to trench on the unfathomable depth of the 
octrine of God's election and fore-ordination) to find their (ever very easily found) 
theoretic difiioulties, as unconcealedly suggested by the words of the above-quoted 
fifteenth verse. But it remains the same, that the election and the fore-ordaining of 
One who foreknows, and whose word of prophecy is as sure as the word of any other 
being after the event, are altogether different phenomena, different facts from what 
they otherwise should seem to be. Still, the central mystery must needs remain, before 
which we wonder, exercise faith, and silently adore, or we should not be creatures in 
the presence of the Creator. The history of this crisis of the nation highly favoured 
reminds us — 

I. Of the 8UBB Word of God. The forewarning, " Thou shalt surely die," was not 
more truly fiilfiUed than the forewarning made now, not a century and a quarter ago, 
that the nation that would have an earthly king would come to find, not its gain therein, 
but its loss. The dicta of revealed religion (for such both of the above forewarnings 
may be justly styled) are great, simple, and eternal for man. And from instances on 
a universal scale, and then on a national scale, are we, as individuals, mercifully, most 
forcibly, and most graciously admonished. 

II. The bbring uncbktaintt first, and then the certain brrinoness of the 

MAN who fails to MAKE GOD AND RIGHT, DUTY AND TRUTH, HIS SWOBN GUIDE. High 

place, high ofiSce, high responsibility, — these give the prominence which is needed to 
enforce the example of such truth. The deviation is not more real than in the humblest, 
lowliest life, but it is more conspicuous. Let us note, as circumstances bearing on the 
case, what follows. 1. Behoboam must have had some forewarning of the place to 
which he was to come. Solomon's was not a sudden death, nor his son's a sudden, 
onezpected accession. 2. Kehoboam must have had some acquaintance with the severity 
of the oppression and servitude of the people as a whole, and probably some anticipation 
of the likelihood of the representations, which in fact they made to him, of their experi- 
ences. 3. These representations, and the manner in which they were brought before 
Behoboam, were far from unreasonable. 4. Behohoam, to all appearance, is disposed to 
begin by acting wisely. He will wait three days before replying. He will utilize that 
interval by asking the advice of the experienced. He asks it ; it is given, and given 
rightly. 6. There can be little doubt that it was at this point that self and self-will 
showed themselves in Behoboam. Perhaps he had already heard, already knew, the 
feeling and the reckless bias of the younger men — for it is significantly said they were 
of those who had been brought up with him, and who were his chief associates now — 
or otherwise, if his own inclination and will were strong enough of themselves, he did 
not lean to the judgment of the old men, and hoped for different advice from the 
younger men, though it were but the merest prop to his own wish. He asks their 
advice, and is flattered and is glad that it leaps with the thought of his own brave and 
iH-avado spirit I In this show of right-doing, in this superficial wisdom, so different 



124 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. x- 1—19. 

from that special wisdom noted in his father, one fatal defect existed. He asked the 
advice of the old. That it might not be said he asked the advice of one class alone, he 
asked the advice of the young also. But he did not ask the advice of God, he did not 
pray for the direction of God. And his foot slipped ; he stumbled and fell, and that 
fall was great. Two things were wrong with even his earthly wisdom. To ask the 
advice of the young at all was a mistake, and to a great extent even a contradiction in 
terms. For inevitably they were wanting in the experience which was necessaiy to 
draw upon for advice. To ask the advice of the young, after having asked and received 
that of the aged, was a greater mistake. It looked like a sham and a delusion, and a 
self-deception, and a craving after self-deception ; and such it was. It was an affront 
to common sense, an insult to his own conscience, and a sop thrown to $elf — that 
enemy which is often, very often, a man's worst, very worst enemy 1 Behoboam asked 
advice of those persons who he knew wouldn't be above giving the advice which h« 
wanted. So he, indeed, easily got what he wanted. So it may be said again God per- 
mitted him to have what he saw he was bent on having, as he permitted the people 
and nation to have, some hundred and twenty years before, the king they were bent on 
having. But he lived to rue the day, and rueing it still ever, he died. An unreason- 
able, a cruel, and a brutally insolent answer alienated once and for ever the hearts, 
service, and lives of the larger part of the people from their king ; but a king who had 
disentitled himself. A very few days and he was a fugitive (ver. 18), though to his 
own capital — that capital one lamentably dismembered in its provinces. So stumble and 
so fall, sooner or later, those who set at naught kindness, justice, God, to serve self, 
folly, and time present. 

III. The infinite bisk op mischief ibeepaeablb that utrkb in the intbmpbbatb 
BIN, the intempebatb tempbb, oe, put gbneballt, the intbmpebate action, of men 
in adthoeitt, by eeason op the easy excuse fob schism, the facile though supeb- 

PIOIAL defence op IT, THEREBY OFFBEBD TO THE VBEY LIPS OF THOSE WHO ABB, OB 
OUGHT TO BE, UNDBB THEIB AUTHOEITY, AND WHO OTHEEWISB WOULD HAVE EBMAINED 
IN HAPPY UNQUESTIONING BUBOEDINATION TO THAT AUTHOEITY. The illustration and 

instance of this here is patent and glaring. The disaster was enormous. The long- 
trailed consequences were mournful, melancholy, miserable. The fault and sin of the 
ten tribes or their representatives are undeniable. Their sweet reasonableness of yester- 
day and three days ago is, unfortunately, not simply blown to the winds or evaporated 
into thin air — ^worse by far, it is converted into a determined breaking loose from some 
of the holiest bonds wherewith it is the mercy of Heaven to bind on earth. The 
kinuidom of God is one ; the Church of God is one ; the people of God are one. Dis- 
guise it as laxity of creed may, disguise it as laxity of practice may, disguise it as the 
great ancient or even greater modern cleavages of apostasy may, the calamity is of the 
nature of an avalanche alike of faith and of good works, and ever buries beneath its 
disastrous debris, not bodies but souls innumerable, and of immeasurable worth. Hence 
the golden calves, instead of the One only Object of worship, without image or likeness. 
Hence Bethel and Dan, instead of Jerusalem without compare. Hence priests of the 
lowest life, i.e. without the credentials of devotion, love, Divine call and appointment. 
Hence, instead of the one altar, many, but these reuded, their ashes poured out to the 
ground, and incense a rejected abomination, and all the long-drawn sequel of woe 
untraceable by human eye, irremediable by human power. Does not the world take more 
loss from the dissensions of the Church than all the Church takes from the united 
enmities of the world ? 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 4. — Two young men. These two young men, Eehoboam and Jeroboam — 
for we may regard them as such, though the former was forty years old when he began 
to reign — may be viewed together, as they were brought together, and may furnish us 
with some useful suggestions for the guidance of our life. We have them — 

I. Staeting feom diffbebnt ENDS OP THE SOCIAL SCALE. Rchoboam bom in the 
palace, bom to the purple, surrounded with every luxury, accustomed to the utmost 
deference, expecting the greatest things. Jeroboam commencing his career almost at 
the bottom of the scale, losing his father wheu quite young, obliged to work hard to 



IH.X. 1— 19.J THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 125 

■ustain his widowed mother, obtaining employment as a workman in connection with 
one of King Solomon's works, with " no prospects " in life. 

II. Meetiko midwat in theib oabeer. When they looked one another in the faca 
at Shechem, what was it that each saw in the other? Probably the king's son saw in 
the son of Nebat a man who was clothed in presumption, who had forgotten his position, 
who was entertaining a daring and criminal purpose in his heart. And probably Jero- 
boam saw in the enthroned monarch a man who was unfitted for his post, unequal to 
the strain that would be put upon his powers, a feeble man who would prove an easy 
prey to his own designs. No kindly feeling, we may be sure, shone in the eyes of 
either prince or subject as they confronted one another that day at Shechem. 

III. Challenged to make a choice on a critical occasion. Behoboam was now 
called upon to decide definitely what policy he would pursue in his administration— 
whether that of leniency and popularity, or that of stringency and force ; whether he 
would " rule by love or fear." Jeroboam had, at this point in his life, to decide whether 
he would adopt the taft policy of continuing in retreat, or the bold and venturesome 
one of heading a national revolt, and being either crushed beneath the feet of authority 
or raised to the height of a successful revolution. 

IV. Disappointing the hopes of theib best fkiends. Singularly enough, the 
names of both these men signified " enlarger or multiplier of the people ; " they pointed, 
probably, to the hopes of their parents concerning them. But though they both occu- 
pied the throne, and one of them rose to a much higher position than could have been 
anticipated at his birth, both men failed in the sight of God and in the estimate of the 
wise. The one by his folly estranged and lost the greater part of his kingdom ; the 
other led Israel into shameful and ruinous apostasy. 

1. Be not mMch affected hy social position ; very great advantages in this respect will 
not carry us far along the path of true success ; without character their value will soon 
expire. On the other hand, grgat disadvantages may be overcome by industry, energy, 
patience, virtue. 2. Be prepared to make the decisive choice, whenever the critical 
moment may come. We cannot be sure when this will arrive, but there will come an 
hour — ^there may come more hours than one — when a decision has to be taken by us 
on which the gravest consequences, to ourselves or to others, will depend. Shall we 
then be equal to the occasion ? Shall we be prepared to speak the wise word, to choose 
the right course, to take the step that will lead upward and not downward ? This will 
depend on the character that we shall have been forming before that time comes. If we 
shall have been neglecting our opportunity and misusing our privileges, we shall then 
be found wanting ; but if we shall have been gathering wisdom at every open source, 
we shall be able to speak, to act, to decide as God would have us do, as we shall after- 
wards thank God we did. 3. Aspire to fulfil the lest hopes and 2'rophecies of younger 
days. We may have a name, a reputation, to uphold. Our parents and teachers may 
be looking for good and even great things from us. Let us be earnest and eager to live 
such a life, that not only shall there be no painful discrepancy between the hope and 
the reality, but that there shall be a happy and satisfying correspondence between the 
two. — 0. 

Vers. 4 — 14. — T%e legacy of brilliance, eto. We have here — 

L The leoaotof brilliance. "Thy father made our yoke grievous" (ver. 4), 
No man ever had a nobler opportunity than Solomon bad. His father handed to him 
a united nation, a country whose enemies were subdued, the kindly and helpful shadow 
of a great name and a beloved disposition and an illustrious career. He was endowed 
by God with great talent and surpassing wealth. He had before him an object <d 
honourable ambition, which would be acceptable to Heaven and gratifying to his snb> 
jects. But, instead of pursuing the path of usefiilnesB and the prize of a people?! 
gratitude, he aimed at overwhelming splendour. And what did he gain by hia pur- 
suit ? Forty yean of selfish gratification, not undimmed (we may be sure) by many 
cares, disappointments, difficulties, in his home (or harem) and in his court ; and when 
he died he left a kingdom less compact, a dynasty less secure than he found when he 
took the reins of government from his father David. All his brilliance ended in a 
popular sense of injury, in a general consciousness that the people had been weighted 
with needlessly heavy burdens, with a store of suppressed popular discontent ready to 



126 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. i. 1—19. 

burst out and blaze forth at the first opportunity. Brilliance is a very fascinating 
thing, whether it be on the throne or in parliamentary government, or in the courts of 
law, or in business, or in the school. But what is its end ? To what issues does it 
lead? Usually it conducts to poverty, to serious error, to discomfiture, often to a 
catastrophe. But, where brilliance breaks down and is ruined, steady and conscientious 
faithfulness, under the guidance of heavenly wisdom, will succeed — ^will lead on to a 
real enrichment, to a lasting safety, to an honour that may be accepted and enjoyed. 

II. Thb wisdom op contemplation and consultation. "He said . ._ . Come again 
unto me after three days. . . . And he took counsel " (vers. 5, 6). It is, indeed, true 
that no good ultimately came of this delay and this consultation. But that was because 
Behoboam consulted the wrong men. He did well in asking for time and in appealing 
to others at this critical juncture. Supposing that this demand took him by surprise, 
nothing would have been more foolish than to have given a reply offhand. A remon- 
strance is very likely to excite anger in the first instfoce, and no wise man will come 
to an important decision when he is out of temper. It is in the hour of complete self- 
oontrol that we should settle grave matters affecting our destiny. Moreover, we do 
well to take the judgment of others. It was due to the nation that his father's wise 
statesmen should be asked for their advice in a great national crisis. It wasdueto 
himself that his inexperience should secure the inestimable advantage of their ripe 
sagacity. It is always due to ourselves that we get the additional light which can be 
gained from an impartial judgment. No man can possibly look at his own affairs in a 
perfectly pure atmosphere ; no man can take an entirely unbiassed view of his own 
tempori interests. Men who look from outside see what we cannot possibly see, and 
their counsel is sure to be worth our consideration, " The physician who prescribes 
for himself, or the lawyer who advises himself, has a fool for his patient or for his 
client." This saying will hold good in every department of human action. Take time 
for thought, and invite the frank and full counsel of your true friends. 

III. Oim TBDB couNSELLOES. These are : 1. They who have had an opportunity of 
knowing. The young men whom Rehoboam consulted could have given him very 
good advice on some subjects, on those that belonged to their period of life — athletics, 
feshions, etc. ; but of statesmanship what could they tell ? We should take care to 
consult those who know, who have learned in the best schools. 2. They who give us 
frank rather than palatable counsel ; who will tell us what they believe to be for the 
best, rather than that which will humour our own fancies. 3. They whose counsel 
makes for peace rather than for strife. There are times when the wisest will be for 
war, but in nine cases out of ten the true Christian advocate will urge conciliation and 
concord. — C. 

Ver. 18. — Ignominy, its source and its avoidance. For the son of Solomon and the 
grandson of David to meet the tribes of Israel in solemn assembly, and, after holding 
conference with them, to have his officer and ambassador scornfully stoned to death, 
•nd then to betake himself to his chariot with all speed and flee to Jerusalem, — this was 
a pitiable illustration of human ignominy. We almost pity the abject prince for his 
misery as much as we blame him for his folly. 

I. The sotracE OP iqnomint. What is it that brings men down to such dishonour ? 
It is : 1. When they assume a position to which they are not entitled ; when they take 
a higher place than they can fairly claim, and the " more honourable man " comes in to 
supplant them, and they " begin with shame to take the lower place " (Luke liv. 9). 
An assumption of social or literary or ecclesiastical superiority, unwarranted by the 
facts, must sooner or later end in an ignominious surrender. 2. When they undertake 
• task for which they are unfitted. The son of Gideon wisely shrank from the act of 
execution for which his immaturity rendered him unfitted. " As the man is, so ia hit 
strength," said he. Youth must not undertake the task of manhood, nor ignorance 
that of learning, nor inexperience that of trained and proved ability, nor mental feeble- 
ness that of intellectual vigour, nor moral frailty that of spiritual strength. Else it 
will sustain an ignominious falL 3. When they adopt a course which should have been 
serupulously avoided. What could have been the result of such inseusate folly as that 
of which Rehoboam had just been guilty but this ignominious flight? When his far 
■tronger father had incensed the citizens by heavy and burdensome taxation, what a 



OH. X. 1—19.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 127 



ruinous mistake it was for him to declare that he would go even further than Solomon 
himself had gone in this direction I To take a course which conflicts with men's 
natural rights, or which kindles their just indignation, or which wounds their keen 
susceptibilities, is to invite dishonour to our door ; it is to robe our own shoulders with 
the mantle of shame. 4. When we credit ourself with a character which we have not 
gained; when we assume that we are in spirit and in principle what in truth we are 
not, that we have moral qualities which we really do not possess ; — in this case, the 
dishonour that awaits us may come either in this world or the next. (1) We may he 
found unable to resist the temptations which we encounter, and our lamentable failure 
may expose us to the rebuke and the condemnation of man (see Acts v. 1 — 11 ; xiii. 
13 ; XV. 38 ; 2 Tim. iv. 10). (2) We may find ourselves rejected and expelled on the 
great day of judgment (Matt. vi. 21 — 23; xxv. 44, 45). 

II. The avoidance of iqnomint. If we would not be put to shame by our fellow- 
men or by the Divine Judge, we must do these things : 1, Study until we know our- 
selves ; examine our hearts until we know what is in them — what is the spirit we are 
of, what are the principles at the root of our behaviour. 2. Be content with the posi- 
tion and the work which our heavenly Father has assigned us (see Ps. Ixxxiv. 10 ; 
cxxxi. 1). 3, Make continual and earnest supplication that God will reveal us to our- 
selves (Ps. xix. 12 ; cxxxix. 23, 24). Then, instead of an ignominious retreat, our 
path will be that of the just, shining more and more ; we shall advance from honour to 
honour; God himself will crown us with his Divine commendation. — C. 

Ver. 1. — The coronation of a king. I. The person op the monarch. Behoboam, 
the man "who enlarges the people," a name upon which his subsequent history was a 
satire. 1. 2%e child of a heathen mother. This was Naamah, the Ammonitess (ch. 
xii. 13 ; 1 Kings xiv. 31), a daughter of the last Ammonite king, Hanun, the son of 
Nahash (1 Chron. xix. 1, etc.). Eehoboam probably suffered in character and constitution 
from his taint of heathen blood. 2. The son of a distinguished father. Judged at the 
worst, Solomon was a great king, no less renowned for administrative faculty than for 
wisdom and wealth. The first two, it is clear, do not pass from sire to son by the law of 
heredity. A man may bequeath money to his son, but he is helpless in the matter of 
intellectual wealth. A king may hand on crown and throne to his descendant, but he 
cannot communicate capacity to rule. 3. The heir of an extensive empire. The 
sovereignty of the undivided kingdom and of all the tributary princes fell into his 
hands on his father's decease. 

IL The scene of the coronation. Shechem. 1. A spot of rare heauty. Eighteen 
hours distant from Jerusalem, and situated at the foot of Mount Gerizim, in the 
mountain range of Ephraim (Judg. ix. 7) — the modern Nablous, near the site of the 
ancient Shechem, "is the most beautiful, perhaps it might be said the only very 
beautiful spot in Central Palestine" (Stanley, 'Sinai and Palestine,' pp. 233, 234). 2. 
Atcene ofirtspwvng memories. Patriarchs had pitched tents and erected altars there 
(Gen. xii 6, 7 ; xxxiii. 18 — 20). Thither Joshua had convened the princes and elders, 
the heads and representatives of the people, when the conquest of Canaan had been 
completed, and made a covenant with them, setting them a statute and ordinance — 
so practically constituting Shechem the first capital of the land (Josh. xxiv. 1, 26). 
There Joseph's bones were consigned to a sepulchre in the parcel of groimd which 
Jacob had bought of Hamor for a hundred pieces of silver (Josh. xxiv. 32). There, 
on the two mountains which overlooked the valley, Gerizim and Ebal, had been placed 
the bletung and the curse as commanded by Jehovah (Dent. xi. 29, 30; Josh. riiL 
31, 33). There also the first attempt, though unsuccessful, at king-making had been 
made (Judg. ix. 1). 3. A locality unauthorized for coronations. Stanley speaks of it 
as having been the custom, even after the erection of Jerusalem into the capital, to 
inaugurate new reigns at Shechem, citing as a modem parallel " the long continuance 
of Rheims, the ancient metropolitan city of France, as the scene of the French corona- 
tions " (' Sinai and Palestine,' p. 239) ; but, as Behoboam's is the only coronation that 
took place at Shechem (in addition to the above-mentioned crowning of Abimelech), 
one example, or even two, can hardly be said to constitute a custom. The proper 
place for carrying out such a second coronation as the northern tribes contemplated 
was Jerusalem, the metropolis of the entire kingdom, just as when they had acknow- 



128 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. x. 1—19, 



ledged David's sovereignty (2 Sam. t. 1) they came to Hebron, at that time th« 
capital o£ Judah. Besides, Eehoboam had already been crowned at Jerusalem, and in 
that act the northern trilses should have taken part. That they stood aloof and 
claimed for themselves a right of either acquiescing in or repudiating the sovereignty 
of Eehoboam shows, if not that they still had a right of free election to the crown, at 
least that their fusion with Judah was not so complete as, after seventy-three years, it 
might have been. Their intention, probably, was to acknowledge Eehoboam as king, 
but at the same time to assert their freedom by insisting on his compliance with 
certain demands and conditions. Hence they abstained from the national gathering at 
Jerusalem, and summoned Eelioboam to a new assembly at Shechem to receive their 
fealty as if they were a separate empire. " It wai a significant hint to Eehoboam, if 
he had properly understood it " (Bwald). 

III. The aiVBBS op the oeown. All Israel. The ten tribes as digtinguishod from 
Judah and Benjamin, which had already taken the oath of alle^ance to the son of 
Solomon (ch. ix. 31). The northern tribes, from the time of David's accession to the 
throne of Saul (2 Sam. ii. 4), when they adhered to the sceptre of Ishbosheth, Saul's 
son (2 Sam. ii. 10), had asserted a semi-national independence; this again, after 
having lain in abeyance for the greater part of a century, suddenly flamed up, and gave 
ominous outlook of trouble to the young prince. 

Lessons. 1. Kings' crowns oftentimes conceal thorns. 2. Those thrones are 
stablest which rest on the free choice and affection of subjects. 3. Those peoples are 
best ruled whose sovereigns by their lives show they have been enthroned by God. — W. 

Ver. 2. — The recall of an exile. I. The exile's stoey. 1. Eit name. Jeroboam, 
"whose people are many;" the son of Nebat. His father was an Ephrathite of 
Zareda, in Ephraim ; his mother a widow (1 Kings xi. 26) — ^which may mean either 
that he had been born in unlawful wedlock (LXX.), or that his father had died while 
he was young, leaving him to be brought up by his widowed mother (Josephus). 2. 
His character. Courageous and industrious, " a mighty man of valour " (Judg. vi. 12 ; 
xi, 1), and a man that did work (Prov. xxii. 29) — two qualities befitting youth, and 
almost certain to bring temporal success in their train; two qualities that should never 
be absent from Christians, who are specially commanded to "add to their faith virtue, 
or courage " (2 Pet. i. 5), and to " be not slothful in business " (Eom. xii. 10). 3. His 
promotion. Just when Jeroboam came to manhood, Solomon was engaged in building 
Millo, and closing up the breach in the city of David (1 Kings ix. 15). For these 
purposes Solomon raised a levy of workmen, not of the Hittites, Amorites, etc. (ch. viii. 
7), but of Israelites, who worked by courses of ten thousand a month (1 Kings v. 13 ; 
ix. 15); or imposed certain burdens in connection with those works which required to 
be borne by the Israelites. Discerning Jeroboam to be a capable youth, of spirit and 
energy, Solomon appointed him overseer or governor of all those Israelites employed in 
or about the works who belonged to the house of Joseph, i.e. who were Bpbraimites. 
4. His incipient rebellion. Serving in this office, he began to commune with his own 
thoughts about raising a revolt. Either as an Ephraimite he felt humiliated at being 
obliged to work in the capital of Judah, or beiug a youth of aspiring njind he was not 
content with the elevation suddenly thrust upon him, and wished to climb higher; 
but in any case, when the "mood" was on him, an incident occurred which, chiming 
in as it did with his own aspirations, pricked the sides of his intent, and bore him 
onwards in his dangerous career of ambition. That incident was his meeting with 
Ahijah the Shilonite, who told him that Jehovah intended to wrest ten tribes from 
the Davidic kingdom and give them to him, Jeroboam (1 Kings xi. 29). A perilous 
coQimuDication for a youth like Jeroboam to carry about with him I Josephus states 
that it prompted him " to persuade the people to forsake Solomon, to make a disturb- 
ance, and to bring the government over to himself" (' Ant.,' viii. 7. 8). 6. Sis precipi- 
tate flight. His treason having come to the king's knowledge, he was obliged to save 
himself from well-merited execution by suddenly withdrawing from the land, and seek- 
ing refuge in Egypt under the sceptre of Shishak (see on oh, xii, 2), 

n, Thb exile's BET0RN. 1. Jt$ date. When Solomon was dead. A king's life is 
sometimes a kingdom's best bulwark against revolution. So long as Solomon lived, 
insurrection under Jeroboam was impracticable. Yet a king's life may be the greatest 



OH. X. 1—19.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHKONICLBS. 129 

barrier to the progress of a good work. Moses could not return to Egypt to resume his 
emancipation work until Barneses II. was dead (Exod. ii. 23). Joseph could not 
return from Egypt with Mary and Jesus until Herod was dead (Matt. ii. 19). 2. Its 
occasion. The invitation of the northern tribes (ver. 3). This, addressed to Jeroboam 
while at the court of Rhisliak (1 Kings xii. 2 ; Josephus, ' A< it.,' viii. 8. 1), was probably 
the medium through which he learnt of Solomon's decease. Not necessary to hold 
that it was only despatched to Jeroboam after the tribes had assembled at Shechem 
(Bahr), since it may easily have been sent immediately on Solomon's death, between 
which event and the gathering at Shechem twelve months intervened. Jeroboam, 
however, is commonly supposed (Bertheau, Bahr) to have returned from Egypt expro- 
prio motu, and to have been residing with his wife and child at Zareda or Sarira, when 
summoned to Shechem. The suggestion (Keil) is probably correct that two invitations 
were addressed to Jeroboam — the first while he was yet in Egypt, to return to his 
native land ; the second while he lingered at Zareda, to come to Shechem. 3. Its 
object. Whether of his own accord, or in obedience to the summons of the tribes, 
Jeroboam returned from Egypt ; his ulterior aim, there can be little question, was to 
further his own ambitious projects. 

Lessons. 1. The value to a yoimg man of energy and talent. 2. The danger as 
well as sin of harbouring ambitious thoughts. 3. The hatefulness of treachery. 1. 
The possibility of a wicked man's schemes furthering God's designs. — W. 

Vers. 3 — ^19. — The loss of a kingdom, I. A reasonable request fbefebbed. (Veri. 
3, 4.) 1. A public grievance stated. The northern tribes, through Jeroboam, com- 
plained to Eehoboam that Solomon had made their yoke grievous. Whether this was 
true or not has been much debated. (1) That it was largely used as a pretext to 
justify their subsequent behaviour is not without support. In the first place, it was 
put forward by tribes already disaffected, and through the medium of one who had 
formerly shown himself a traitor. Then, that Solomon, in making a levy of his subjects 
for carrying on his numerous buildings, was only acting in accordance with the custom 
of Oriental monarohs generally from Egypt to Babylon, must be conceded. Besides, it 
may be assumed that no more oppressive tasks were laid on the northern than on 
the southern tribes, from none of which complaint was heard. Further, if heavier 
burdens than hefore were placed upon the people by Solomon, that was largely inevit- 
able from the magnificence of his court and the extensive building operations demanded 
by the safety as well as glory of the kingdom. And finally, if the people were heaviljr 
burdened under Solomon, they still enjoyed considerable advantages of peace and 
prosperity. (2) In support of the assertion made by the tribes, attention may be 
called to the facts that neither Behoboam nor his counsellors denied, but rather both 
undisguisedly admitted, its truth (ver. 11) ; that the complaint was not that of th« 
house of Joseph alone, but of " all Israel ; " and that the circumstance of Judah and 
Benjamin refusing to back it up is not sufficient to demonstrate its falsehood. 2. A 
measure of relief demanded. " Make the heavy yoke of thy father lighter." Not only 
was this reasonable, but it should have been a point in their favour, that they sought 
redress for their grievance by the peaceful method of conference rather than by 
immediately resorting to the sword. Instead, however, of granting their request, 
Behoboam temporized, put them off, asked for three days to consider the matter, 
pr(»Bising at the end of that time to give them a definite and final answer. Never 
before had there been in Israel's history such a critical " three days," unless, perhaps, 
" the three days' " start on leaving Egypt (Exod. viii. 27, 28), or the three days' 
preparation for the conquest (Josh. i. 11). The issue of this " three days' " deliberatioa 
on the part of Behoboam was momentous. According as it should be should likewist 
be the after-course of history, not for Israel alone, but for the world. Almost always 
dangerous, delay was in this case disastrous, 

n. A GOOD oouNSEL REJECTED. (Vers. 6 — 8.) 1. The king's aged advisers. It 
argued some sense on the part of Behoboam that he first solicited advice from tint 
experienced statesmen of the kingdom, and the privy councillors of his late father — 
perhaps for a moment he was of opinion that "days should speak, and multitude ot 
years should teach wisdom" (Job xxxii. 7); it proved him possessed of little sense that 
he closed his ears against their prudent suggestions (Frov. xxiii. 9). 2. The Jdng't beit 

U. CHRONICLES. IC 



180 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. x. 1— 19. 

eourte. "The accumulated wisdom of the Solomonic era recommended concession, 
The old councillors gave just such advice as might have been found in the Book of 
ProTerbs " (Stanley). They advised acquiescence in the popular demand. They urged 
the king to win the people by kindness. The beautiful antithesis of the Book ot Kings, 
" If thou wilt be a servant unto this people, and wilt save them . . . then they will 
be thy servants for ever " (1 Kings xii. 7), is here awanting, but the sentiment is the 
■ame. The aged senators believed that kindness held the key to the human heart, 
and that "a soft answer turnethaway wrath" (Prov. xv. 1 ; xxv. 15) as much in nations 
as in individuals ; they knew that one must often stoop to conquer, and that he who 
would be served by others should ever exhibit a readiness to serve others (Matt. vii. 12); 
nay, that the true function of a king is to serve his people — a thought happily expressed 
by the Ich dien of the Prince of Wales's crest. 3. The king's consummate folly. " He 
forsook the counsel of the old men." Had he not been a fool, for whom wisdom is too 
high (Prov. xxiv. 7), in whose eyes his own way is always right (Prov. xii. 15), and 
who, as a consequence, walketh in darkness (Eccles. ii. 14), ho might have discerned 
that the situation was critical, that rebellion was in the air, and that the old experienced 
statesmen of the last reign were the only pilots competent to steer the ship of state 
through the breakers. Unlike the men of Issaohar, who were men that had " under- 
standing of the times to know what Israel ought to do " (1 Chron. xii. 32), Behoboam 
was " a strong ass" (Gen. xlix. 14), impatient of control and incapable of guiding either 
himself or others. Some men never see the right thing to do until it is too late. 

III. An evil poliot adopted. (Vers. 9 — 11.) 1. Its proposers. " The yoimg men 
that were grown up with him " — either the statesmen of the new reign whom Kehoboam 
had appointed from among his own companions, or young courtiers who had danced 
attendance on his person while heir-apparent to the crown, and now clung to the steps 
of the throne in the hope of preferment. Though afterwards spoken of as young 
(ch. xiiL 7), Eehoboam was at this time over forty years of age. 2. Its proposals. 
Not concession, but coercion, should be the order of the day. Their complaints should 
be silenced, not removed. Their appeal for lighter service should be answered by a 
heavier yoke. For Solomon's whips they should have Eehoboam's scorpions. Other 
rulers besides Eehoboam have tried to still the complaints of their subjects by more 
and heavier oppression ; e.g. Pharaoh (Exod. v. 15 — 19), and the Stuarts of England, 
not to mention others. 3. Its pursuance. Behoboam hearkened to the counsel of the 
young men, and at the close of the stipulated three days answered Jeroboam and his 
oo-deputies " roughly," in the terms put into his mouth by his hot-headed advisers. 
" It was the speech of a despotic tyrant, not of a shepherd and ruler appointed by God 
over his people" (KeU). It undid in a moment the work of centuries. It shattered 
the kingdom which David's sword and Solomon's wisdom had built, 

IV. A DiviNB COUNSEL FULFILLED. (Vcr. 15.) 1. The Divine purpose. The 
division of the kingdom. Foretold by Ahijah (1 Kings xi. 31), the hour had struck 
for its accomplishment. Jehovah doeth according to his will in the army of heaven 
and among the inhabitants of earth (Dan. iv. 35). Yet all the free actions of men 
have their places in his world-embracing plan, Man's actions may seem contingent; 
God's purposes are not. What he determines he can effect. 2. The Divine instn*- 
mmtality. The foolishness of Behoboam. Not that Behoboam was under any internal 
or supernatural compulsion to act as he did any more than were Pharaoh (Exod. ziv. 
4; Bom. ix. 17) and Judas (Matt. xxvi. 25) to act as they did. Simply, Jehovah 
decreed to permit Behoboam's folly as a means of furthering his own designs. Divine 
Mvereignty and human freedom not contradictory, though mysterious. 

V. A NATIONAL EEVOLT CONSUMMATED. (VciS. 16, 17.) 1. With pOpulOT mthW' 

tiasm. " All Israel," with the exception of those members of the northern kingdom 
who dwelt in Judasan cities, joined in the cry, " What portion have we in David," etc. ? 
The unanimity of the movement showed that it was not without ground. 2. With 
fitret indignation. The cry which had once before been heard in Israel (2 Sam. zz. 1) 
expressed the people's sense of wrong in being cast off by Behoboam, treated no longer 
as free subjects, but as conquered slaves. It proclaimed the deep-seated contempt 
they now cherished for the son of Jesse, as they now designate the dynasty of David. 
S. With implacable resentment. " Struck by the king's words as by an iron hammer, 
•nd grieved at them," the people rejected hi 'riendly overtures for reconciliation con- 



OH. xi. 1—23.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 



131 



T«yed through Hadoram. If this was the son of David's tribute officer (2 Sam. xz. 24)) 
he must have heen at this time an old man about eighty. Hence he was probably the 
Adoniram, son of Abda, who was over the levy (I Kings iv. 6). Though not likely that 
he advanced towards the people with a small force as if to enforce submission (Bertheau, 
Ewald), but rather that he approached them alone (Josephus), a more unfortunate 
selection of one to act as ambassador could scarcely have been made. Most likely one 
of the older counsellors who recommended moderation, Hadoram was yet the man who 
was "over the tribute," i.e. was the tax-collector of Behoboam, and as such could 
hardly fail to he obnoxious to the angry multitude. Regarding him as an enemy, they 
sprang upon him with murderous fury: "they stoned him with stones till he died," 
thus inflicting on him a death usually reserved for traitors and blasphemers. This was 
the one dark spot which marked what would otherwise have been a bloodless revolution. 
4. With final decision. The murder of his plenipotentiary convinced Behoboam that 
the opportunity for parley was over, that fair speeches would no longer sufiSce to quell 
the insurrection, and that the revolt of Israel was an accomplished, most likely a 
permanent, fact. Mounting his chariot in haste, and with alarm for his safety, the 
king who had come to Shechem to obtain a crown returned to Jerusalem, having lost 
ft kingdom. 

Lessons. 1. The danger of oppression (Eccles. vil. 7). 2. " In the multitude of 
counsellors is safety " (Prov. xi. 14), only when all are wise (Prov. xii. 5), and he who 
is counselled is not a fool (Prov. zii. 15). 3. He that hesitates is lost — exemplified in 
the case of Rehoboam. 4. The rashness of youth — shown in the second company of 
the king's advisers. 5. Quern deus vult perdere prius dementat. 6. " Better is a wise 
child than a foolish king " (Eooles. iv. 13). 7. Good men often suffer for the sins of 
others, and even lose their lives when working for the good of others — illustrated in 
Hadoram. 8. Wicked men would often like to flee from the sight, and much more 
from the consequences, of their own wickedness. — W. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XL 
The first four verses of this chapter would 
have been better placed as the conclusion of 
the previous chapter. They correspond with 
1 Kings xii. 21 — 24; and they tell how 
Behoboam was restrained from making bad 
worse, in a hopeless attempt to recover the 
seceding ten tribes, by war that would have 
been as bloody as foredoomed to failure. 
" The word of the Lord " to this intent came 
to the Prophet Sliemaiah, and through him 
to Behoboam. The remaining verses of the 
chapter are new matter, and belong to 
Chronicles alone. They tell how Behoboam 
■et to work to fortify his towns, or rather 
many of them (vers. 5 — 12); how he re- 
ceived priests and others from the kingdom 
of the ten tribes (vers. 13 — 17) ; and, last and 
worst, of the wives and concubines he took 
(vers. 18—23). 

Yer. 1. — He gathered of the house of Jndah 
and Benjamin. The parallel (1 Kings xii 
21) says more distinctly, "The house of 
Jadah with the tribe of Benjamin." They 
of Jeroboam (oh. x. 16) had flung it at 
Jndah: "Now, David, see to thine own 



house." Behoboam, of course, does this very 
thing. For the first time,/ornia%, Benjamin 
is now introduced as throwing in its lot with 
Judah, and the acted prophecy of Ahijah is 
seen fulfilled ; the chiefest of the tribes, and 
the tribe that came of the youngest and most 
petted of old Jacob's sons, are now wedded 
totheend. Thetribeof Benjamin lay hemmed 
in between Ephraim, to which it had once 
much leaned, and to which (as Benjamin 
was the blood-uncle of Ephraim) it was more 
closely related, and Judah, with which it 
had once been at variance (2 Sam. iL 12— 
32 ; iiL 1—27 ; xx. 1). But exactly on the 
border-line of Judah and Benjamin rose the 
city Jerusalem and the temple (Josh. zv. 8; 
xviii. 16; Jer. xx. 2); and, beyond doub^ 
this fact bad helped to bring about the mnch 
more friendly feeling, if not absolutely close 
union, that now for some time had existed 
between these two tribes in their contiguous 
allotments. A hundred and four-score thou* 
sand chosen men, which were warriors. 
According to Joab, in David's time the men 
able to bear arms of Judah alone were five 
hundred thousand (2 Sam. xxiv. 9). Com- 
pare the numbers in the next reign (oh. xiii 
3), and, later on still, in Jehoshaphat's (ch. 
xvii. 14—18). Both of these show that 
Abijah and Jehosbaphat respectively had 
improved the time given to baining mnob 



132 



THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xi. 1—23^ 



larger armies, whereas now Behoboam was 
taken by surprise. 

Ver. 2. — Shemaiah the man of God. This 
is the first historical mention (1 Kings xii. 
22) of Shemaiah. The second is found in 
oh. xii. 5, 7, on occasion of the invasion of 
Judah and Jerusalem by Shish:ik King of 
Egypt ; and the third, in the same chapter, 
ver. 15, that lie wrote a book respecting the 
acts of Behoboam. The expression, "man 
of God," owns to a somewhat unexplained 
history. It is first found in the added part 
of Deuteronomy (xxxiii. 1), where it is 
applied to Moses. It occurs once in Joshua 
(xiv. 6) ; twice in Judges (xiii. 6, 8) ; four 
times in Samuel (1 Sam. ii. 27; ix. 6 — 8); 
taenty-nine times in Kings; six times in 
Ohionicles; once each in Ezra, Kehemiah, 
and Jeremiah. 

Ver. 3. — To all Israel in Judah and Ben- 
jamin. There is difference of opinion as to 
who are intended in the expression, " all 
Israel," already confessedly ambiguous in 
two other passages. "When we consider the 
mention of Behoboam peisonally in tlie 
former clause of the vtrse, it would seem 
most probable that the meaning is all the 
people of the nation, resident in the Judah 
and Benjamin allotments, i.e. the nation 
called collectively Israel. This will include 
"the renmant" spoken of in the parallel 
(1 Kings xii. 23, compared with 17). 

Ver. 4. — This thing is from me ; i.e. the 
punishing disruption; not the precedent 
causes with the entirety of historical events ; 
this punishing and witnessing disruption is 
not to be " lightly healed." The man who 
did what caused it, the men whu did what 
caused it, cannot thus each undo what they 
have done— least of all undo it by the 
appeal of war. They and theirs will have, 
long as life lasts, as lives last, to go through 
the baptism of bitter suffering, and leave a 
heritage of the same for others. 

Vers. 5 — 12. — These eight verses teU how 
Behoboam, relieved of the responsibility of 
attempting to reconquer the revolted, wisely 
betakes hmiself to strengthening and defend- 
ing what was left to him. He builds fifteen 
"fenced cities," or "cities for defence," 
twelve of them south and west of Jerusalem, 
for fear of Egypt ; he fortifies certain strong- 
holds, oflHcering them, provisioning them, 
Knd supplying to them and " every several 
dty " the necessary weapons of warfare and 
shields. 

Ver. 6. — Bethlehem. This was a case not 
of aotoal new building of a city, but of re- 
■tonng and strengthening it. Bethlehem, 
originally Ephrath (Gen. xxxv. 16 ; xlviii. 7), 
was one of flie very oldest towns existent in 
Jacob's time. It was not called Bethlehem 
till long_ after the settlemeut of the tribes. 
It Was six miles from Jenudiem, on the east 



of the road to Hebron. Etam. A place 
near Bethlehem (1 Chron. iv. ", 4, not 32 } 
Septuagint of Josh. xv. 60) ; possibly the re- 
sort of Samson after his revenge on the Philis- 
tines (Judg. XV. 8, 11). It was not the Etam 
mentioned as belonging to Simeon (1 Chron. 
iv. 32). Tekoa. According to Jerome, as also 
Eusebius, six Eoman miles from Bethlehem, 
and nine from Jerusalem, or else, possibly 
by another road, twelve (Jerome's 'Pro- 
oemium in Amos,' and his ' Onomasticon '). 
It is absent from the Hebrew catalogue of 
Judah towns (Josh. xv. 49), but is in the Sep- 
tuagint Version of it. It was the place of 
the " wise woman " of 2 Sam. xiv. 2. 

Ver. 7. — Beth-znr. About five miles north 
of Hebron (see Josh. xv. 58 ; 1 Chron. ii. 
45; Neh. iii. 16). Shoco; properly, Socoft, in 
the Shefelah (Josh. xv. 35). According to 
Jerome and Eusebius, it was about nine 
miles from Eleutheropolis, on the road to 
Jerusalem (see also 1 Sam. xvii. 1). Adnl- 
1am. In the Shefelah (Josh. xv. 35). It 
was an ancient place (Gen. xxxviii. 1, 12, 20 ; 
Josh. xii. 15; Neh. xi. 30). See also the 
familiar passages (1 Sam. xxiL 1 ; 2 Sam. 
xxiii. 13; 1 Chron. xi. 15). 

Ver. 8. — Gath. Site still unknown. Some 
think it may be the Gath-rimmon of Dan 
(Josh. xix. 45). Otherwise it is Gath of the 
Philistines (Josh. xiii. 3; 1 Sam. vi. 17), 
and of Goliath (1 Sam. xvii. 4, 23). I. L. P., 
in Dr. Smith's 'Bible Dictionary,' i. 656, 
Tfishes to find it on a hill now called Tel-et- 
Safieh, on one side of the Plain of Philistia, 
about ten miles east of Ashdod and south- 
east of Ekron. See also "Topographical' 
Index," p. 411, in Gender's 'Handbook to 
the Bible,' 2nd edit. Other interesting re- 
ferences are 1 Sam. xvii. 1, 52; xxi. 10;. 
1 Chron. xviii. 1 ; ch. xxvi. 6 ; 1 Kings ii. 
39 ; 2 Kings xii. 17 ; Amos vi. 2. Mareshah. 
In the Shefelah (Josh. xv. 44), now Maraeh,- 
a short distance south of Eleutheropolis. 
Zerah the Cushite came here when he was 
invading Judssa (ch. xiv. 9. See also ch. 
XX. 37 ; MicdU i. 15). It was taken by John 
Hyrcanus, b.o. 110, and was demolished by 
the Parthians, b.o. 39. Ziph. Probably the 
present Tel-Lif, a little south-east of Hebron 
(Josh. XV. 55 ; see also 24. See also 1 Sam. 
xxiii. 14 — 24; xxvi. 2). 

Ver. 9. — ^Adoraim. This name is not found 
anywhere else. The meaning of the word is 
"two heaps," and very probably describes 
the physical features of the site. It is prob- 
ably the modern Dura. Its site is other- 
wise unknown. Laohish(see Josh.xv.39; also 
X. 3; xii. 11); probably the modern Cm- 
Lahit, that lies on the road to Gaza. Othei 
interesting references are 2 Kings xiv. 19; 
xviii. 14—17 ; xix. 8 ; Neh xi. 30 ; Mioah 
i. 13. Azekha (see Josh. iv. 35 ; also x. 
10); it was in the Shefelah (see also 1 Sam. 



OH. XI. 1—23.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



133 



xvii. 1 ! Neh. xi. 30 ; Jer. xxxiv. 7). The 
gite of it-is not identified. 

Ver. 10. — Zorah. The people of Zorah, 
or Zoreah, were the Zareatliites of 1 Chron. 
ii. 53; it was the home of Manoah, and the 
native place of Samson (see Josh. xv. 33; 
xlx. 41. Other interesting references are 
Judg. xiii. 25; xvi. 31; xviii. 2 — 11; Neh. 
xi. 29). It belonged to the original allotment 
of Ban, and is constantly named in company 
with Eshtaol. Aijalon. The modem Jah; 
also originally belonged to allotment of Dan 
(Josh. X. 12; xix. 42; xxi. 24. Other in- 
teresting references are Judg. i. 35 ; 1 Sam. 
xiv. 31 ; 1 Kings xiv. 30 ; 1 Ohron. vi. 66, 
69; oh. xxviii. 18). Hebron. One of the most 
ancient of cities still lasting, rivalling in this 
respect Damascus. It belonged to Judah 
and to its hill country (Josh. xv. 54 ; xx. 7) ; 
it was about twenty Boman nules south of 
J'erusalem. Its original name was Kirjath 
Arba. In Numb. xiii. 22 it is said that 
it was built "seven years before Zoan in 
Egypt," but it is not said when Zoan was 
built. It now contains about five thousand 
population, but scarcely a tithe of them Jews. 
Its long stretch of history is full of incidents 
of interest, and is partially illustrated by the 
references that follow : Gen. xiii. 18 ; xxiii. 
2 — 19, 20 ; XXXV. 27 ; xxxvii. 14 ; Numb. xiii. 
22, 23; Josh. x. 36; xiv. 6—15; xv. 13, 14; 
xxi. 11—13; 2 Sam. iv. 12; v. 5; Neh. 
xi.25. 

Ver. 12. — Having Judah and Benjamin on 
his side. The mention of both tribes just 
serves to point for us the fact that Benjamin's 
-existence and value were not absolutely 
ignored, but were for a short while quoted 
before the kingdom of Eehoboam became 
called by the name of Judah simply. 

Yer. 13. — The priests and the Levites that 
were in all Israel resorted to him out of all 
their coaBts. The emphasis thrown into the 
contents of this verse is evident and agree- 
able ; the ecclesiastical party acted worthily 
of itself. The priests and Levites could not 
bring themselves to offer sacrifice and service 
to the calves, or to forsake Jerusalem and 
the temple and the true altar. No doubt a 
stirring, throbbing history underlay the few 
but suggestive words which point here the 
conduct of the priests and Levites. These 
would not content to stand shoulder to 
•boulder with priests made not from the tribe 
of Levi (1 Kings xii. 31). 

Ver. 14. — Left their suburbs (so Lev. 
XXV. 34 ; Numb. xxxv. 1, 3, 7 ; Josh. xiv. 4 ; 
xxi. 12). Jeroboam . . . had oast them off. 
This glimpse reveals to us, with exceeding 
probability, that there had been some struggle 
on the solemn matter; we may readily 
imagine that Jeroboam had either tried it on 
in vain with the true priests and Levites, 
«r bod learned very conclusively beforehand 



that it would be vain (o try it on (oh. 
xiii. 9). 

Yer. 15. — The high places ; i.e. Dan and 
Bethel (1 Kings xii. 28—33). For the 
devils ; i.e. for the " hairy ones " (Dn'J?a'). 
Reference is intended to the idolatrous wor- 
ship of the " he-goatg " by the Hebrews, after 
the example of Egypt, and the reference here 
is either literal or derived (Lev. xyii. 7). 
For the calves (see 1 Kings xii. 28). 

Yer. 16 shows a good example on the part 
of the clergy, effectual, and follomed by the 
people. 

Ver. 17. — Strengthened . . . three years. 
" Eighteousness exalteth a nation, but," etc. 
(Prov. xiv. 34; Isa. xxxiii. 6). The sad 
knell is sounded aU too soon ; see first verse 
of next chapter. Three years' strength will 
soon become weakness, and three years' 
goodness will save no soul. 

Yer. 18. — The 'Speaker's Gommenfaty' 
opportunely suggests the probability that we 
may be indebted here to Iddo's "genealo- 
gies " (ch xii. 15). The word daughter here 
is a correction of the Keri, the Chethiv 
Imving been "son.'' This Jerimoth is the 
seventh out of a list of eight men of the same 
name mentioned in the two books of Chro- 
nicles. He is not given as one of the children 
of David's proper wives in either 1 Ohron. 
iii. 1 — 8 or xiv. 4 — 7 ; Jerome says it was 
the Jewish tradition that he was the sou of 
a concubine of David. It is just possible 
that Jerimoth and Ithream were two names 
of the same person. Abihail was second 
cousin of Mahalath. It is not quite clear 
whether Abihail were wife of Jerimoth and 
mother of Mahalath, or a second wife now 
mentioned of Eehoboam. The contents of 
the next verse not differencing the children 
there mentioned, and assigning her own t» 
each wife of Eehoboam, if these were two 
wives of his, favours the former supposition 
(our Hebrew text being " and she bare," 
not " which bare "). When it is said that 
Abihail was the daughter of Eliab, the 
meaning probably is, as again in ver. 20, 
granddaughter. (For Eliab, see 1 Sam. XTL 
6 : xvii. 13 ; 1 Chron. ii. 13.) 

Yer. 19. — (See last note.) If previous verse 
speaks of two wives of Eehoboam, of which 
wife (our Hebrew text being not "which 
bare," but "and she bare") were Jeusb, 
Bhamariah, and Zaham the children? or of 
which respectively, if they express the 
children of both ? As the words now stand, 
it can only be supposed, with all lexicons, 
that Abihail is mother of the three children 
on the two-wife supposition. 

Yer. 20. — Maaohah was the grand- 
daughter of Absalom by his daughter 'Famai, 
wife of Uriel (ch. xiii. 2 ; 1 Kings xv. 2). 

Yer. 21. — Eehoboam was clearly wrong Iqf 
Deut. xvii. 17 (note Solomon's Song vi 8). 



184 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xt 1—23. 



Yer. 22. — Cancel in this vene the italics 
"to be." Behoboam again offends against 
the "Law" (see Deut. xxi 15—17). He 
cannot jasUy plead as a precedent the in- 
stance m David and Solomon, as in 1 Chron. 
xxiii. 1; for this was only jnstified by the 
express Divine ordinance, as in 1 Ohron. zzii. 
9 ; xzlz. 1. 

Ver. 23. — The wise dealing of Behoboam, 
fourfold (weakening his children by division, 
giving them each employment, giving them 



also abundance of victual, and— as is pob- 
ably the meaning, though not said so either 
here or in the Septuagint — finding for them 
many wives), will not, thongh it were forty- 
fold, avail to cover his " despising" of the 
" Law." Bather his toise dealing is an indi- 
cation that his conscience was not quite at 
ease, and that he knew he was wrong. 
Nothing is so liable to blind judgment as 
personal afieotion* 



OMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 4, 6 — 17, and 23. — The discipline that resulted in obedience, aecompanied 
with right and earnest endeavour. The homiletic treatment of this chapter centres 
round two suggestions. 

I. The simple and prompt obedience of Eehoboam, in certain bespeotb, to thb 
Divine message of prohibition. Of which obedience on the part of Behoboam we 
may notice : 1, That it compared favourably with the conduct of those who, being 
bidden and encouraged in every way to go tip to war, and to possess a certain goodly 
land, re/used ; and, being commanded not to go up, insisted on going (Deut. i. 26, 43), 
to their discomfiture and defeat. 2. ITiat the mere pride of war must have gone far to 
make such obedience difficult. 3. That the somewhat juster pride of earnest desire to 
undo, if possible, his own mischievous doing, and to restore a united nation, must have 
contributed still further to the difficulty of that obedience. 4. And it is very possible 
that a sensitive shame in the presence of those young counsellors who had helped to mis- 
lead him, but who for certain never offered to help bear the blame of the consequences, may 
have added some contribution to the difficulty of obedience. Yet Eehoboam's obedience 
was apparently prompt and unquestioning. Terrible recent experience had not been 
thrown away, but had so far gained some wisdom for him. And the prophet's distinct 
announcement that the Lord had recognized and adopted the situation as one for his 
intervening and overruling providence, must have lent consolation to a truly penitent 
disposition, saved from remorse had there been tendency thereto, while in no way 
palliating the sin of either king or people. 

IL The babnbst and eight endeavours of Behoboam to shepherd all the 
better his lesser flock, his seduced kingdom. This was witnessed to in three 
leading and typical directions. 1. Behoboam, uses all the means of an outward kind 
that may " strengthen the things that remain." Cities, and fences, and strongholds, and 
forts, and stores of food, and all armour are seen to and supplied. 2. It was of deeper 
significance that he received only too gladly, welcomed out of a true faith then at loist, 
all the priests and Levites who found indeed that Israel was not the place and Jeroboam 
not the master for them. To have the recognition of religion, the faith of religion, the 
presence of the practical ministries and ministers of religion, is the salt of the earth, the 
health of a people, the conserving of the soundness of civil society. Sin, and a grievous 
tale of it, were the woe of even Judah; but- its core was never quite unsound, and its 
perpetuity was never broken ; while i-ottenness was the very core of Israel, and Jeroboam 
and their staff was to be broken absolutely. 3. The true, the devout, the pious of the 
country, those who " set their hearts to seek the Lord Ood," were likewise received and 
welcomed at the true altar, at Jerusalem the city of the great King, with their sacrifice* 
and offerings, following in the steps of their priests and ministers. We can imagine 
them pouring up to the city of their solemnities, like the regular health-bringing waters 
of some tidal river for Judah, who often mourned and was desolate and bereaved ; but 
for themselves, to the drawing of fresh spiritual life, deeper faith, added strength of 
hope, kindled joy and love, as they offered their sacrifices, paid their vows, and fre- 
quented their temple. People and king were strengthened, as thus " they walked in 
tiie way of David and Solomon." We could wish it were written without the ominous, 
ill-sounding qualification of " three years." These things are certainly very observable 
of Behoboam at this time, that a remarkable change had come over, not the spirit of 



OH.XI. 1— 23.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 135 

his dream, but of his real working life. We hear no more of his young counsellors. 
'Tb.Bj had been found out, and now were no longer clung to, even as " favourites " to 
whom royalty iniquitously insisted on Bhowing partiality. We recognize no further 
indications of the hectoring and insolent spirit in which Sehoboam had allowed him- 
self to answer the not unreasonable representations of those who had addressed him on 
the subject of lightening their acknowledged burdens. We learn of his desire and the 
beginning of his preparation to attempt to recover the nevertheless irrecoverable. He 
is divinely prohibited, and that, no doubt, to the saving of greater harm. He acquiesces 
in the prohibition, and with intensified zeal applies himself to the care of his diminished 
dominions. He would defend them from outer assault ; and they are also the resort 
and the refuge and the religious home they should be, for all the upright in all tha 
land. From our sight in this one chapter Behoboam vanishes, emulating steadily for 
three yearn the best portions of the example* of his fathers David and Solomon. 
Unhappily, the end was not yet. 

HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — t. — Fighting against trethren. Behoboam might have alleged some very 
strong reasons in defence of the proposed war (ver. 1). He might have pleaded that 
the tribes had no constitutional or moral right to revolt and secede, and that their 
secession would seriously and even fatally weaken Israel, and expose it to the mercy of 
her powerful and unscrupulous neighbours. But the word of the Lord came authori- 
tatively to him, " Ye shall not go up," etc., and the strife was stayed. These words 
may teach or remind us of — 

I. The itnsebmliness of domestic btrifb. It is not only such murderous violence 
as darkened the history of the first human family, and such bitter strife as that which 
too often divides brothers and sisters into plaintiffs and defendants; it is also theunfor- 
given offence, or the interminable dispute, which keeps their lives apart, or makes cold 
the hearts that should be warm with love ; and it is also the daily bickerings, accusa- 
tions, contentions, which come beneath the Divine displeasure. It is not only the 
presence of strife, it is the absence of love ; it is the want of kindness, considerateness, 
charity, sweetness of look and of tone, which gives dissatisfaction to bim who is ever 
saying, " As I have loved you, love one another." 

. II. The painfui. incongeuitv op Church dissensions. Apart from all ecclesias- 
tical controversy, in regard to which there may be honest difference of opinion and of 
action without any real bitterness of heart, there is often found within the borders of 
the same Christian community a difference which hardens into a dissension. It is 
here that the strong, decisive command, against which is no appeal, should be heard, 
"Ye shall not fight against your brethren." We may not be able to define in language 
the exact difference between allowable and honourable and even commendable defence 
of the true and wise in Christian thought and method on the one hand, and a reprehen- 
sible and unchristian dissension on the other hand. But if " our eye be single," and 
our Master's cause be dearer to our heart than our own preferences, we shall know 
where the difference lies, and we shall heed the prohibition of the text, and the injunction 
of the apostle, " Be at peace among yourselves " (1 Thess. v. 13). 

III. The pecdliab iniquity of fratricidal war. How pitiful the sight of the 
armies of Judah arrayed against the armies of Israel ; the children of Abraham and 
Is'iao and Jacob seeking one another's life, shedding one another's blood ! The peopla 
of God turning their weapons against each other, weakening the forces of righteousness, 
helping to extinguish the light that was in the world. Well might the prophetic 
word be uttered, " Ye shall not fight," etc. The Divine Father of the human family 
has, since then, loolied down on many a sad and shameful fratricidal war — wars in 
which father and son, brother and brother, have met in deadly contest on the battle- 
field ; wars in which the hearts of those united by the strongest bonds have been inflamed 
•gainst one another by the fiercest passions. Surely negotiation and concession should 
be carried to the very last conceivable point before men " go up and fight against their 
brethren." But it may be said that the words point to — 

IV. The wrongnkss of all war that is anTwisb avoidablb. And so, indeed, 
they do. For are we not all brethren ? are we not all " members one of another " ? 



136 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xi. 1—23. 



Are we not, whatever our nationality may be, children of the same heavenly Father, 
possessors of the same spiritual nature, lellow-sufferers from the same great spiritual 
malady, fellow- strugglers against the same spiritual foes, fc'llow-travellers to the same 
solemn future ? May we not all be the redeemed of the same Divine Saviour, workers 
in the same holy fields of usefulness, occupants of the same heavenly home ? Is it well 
that we who are brethren, that we who, beneath our superficial distinctions, are so 
closely and deeply united to one another, that we should be planning one anothci'g 
destruction, be rejoioino; in one another's discomfiture, be exercising our utmost art and 
putting forth our utmost skill to shed one another's blood? To all those who would 
enter lightly or needlessly into war, comes the strong and solemn prohibition, " Ye 
shall not fight against your brethren." — 0. 

Ver. 4. — Wrought of Ood. "For this thing is done of me." How much has God 
to do with the events and issues of our life? Speaking in the idiom of the ancient 
Hebrew writers, we should say — Everything. Speaking after our modem fashion, we 
should say — Much; and so much that we are altogether wrong and foolish if we do 
not take it into account. The words of the text, together with the context, suggest — 

I. That God dobs many things which, antecedently, we shottld not expect 
HE WOULD DO. Who would have expected, apart from his own warnings, that he 
would bring about the rupture in the kingdom of Israel ? How very preferable, in 
many waj s, does it seem to us that that little kingdom should remain united and 
strong instead of becoming divided and weak ! We should have thought that the 
Divine wisdom would devise some other punishment for Solomon's vain-gloriousness 
and defection, for Rehoboam's childish folly, than that which the text tells us wai 
wrought of him; there might have betn, we should say, some personal humiliation or 
Bome temporary national calamity from which it would soon have revived. But so it 
was not to be. And though it may yet remain inexplicable, it is certain that this 
rending of the kingdom in twain was " of God." In the history of our race, in the 
course of Christianity, we have witnessed or have read of the same thing. Sometimes 
it has been in the fate of institutions. God has let some prosper that we should have 
expected him to bring to ruin, and others he has allowed to perish that we should have 
expected his interposition to save. And many times it has been the lives of men. How 
often have we wondered that the bad and baneful life has not been shortened, that the 
noble and valuable life has not been spared! How difficult it has been to believe that 
this thing and that thing were " done of him" 1 Yet we know that the guilty do not 
live one day longer than he permits, and we know that " precious in the sight of the 
Loid is the death of his saints." We believe, though we cannot see, that God's hand 
is on all the springs of human life, that he is directing everything, and that those issues 
which at the time, or long after the time, seemed strange and deplorable, will prove to 
have been kind and wise and just. 

II. That the guilty should ascribe to him the issues op their tolly. Reho- 
boam's senseless behaviour at Shechem had obviously much to do with the political 
disaster that followed. Yet Divine righteousness had so much to do with it that God 
said, " This thing is done of me." Crime, vice, folly, sin, work out their issues in poverty, 
shame, sorrow, death. The moralist stands over the fallen culprit and says, not 
untruly, "You have brought this upon yourself; it is your own guilty hand that haa 
brought you to the ground." Yet, with equal truth, and perhaps with greater wisdom 
and kindness, the prophet of the Lord comes to him and says, " This end of evil is of 
God ; he has brought it about ; it is the mark of his Divine displeasure ; it is a summoni 
to another and a better course." Conversely, we may add — 

III. That the good should, and do, attribute to him the results of theib 
ENDEAVOURS. If it is the action of God's righteous laws, and in that way the working 
of his hand, that sin ends in misery and ruin, so is it on the other side. It is the out- 
working of Divine beneficence, it is the result of his wisdom and goodness, it is the 
consequence of his action, direct and indirect, that the fields are white unto the harvest, 
that the trees in the Master's vineyard are bringing forth fruit, that the young people 
are growing up into wisdom and spiritual comeliness, that character is ripening for the 
heavenly garner, that life is opening out into immortality. " This thing," also, " i» ol 
him." — G. 



o». XL 1—23.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 137 

VerB. 13 — ^18. — Fidelity to conscience. This migration of priests and people from the 
other tribes of Israel to Judah and Jerusalem was a serious event in the history of the 
people of God, and it presents a striking and suggestive spectacle to all time. It is an 
early illustration of fidelity to conscience. 

I. The seveeity of the strugqlb. These servants of Jehovah, priests and people, 
had to triumph over great obstacles in order to take the step on which they decided. 
They had : 1. To set at nought the commandments of the king. This was a more 
■erious thing then than it would be now ; it meant more rebelliousness in action, and it 
involved more danger to the person. 2. To cut themselves adrift from old and sacred 
associations. They had to forsake their neighbours and (many of them, no doubt) their 
relatives ; many had to leave their vocation or, at any rate, its exercise in familiar spots 
and among old and early acquaintances ; they had to make little of those sentiments of 
which it is in our human heart to make much. 3. To sacrifice material advantages. Of 
the Levites we read that they " left their suburbs and their possession " (ver. 14) ; and 
we may be sure that those who were n6t Levites, aud who, consequently, would have a 
much greater interest in the occupancy and holding of the land (Deut. x. 9), made still 
greater sacrifices than they. The families must Jaave gone forth " not knowing the 
things that would befall them," but knowing that they would encounter serious loss 
and discomfort, and would miss much which they had been accustomed to possess and 
to enjoy. 

n. The wisdom of theib choice. 1. They pleased God. God would accept and 
honour their fidelity, which was an act of faithfulness and obedience to himself. 2. 
They retained their self-respect. This they would not have done if they had conformed 
to the false rites which Jeroboam had instituted and ou which he was insisting; in that 
case they would iiave sunk far and fast spiritually, and would soon have lost all hold 
upon the truth. For we cannot dishonour the truth in the eyes of men and retain our 
own appreciation of it. 3. They took a course which ennobled them — a course by 
which they not only became entitled to the honour of their countrymen, but by which 
they committed themselves definitely to the service of God and confirmed their own 
faith in him. They did that for which their children and their children's children 
would "call them blessed" and noble. 4. They adHed materially to the strength of 
the kingdom which bore witness to the truth (ver. 17), and helped to make durable its 
godly institutions. 5. They became located where they could take part in the worship 
of God according to the requirements of their own conscience. Setting their hearts to 
seek the Lord God of Israel, they came where they could " sacrifice unto the Lord God 
of their fathers" (ver. 16). They lost much temporal, but they gained much spiritual 
advantage. They sowed " not to the flesh, but to the Spirit." They left houses of brick 
behind them, but they came where they could build up the house of a holy character, 
of a noble and useful life. There are those in Christian lands who do not likewise, but 
otherwise. For some temporal considerations they leave the home where there is 
everything to illumine the mind and enlarge the spirit and enrich the soul, and go 
where all this is absent. Doubtless the removal from one town to another is an action 
in which many motives may and should have their force, but let spiritual considerations 
have a great weight in the balance. — 0. 

Vers. 18 — 23. — Spiritual admixture. After reading the first fourteen verses of the 
last chapter (ch. x.), we hardly expect to come across the words, concerning Behoboam, 
■» and he dealt wisely " (ver. 23). But this king, though he could certainly be very 
foolish, was not all folly ; like most men, he was a spiritual admixture. We look at — 

I. The BiNauLAB bfibitual aduixt0re we find in him. The account we have 
of him is not a long one ; it is contained in two or three short chapters, but in these we 
count seven wise and four foolish actions. We find him (see above) very wise in 
taking time and in consulting others before giving an important decision on a critical 
occasion ; most foolish in heeding the counsel of the young men ; foolish in sending his 
minister that " was over the tribute " amongst those who were complaining bitterly of 
their taxation (ch. x. 18) ; wise in hearkening to and heeding the Divine prohibition 
of war (ver. 4) ; wise in fortifying and storing the strongholds on the frontier (vers. 
5 — 12) ; wise in welcoming to Judah the priests and people whom Jeroboam had driven 
ftway ; very foolish indeed in "desiring many wives" (ver. 23) and in establbhing sc 



138 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. Iob. xi. 1—23. 

large a harem (ver. 21) ; wise in choosing so many from the stock of David and in 
dispersing his sons about his small kingdom, where they could not quarrel among 
themselves, but be of some service to him ; wise in " walking in the way of David ' 
(ver. 17) ; foolish in departing therefrom after three years of obedience. 

n. The spiKiTaAL aduixtubb thebb is ru us. We find that good men have : L 
Those virtues and failings which seem to go together. They have, as we say, _" the 
faults of their virtues." With much strength and earnestness goes severity in the judg- 
ment of other people ; with much meekness goes inactivity ; with much vivacity and 
picturesqueness of style goes laxity, if not unveraciousness ; with much good-natured- 
ness goes carelessness, etc. 2. Failings which do not naturally accompany virtues. Of 
some good man whose general integrity we cordially acknowledge, whose excellency 
and usefulness (perhaps) we even admire, we have to admit reluctantly that be is very 
vain, or very proud, or very blunt, or very careless ; or we have to confess that there is 
some other defect in his character, perhaps more than one shortcoming. In truth, we 
have to confront the truths, viz. : 1. That Christian character is an admixture. It is 
good not unmarked with evil ; it is rectitude not without some occasional swerving to 
the right hand or to the left; it is rather an earnest aspiration or an honest and devout 
endeavour than a complete attainment ; it is a battle that will end in victory, but it is 
not (yet) the victory ; it is a race, and not the runner clasping the goal and receiving 
the prize. 2. That it behoves us to take heed how we judge. One failing does not 
unchristianize a character ; it is what is in the depth, and not what is on the surface, 
that decides our position ; the " spirit we are of," and not the proprieties of behaviour. 
8. That we do well to consider how much alloy is mixed with the pure gold of our own 
character. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 4. — A warlike expedition hindered. I. The king's abmt. 1. Whence 
collected. From Judah and Benjamin, or that portion of the latter which adhered to 
Judah. 2. Its place o/ rendezvous. Jerusalem, the metropolis of the southern king- 
dom. It was intended that the king's forces should proceed from the capital. 3. The 
number of its force. A hundred and eighty thousand men — a contingent of the army 
of Judah. 4. The character of its soldiers. "Chosen men, which were warriors;" 
picked veterans, because of the importance and difficulty of the expedition upon which 
they were about to be despatched. 5. The work for which it was designed. " To 
fight against Israel " — against the ten or nine and a half northern tribes who had lately 
belonged to the same empire with them, and were still of the same race. 6. The 
ultimate aim of the expedition. To reduce Israel to subjection. Politically viewed, it 
was not wrong to aim at the conquest of Israel ; only Behoboam would have done 
well had he sat down calmly and considered whether he was able, with the help of 
one or two tribes at most, to overcome ten, with a population vastly larger and 
equally inured to war with those acknowledging his sway (Luke xiv. 32). Eeligiously 
examined, it is not so certain Gehoboam was pursuing a legitimate aim, seeing that 
under him, no less than under his father, the unbroken empire had forsaken Jehovah 
and declined into idolatries, which declension, besides, waa the primal cause of the 
disruption that had taken place. 

II. Jehovah's inteedict. 1. Through whom conveyed. "Shemaiah the man of 
God." This prophet appears to have belonged to Judah (ch. xii. 15), and resided in 
Jerusalem ; unlike Ahijah, whose home was in Ephraim (1 Kings xi. 29). 2. To 
whom delivered. " Behoboam . . . King of Judah, and to all Israel in Judah and Ben- 
jamin." The Divine message was no doubt spoken in the palace to the king and his 
princes, and through them published to the assembled warriors. 3. In what terms 
issued. (1) A prohibition : " Ye shall not go up " upon this expedition, " nor fight 
against your brethren ; (2) a command : " Beturn every man to his house ; " and (3) 
a reason : " For this thing is done of me," saith the Lord. Thus to Rehoboam by She- 
maiah, as to Jeroboam through Ahijah, was the intimation given that the disruption 
of the kingdom exactly accorded with the Divine purpose. 4. Sow received. In sub- 
mission and with obedience. Whether this prompt compliance with Heaven's will was 
due, on the part of Rehoboam, his princes, and his army, to religion, humanity, or 
worldly policy, is not said by the Chronicler. They may have felt it would be dangerous 
to fight against God ; or been touched by the consideration that the Israelites ware. 



CH. XI. 1—23.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 139 

•fter all, their brethren ; or calculated that prudence would be the better part of valour, 
■eeing it was not self-eTident they would succeed in their enterprise. 

Lessons. 1. The sinfulness of war, especially of civil war. 2. The paramount 
authority of God in civil and political, no less than in private and religious, affairs. 3. 
The presence of God's iinger in all social and national movements, in the establishment 
•nd overthrow of kings, in the permitting or hindering (as his wisdom determines) of 
civil strife, etc. 4. The wisdom of obeying God. — W. 

Vers. 5 — 17. — The strengthening of a kingdom. L The ekection of fobteesses. 
(Vers. 5 — 12.) 1. Their object. To defend the frontiers of the kingdom, against both 
Israel on the north and Egypt on the south, for which last special need existed, con- 
sidering the friendly relations which had subsisted between Jeroboam and Shishak. 
Shisbak's invasion, which soon followed, showed Behuboam's apprehensions not to 
have been baseless. Though wars are seldom justifiable, it is never wrong or unwise 
on the part of a prudent monarch to consult for the protection of his country and 
people. 2. T/ieir names. (1) In the land of Judah. (o) On the southern frontier : 
Bethlehem, mentioned in Jacob's time (Gen. xxxv. 19), two hours south of Jerusalem, 
the birthplace of David and of Christ (1 Sam. xvi. 1 ; Micah v. 1 ; Matt. iL 5, 11), 
now Beit-Lahm. Etam, a town probably between Bethlehem and Tekoa, the present 
Tillage Urt&s, south of Bethlehem, near which is the spring called 'Ain Atan. Tekoa, 
now TeTcva, " on the summit of a hill covered with ancient ruins, two hours south of 
Bethlehem " (Keil). Beth-zur (Josh. xv. 58), a town on the watershed, identified 
with the modem Beth-sur, a ruin midway between Urtfts and Hebron. (6) On the 
western boundary towards the Philistines : Soco (Josh. xv. 35), the present Shuweike 
in Wady Samt, three hours and a half south-west from Jerusalem. Adullam (Josh. 
XV. 35), a very old Canaanitish town, that lay in the so-called Shephelah, or lowland, 
of Judah, probably to be identified with the present Deir Bublan, two hours north of 
Eleutheropolis. Oath, one of the five chief towns of the Philistines (Josh. xiii. 3), first 
subjected to the Israelites by David (1 Chron. xviii. 1), and under Solomon ruled by 
its own king, who paid tribute to the hraelitish throne (1 Kings ii. 39) ; according to 
the ' OnomasticoD,' situated five Roman miles from Eleutheropolis, on the road to Dios- 
polis; otherwise not yet identified, though Conder looks for it in the direction of Tell- 
ea-Safl. Mareshah (Josh. xv. 44), near to which Asa defeated the Ethiopian king Zerah 
(ch. xiv. 9), aocoiding to Eusebius, lay two Roman miles from, and in all probability is 
to be sought for in, the ruin Merdsh, twenty-four minutes south of Beit Jibrtn (Eleu- 
theropolis). Adoram, shortened into Dora (Josephus, 'Ant.,' xiv. 5. 3), is the present- 
day Dura, a village seven miles and a half west of Hebron, surrounded by olive-grovea 
and corn-fields (Kobiuson). Lachish, in the lowland of Judah (Josh. xv. 39), is probably 
the present ruin Lakis, three miles west-south-west from Beit Jibrin, situated "on • 
circular height covered with ancient walls and marble fragments, and overgrown with 
thistles and bushes " (Robinson, Bitter, Keil ; Pressel in Herzog, viii. 157 ; Reihm, L 876), 
though Conder prefers to find it in Tell-elrhesy, near Eglon. Azehdh (Josh. xv. 35), 
east of Ephes-dammim (1 Sam. xvii. 1), has not been discovered, (c) On the border 
of the Edomites : Hebron, originally Kirjath-arba, i.«. the city of Arba, " a great man 
among the Anakims" (Josh. xiv. 15; xv. 13; xxi. 11), afterwards a settlement of the 
patriarchs (Gen. xxiii. 2 ; xxxv. 27), now called Kl-Khalil, " the friend of God," in the 
hill country of Judah, seven hours from Jerusalem, one of the oldest towns of which 
we possess knowledge, having been " built seven years before Zoan in Egypt " (Numb 
xiii. 22). Ziph, probably in the hill country of Judah (Josh. xv. 55), to be looked 
for in the present ruin Tell Ziph, an hour and a quarter south-east of Hebron. (2) In 
the land of Benjamin, as a protection against the north. Zorah (Josh. xv. 83), not 
Samson's birthplace (Judg. xiii. 2), represented by the ruin Sura, ten Roman mile* 
from Eleutheropolis, on the road to Nicopolis, but a place lying on a high peak of the 
northern slope of the Wddi-Serar. Aijalon, the present village of Jdlo, on the verge 
of the plain Merj-ibn-Omeir, four leagues west of Gibeon. These last-named town* 
belonged originally to Dan, but after the disruption of the kingdom they appear to 
have lallen to the tribe of Benjamin. 3. The equipment of these strongholds. Captains 
were appointed, provisions laid up, and shields and spears stored up in every city 
(ver. 11). 



140 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xi. 1—23. 

II. The reformation of belioion. (Vera. 13 — 17.) 1. The priests and Levitt* 
out of all [srad returned to the temple. The occasion of this falling away from Jeroboam 
was that he and his sons had practically renounced the religion of Jehovah, had set up 
" high places " of his own in Dan and Bethel, where Jehovah was worshipped in the 
form of two ox-images, or golden calves, in imitation, most likely, of the images of 
Apis and Mnevis in Egypt, or of the " calf " made by Aaron in the wilderness, the 
notion of which doubtless was also borrowed from Egypt (1 Kings xii. 28). These 
calves and other images of animals the Chronicler calls she'erim (Hebrew), " devils " 
(Authorized Version), "he-goats" or "satyrs" (Revised Version), after which the Israelites 
had gone a-whoring in Egypt (Josh. xiiv. 14), and even in the wilderness (Lev. xvii. 7 ; 
Amos V. 25, 26). " In later times they appear to have connected with it [this worship] 
notions of goblins, in the form of goats, who haunted the wilderness and laid in wait 
for women" (Gerlach). Jeroboam, then, having set up this rival form of worship, had 
no further use for the regularly ordained priests and Levitea, unless they would conform 
to the new cultus; and because they would not, he cast them out from their oflSoes 
and would no more allow them " to sacrifice unto the Lord." It says a good deal for 
their conscientiousness and courage that, rather than renounce what they believed to 
be the true religion, or worship God otherwise than according to their consciences, they 
cheerfully abandoned " their suburbs and possession " — in modem phraseology, their 
residences and emoluments; Scotticd, their manses and glebes. They were the first 
nonconformists in the northern kingdom. 2. The pious worshippers of Jehovah out of 
all Israel returned to Jerusalem. These are described: (1) By their characters. " Such 
as set their hearts to seek the Lord Q-od of Israel." The essence of all religion is " to 
seek the Lord God of Israel," in whose favotir is life, and whose " loving-kindness is 
better than life " (Ps. xxx. 5 ; Ixiii. 3), the knowledge of whom is also life eternal (John 
xvii. 2). Nor can Glod be sought unless with the heart as distinguished from the mind, 
and with the whole as contrasted with a divided heart (ch. xv. 12 ; Ps. cxix. 2, 10; 
Jer. xxix. 13). And even this is impossible without determination, energy, and per- 
severance on the part of him who desires to be religious (Ps. ix. 1 ; 2 Kings x. 31 ; 
Acts xi. 33). (2) By their worship. They " came to Jerusalem to sacritice unto the 
Lord God of their fathers." True religion cannot subsist alongside of false worship. A 
serious mistake it is to suppose that any form of expression will suffice as an ontlet for 
pious feeling. God must be approached and served in the way and through the form« 
he has himself prescribed. 3. Eehoboam and his princes returned to the service of 
Jehovah. (1) Their reformation was probably sincere so far as it went. But (2) it did 
not go far enough. They did not abandon entirely the idol-worship of Solomon, but 
conjoined with it the service of Jehovah. And (3) it was of short duration, lasting 
only three years (ver. 17), i.e. so long as the flight of invasion was on them, but dis- 
appearing when all fear on that score was at an end (oh. xii. 1). 

Learn : 1. The worthlessness to a kingdom of fortresses without religion. 2. The 
worthlessness to a person of religion without sincerity and truth. 3. The worthless- 
ness to a state of a king without a God. 4. The worthlessnets to either state or 
individual of goodness that is not permanent. — ^W. 

Vers. 18 — 23. — A royal polygamist. I. Rehoboam's wives. 1. The numher of 
them. In all eighteen wives and sixty concubines. Solomon had seven hundred wives, 
princesses, and three hundred concubines (1 Kings xi. 3). David even had more wives 
and concubines than was good for him (2 Sam. iii. 2 — 5 ; v. 13 ; xii. 8). Oriental 
monarchs generally had well-filled harems. Barneses II. had a hundred and nineteen 
children (sixty sons and fifty-nine daughters), " which gives ground for supposing a 
great number of concubines, besides his lawful wives" (Brugsch, vol. ii. p. 115). Poly- 
gamy was also permitted to, and practised by, the monarchs of Assyria, whose palaces 
accordingly were guarded by a whole army of eunuchs (Sayce, ' Assyria, its Princes, 
Priests, and People,' p. 129). 2. The chief of them. (1) " Mahalath, the daughter of 
David's son Jerimoth," who was probably a son of one of David's concubines, as Jerimoth 
is wanting in the list of David's sons (1 Chron. iii. 1 — 8) ; " Abihail, the daughter of 
Eliab, the son of Jesse " (1 Chron. ii. 13), is not a second wife of Rehoboam's (LXX.), 
as the words " which bare " (ver. 19) and " after her " (ver. 20) show, but Mahalath'* 
mother, who was thus David's niece, as Mahalath's father was David's grandson. 



OH. xn. 1—16.] TEE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



141 



Mahalath was probably the first wedded of Behoboam's spouses. (2) " Maachah, the 
daughter of Absalom." Called also " Micaiah, the daughter of Uriel of Gibeah " (ch. 
xiiL 2), or of Abishalom (1 Kings xv. 2), Maachah was probably the daughter of 
Tatnar, whose husband was the above Uriel or Abishalom, and whose father was 
Absalom (2 Sam. xiv. 27). If Mahalath was the first of Behoboam's wives, Maachah 
was the favourite, probably on account of beauty and fascinating manners inherited 
from her grandfather (2 Sam. xiv. 26 ; xv. 6). 

II. Behoboam's ohildken. 1. The number of his sons. Twenty-eight, among whom 
were (1) the sons of Mahalath, nowhere else mentioned, "Jeush, Shamariah, and 
Zaham, men not distinguished for their own sakes, and hardly worthy of further notice 
for their father's sake ; and (2) the sons of Maachah, " Abijah, or Abijam (1 Kings xv. 
1), and Attai, and Ziza, and Shelomith," of whom only the first emerged from obscurity. 
Behoboam's daughters are not named, but only numbered. In those days woman had 
not attained the place which was her due, and which has since been assigned her by 
Christianity. 2. The favourite amongst his sons. Abijah. Though not the firstborn, 
Behoboam designated him as successor to the throne, no doubt to the injury and dis- 
pleasure of the firstborn ; but in doing so, if he obeyed not the Law (Deut. xxi. 16), he 
at least followed the example of David, who preferred Bathsheba's son Solomon to the 
throne, instead of his firstborn, Amnon the son of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess. He also 
made Abijah ruler among his brethren, set him at their head, appointed him as governor 
over them in the various state ofBces they held, and entrusted to him the crown trea- 
sures and the strongest cities (Josephus, ' Ant.,' viii. 10. 1). 3. The treatment of his 
other sons. He " dealt wisely " with them. (1) He dispersed them abroad among the 
different garrison cities, giving them commands in these, so that by their separation from 
one another and their occupation with military duties they might have neither time 
nor opportunity to conspire with Jeroboam, or any other monarch, against Abijah or 
himself. (2) He provided for them abundant maintenance, i.e. a living suitable to 
their princely rank, so that no temptation to discontent might assail them. Behoboam 
probahly knew that if his sons had their bellies well filled their souls would be at ease. 
(3) He sought for them many wives. Whether these were chosen out of the different 
districts where the sons held commands, in order to bring his sons into closer connection 
with the inhabitants of the same (Ewald, ' History of Israel,' vol. iv. p. 47), the 
certainty is that the practice of polygamy in which he encouraged them would not 
tend to increase their warlike energy. 

Lessons. 1. The misery as well as sin of polygamy, leading as it does to divided 
afifections and unjustifiable partialities. 2. The duty of dealing wisely with children, 
but not after the fashion of Behoboam, — W. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER xn. 
This chapter finishes for ns the history 
of Behoboam, his " acts " and his character ; 
and, with the preceding two chapters, it 
may be counted among the masterpieces of 
Scripture biography. In so short a com- 
pass, how well marked, how distinctly limned, 
are the features of the man ! The name of 
Behoboam is, undonbtedly, one of the more 
important, if not taking rank among the 
most important, of Scripture, and no one 
can rise from the study of the fifty-eight 
verses of these three chapters without a very 
satisfactory conception of the man Behoboam 
and what he was. It will be seen from the 
langnage of the second verse, compared with 



ch. xi. 17, that, Tonghly speaking, this 
chapter stretches over the last sad and evO 
twelve of the whole seventeen years of Be- 
hoboam's reign. This, however, does not 
negative the possibility of the anticipation 
in ch. xi. of what, in point of chronology, 
belongs to this ch. xii. The parallel of this 
chapter is 1 Kings xiv. 21 — 31, which gives 
ns more than our vers. 1, 6, 12, 14, of what 
is personal to the evil-doing of Behoboam, 
but much less than our text respecting 
Shishak and his army, and Shemaiah and 
his messages. 

Yer. I. — ^Whes Behoboam had established 
the kingdom . . . strengthened himself; fe. 
whUe insecure and full of spprehensionB, 
Behoboam walked humbly and surely, but 



142 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. hi. 1—16. 



when he thought his object, simply tafety, 
wag gained, bis true and worse self ap- 
peared OT reappeared, and, clothed with 
self-confldence, he forsakes the "Law," to 
bring sure retribution on himself. All Israel 
with him. Wben we turn to the fuller 
statements of the parallel (1 Kings ziv. 22 
— 24), we see that the sins that were at 
work were not those of king merely, but 
of people, especially in abominations such 
as those of sodomy and the immoral practices 
of the " groves," as well as the ecclesiastical 
and irreligious iniquities of " high places " 
and " image " worship ! 

Ver. 2. — Shishak ; Hebrew, p^'B*; Septua- 
gint, 2ouiTa)ci;u ; Shishak, Sheshonk, Seson- 
chis, the Sheahenk I. or Shashank L of the 
montiments, son of an Assyrian king called 
Nimrod or Nemaruth, became King of Egypt 
as first of six kings who lasted in all a 
hundred and seventy years, of the twenty- 
second dynasty of Manetho, reigning in 
Bubastis. To him Jeroboam had fled for 
refuge from Solomon (1 Kings xi. 40). He 
reigned An. Sac. 3830 (b.o. 980) to 3851 
or 3863. This makes Solomon's reign A.s. 
3799 (B.0. 1011) to 3839 (b.o. 971). Shishak's 
invasion, therefore, in aid of Jeroboam, was 
JL.S. 3844 (b.o. 966). A representation of it 
exists in relief sculptured on the south 
external wall of the temple of Amon, at 
Karnak, Thebes ; and, together with this, an 
eliiburate list of countries, cities, tribes, con- 
quered by Sheshenk or tributary to him, 
a liundred and thirty-three in number. 
Among these are some of the very fifteen 
fenced cities (see our ver. 4) which Eeho- 
boam built or fortified, viz. the three, Shoco, 
Adoraim, and Aijalon, while the erasure of 
fourteen names just where these are found 
accounts, no doubt, for the non-appearance 
of others of them. There are also the names 
of Levitioal and Canaanite cities, situated 
in the kingdoms of the ten tribes, but belong- 
ing to the Levites who had been compelled 
to migrate into Jadah. The dates given 
above are those accepted by Conder, in his 
•Handbook to the Bible' (see pp. 28—34), 
and do not quite agree with those adopted 
in Smith's ' Bible Dictionary,' iii. 1287 — 
1294. Both of these most interesting articles 
will well repay perusal, as well as the 
trticle " Thebes " in the latter work, iii. 
1471 — 1475. (The name and word Shishak 
has no relation whatever with the Sheahach 
of Jer. XXV. 26; li. 41, Tja't!*, a word which, 
possibly spelling Bahel or even Ur, marks 
the name of a place, and is evidently used 
by Jeremiah for Babylon or Babylonia.) 

Ver. 3. — Twelve hundred chariots. The 
parallel does not give the numbers. These 
are large, but not inconsistent with those 
mentioned in other connections, whether 
those of Solomon, or, going further back, of 



Pharaoh, lubims. The letter $ is orth(>- 
graphically redundant in this, as also in 
the following names, the forma being already 
plural The Lubim mean the Libyans, west 
of Egypt. They are probably the people 
represented on the Egyptian monuments aa 
Lebu, of Semitic type, subjugated by Egypt's 
kings in the thirteenth centiuy b.o. They 
were among the oldest of colonists, that 
drifted along the coast of Africa, north of 
the Great Desert, from the East, and are 
perhaps the same aa the Lehabim (Gen. x. 
13; ch. xvi. 8; Nah. iii. 9; Dan. xi. 43; 
Jer. xlvi. 9; Ezek. xxxvili. 5). Snkkiims. 
Probably an Arab tribe, though the Septua- 
gint Version gives TpayoSirai, as though 
teking them for Troglodytes in the hills 
west of ^e Bed Sea ; so, too, the Vulgate. 
Gesenins at once renders the wsp tent- 
dwellers, and sets the people in question 
down for some African tribe. They are not 
mentioned elsewhere so as to be recognized. 
Ethiopians. These were ethnically Chishites, 
but the territorial application of the term 
was confined to the African Cushite settlers. 
It is remarkable that, in ch. xxi. 16, Ethio- 
pians are classed with Arabians, but other- 
wise with African peoples, and in particular 
Egypt (Ps. Ixviii. 31 ; Isa. xx. 3, 4 ; xliii. 3 ; 
xlv. 14 ; Jer. xlvi. 9 ; Ezek. xxx. 5 ; xxxviiL 
5). They were many-tribed, and the Sabseans 
were a leading tribe of them. It is evident 
that Shishak could draw from a large and 
varied dominion subject to his dynasty at 
this time. 

Ver. 5. — Shemaiah (see Exposition, ch. 
xi. 2). The princes. These seem to have 
been a fruit of some original organization 
with Solomon, aa they are not found with 
David (1 Kings iv. 2—6). Ye have for- 
saken me . . . therefore have I also left 
you. The same Hebrew verb is employed 
in both members of this sentence, and the 
rendering sliould follow in like manner (see 
ch. vii. 19—22). 

Ver. 6. — Note, as very apt parallel pas- 
sages, Jer. xili. 15, 18 ; Exod. ix. 27. 

Ver. 7. — Some deUveranoe. The Hebrew 
for "some" here is oyas. There is plain 
authority (Euth ii. 7 ; Ps. xxxviii. 10) for 
translating this word as of time, and the ren- 
dering " a little while " of the margin, will, 
therefore, seem preferable. But see next 
note, and the " altogether" of ver. 12. It has 
often been most justly remarked what grate- 
ful note should be taken of the fact that 
God always is recorded as turning such a 
wistful, loving eye to any symptom of repent- 
ance (1 Kings xxi. 27—29; Jonah ii. 5—9). 
Who can estimate the loss of men, that the 
symptoms have been so frequent, so com- 
paratively easily found as compered with 
the reality of lastingness ? 

Ver. 8. — The genius of this verse, never- 



«H. xn. 1— 16.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 



148 



fheleas, mil quite admit of the Authorized 
Version rendering, proposed to be superseded 
In the last Terse. This says life shall be 
qmred, but still severe moral reckoning (that 
of servitude in a sense and tributariness) 
■ball be taken with tlie transgressors and 
forsakers of the Lord I The contrast of 
Ood's service and that of men and the world 
again touchingly recalls the words of Christ 
(Matt xi 28—30). 

Ver. 9. — ^Words do not tell in this verse 
the "humbled service" of Behoboam and 
the princes ; but the position speaks, speaks 
volumes of itself. Where did Behoboam 
hide himself where would he not have been 
glad to hide himself, while the treasures 
of the house of the Lord, and those of his 
own house, were coolly taken by the foreign 
■oldiery, none forbidding them, nor resisting, 
nor even making afraid ? 

Ver. 10. — Instead of which King Behoboam 
made shields of brass. A most humbling 
nversal of the glowing promise afterwards 
given, "For brass I will bring gold" (Isa. 
Ix. 17). 

Ver. 12. — This verse is not in the parallel, 
but is particularly proper to Chronicles and 
its unifuim tenor. And also in Judah 
things went well. The obvious meaning, 
"and still some good was left in Judah." 
There 'sras some hopefulness in the situation, 
and reason for striving mightily "to be 
watchful, and strengthen the things that 
remain, that are ready to die " (Eev. iii. 2). 
The occurrence of nh^h is somewhat against 
the rendering of "some" in ver. 7 as an 
ad\ erb of time. 

Ver. 13. — The parallel to the remaining 
Terses of this chapter is found In IKings xiv. 
21, 22, 29—31. In Jerusalem. Possibly, 
considering the words of ch. xi. 5 — 12, 17, 
this may indicate that Behoboam was 
brought down to thinking almost more of the 
safety of Jerusalem and himself than of the 
kingdum in its length and breadth. One 
and forty years old (see our note, ch. x. 8, 
towards the end, and compare our ch. xiii. 
7, as well as the parallel places, 1 Kings 
Xii.8 and xiv. 21). It cannot be held as con- 
elusively shown that the age of forty-one is 
incorrect. An Ammonitess (see 1 Kings xi. 
1 — 9). Eehoboam's mother's name and 
nationality are noted also, and twice in the 
parallel (1 Kings xiv. 21, 81). Naamah 
was possibly the daughter of Nahash (1 
Chron. xix. 1— xx. 3). The briefness but 
decidedness of the notifications made as to 
this mother of Behoboam leaves us without 
doubt that there is not lacking significance 
in them. Schulz (in his 'Scholia in Vet. 
Test.,' vol. iii.) says the reason is " quia ea 
Alio idololatriffi aobam dedisse videtur : " 
Keil and berthcau think that, thougli there 
wai evidence of this In the case of the men- 



tion of Asa's mother (1 Kings xv. 13), the 
explanation here is that Naamah " appears " 
to have had, as queen-mother, oonsiderable 
infiuenoe in the government. They do not 
specify where they find this to " appear" with 
any marked plainness. It is quite true that; 
in the successive accounts of the Jewish 
kings, the name of each mother is mentioned 
(1 Kings XV. 2; ch. xiii. 2; 1 Kings zziL 
42 : ch. XX. 32, etc.). We shonld say it ia 
like the book, so Divine and human, called 
the Bible, to do so far-seeing and far-reaohinc 
a tiling as to give the mother's name ; and 
practically to say that Solomon and Naamah 
were (in special sense for Judah) a repe- 
tition of Adam and Eve. How utt Judah 
and her line of kings may have correctly 
said, tliey were answerable for "death and 
all our woe," the sacred historians ay 
(1 Kings xi. 4, 9—11, 14, 23, 26, 31, 33, 36 : 
xii. 24 ; oh. xi. 4). 

Ver. 14. — These summarizing moral esti- 
mates of the character of the succeeding 
kings are, indeed, common to the compilers 
of both chronicles and Kings, though absent, 
in the case of Behoboam, from the parallel. 

Ver. 15. — The authority quoted by the 
writer of Kings (xiv. 29, 30) is " the book of 
the Chronicles [literally, the book of the acti 
of the days, i.q. the title of our ' Chronicles '] 
of the kings of Judah," on which follows in 
the next verse the substantive statement, 
"And there was war between Behoboam 
and Jeroboam all theirdays." The authorities 
quoted here are the works of Stiemaiah and 
of Iddo, and it is possible that the following 
words touching the continual wars between 
Behoboam and Jeroboam, which have not 
the substantive verb among them, may have 
been part of the title of Iddo's work, although 
it is more probable that his work on ' Gene- 
alogies' would retain the character of a 
specialty. We subjoin for English readers 
a literal translation of this verse : " And 
the words (acta) of Jeroboam first and last, 
are they not written in the words (acts) 
of Shemaiiih the prophet, and of Iddo the 
seer touching genealogies" [but Gesenius, 
sub voce, " in the manner of a genealogical 
table"] "and wars of Behoboam and Jero- 
boam perpetual." We think that neither 
our Authorized Version nor Gesenius's ren- 
dering probably convey the corn ct mean- 
ing. The hithp. of t^'n' would be better 
satisfied by the rendering, " to make a regis- 
ter," i.e. "to preserve a continued register 
of David's genealogy." 

Ver. 16. — In the city of David; i.e. on 
Mount Zlon, an eminence on the northern 
part of Mount Moriah. Here was the bury- 
ing-place of the kings, chambers with 
recesses for the successive kings. To this 
place of royal sepulture some of the king* 
were not permitted to be brought (oh. ^" 



144 



THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xn. 1—16. 



20; xiiv. 25; xxviii. 27; 2 Kings xv. 7). 
The chief cemetery of the city was on the 
•lopes of tlie valley of the Kidron (1 Kings 
XV. 13 ; 2 Kings xxiii. 6 ; oh. xxix. 5, 16) ; 
another, probably, was south of the city on 
the sides of the ravine of Hinnom (Jer. vii. 
82). In the king's sepnlchres eleven out of 
Jndah's twenty-two kings were laid — David, 
Solomon, Behoboam, Abijah, Asa, Jehosha- 

5 hat, Ahaziah, Amaziah, Jotham, Hezekiah, 
bsiah. For Asa (oh. xvi. 14) and Hezekiah 
(ch. xxxli. 33) places of special honour were 
found. The good priest Jehoiada also had 
burial in the king's burial-plaoe (ch. xxiv. 



16). Kings JeTioram (oh. xxi. 20) and Joaih 
(ch. xxiv. 25) were buried in the " city of 
David," but not in the above Bepulchrea. 
Uzziah, because a leper, was buried in the 
" field of the burial of the kings " (ch. xxvi. 
23). It is all but certain that these royal 
sepulchres were in the enclosure now called 
the " Haram area." (For other interesting 
and important references, see Neh. iii. 16; 
Ezek. xliii. 7, 9; 2 Kings xxi. 18, 26; oh- 
xxxiii. 20; xxviii. 27.) While Behoboam 
was laid thus to sleep with his fathers, Jero- 
boam's reign had yet four yean to ran. 



EOMILETICS. 

Ve^^ 1 — 16.— .4 model instance of Divins goodness and opportunity prolonged t» 
«He who annulled all, and vitiated every highest privilege vouchsafed to him, by the 
one fact of his own infidelity of heart. We are strikingly taught, and we vividly recall 
from the contents of this chapter, the following lessons and facts. 

I. How VERT PBONE FOKGBTFULNBSS OP OUR PAST SINS IS TO FOLLOW WITH SWIFT 
BAPIDITY OH PRESENT RESPITE FROM FEAR, RELIEF FROM STTFFERINa, REMISSION OV 
PUNISHMENT, HESTORATIOJir OF OUR FORMER STATUS, IN WHATSOEVER KIND ! Yet reten- 
tive memory of that sin would constitute our duty, our best wisdom, one of our surest 
cautions for the future, one of the likeliest fertilizings of penitence, and springs of humble 
gratitude. 

II. How VERY PEONB SBOURITT, ABSOLUTE CONFIDBNOB IN SELF, AND THE SPIRIT 
OF EITHER DEFIANCE OR RECKLESS DISREOARD TOWARDS WHAT MAT AGAIN INVADE, 
IN FEAB, IN PAIN, IN PUNISHMENT, IN LOSS OF EVEN THE EARTHLY POSITION WE LOVE 

80 WELL, ARE TO FOLLOW QuioKLT ON PRESENT RELIEF ! Too often, when the deeply 
useful memory of the sin is put far away out of sight and out of memory, it is but the 
precursor of the springing up of a very crop of positively harmful growth. The ground 
that is unoccupied by sweet pasture will be sure to seed itself, of all floating iU weeds ; 
•nd to bring forth even of its own self, and own emptiness, or own pravity, the baneful, 
the noxious, the poisonous herb 1 

■ III. How KIND THE PUNISHMENTS OF GoD ARE ! They are essentially so. Their 
intent is to recover, to reform, to improve. With lesson in them, with suggestion in 
them, with caution and warning in them, with course and system of dis»pline, they 
offer exactly what it were impossible to get of self, or to get of others, or to get from 
anywhere except from the touch of the hand or the finger, or the rod of that tenderesl 
to smite, the all-knowing Father of us all 1 So ver. 8 says deliberately, distinctly, that 
God would teach Behoboam and condescendingly wait near him some while, to teach 
him, the comparison of services, the difference by experience of his yoke, burden, and 
service most ennobling, and those of such a one as Shishak King of Egypt. Behoboam 
would find a greater difference between the two than that of his own well-known 
figurative language, the " whip " and the " scorpion." In tenderer connection, equally 
truly and sweet, did Caroline Fry, once on a time, teach every chastened child of Qg^ 
aad of sorrow, and of smart, and of even woe, to sing — 

■* Often the olonds of deepest woe 
So sweet a message bear, 
Dark though they seem, 'twere hard to find 
One frown of anger there t 

"It needs our hearts be weaned from earth, 
It needs that we be driven. 
By loss of every earthly stay. 
To find onr hope in heaven I " 

rV. How BBADT TO FORQIYE, TO OBANT BBSPITB AND FURLOUGH, TO QIYS * MOX AS* 

Vaok fob BBPENTANoa," THE LoBD Goo OF US ALL IS 1 Fully thirteen years, m kk 



OH. ml— 16.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 146 

appears, did such manner of long-suffering, of forgivingness, even when it could not be 
precipitated into objective forgiveness, hold out — sparing, pitying, prolonging probation, 
repeating trial, accepting the words, the posture, the fastings, the tears, the petitions it 
humiliation, the partial and transient amendments of life and conduct, in case anything 
real, deep, lasting, might haply come of them. Fully thirteen years (see vers. 2, 13) 
was Behoboam kept on the throne, and all this long-suffering, considerate mercy shown 
to him, as though for him. alone, or for him first, or for him chiefly, it bad been written, 
" For he knoweth our frame ; he remembereth that we are dust " — who all the vihUt wai 
neutralizing and cancelling Divine goodness, gift, opportunity, by the one damning vice 
that wrote ^tself aa his epitaph, itself history's last memorandum of him, the laHiOnt- 
able summary in a sentence, " Because he fixed not his heart to seek the Loidl " 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. 1. — The peril of security. The King of Judab, whose career had been marked 
by such a strange admixture of good and evil, of wisdum and folly (see homily on oh. 
xi. 18 — 23), here takes another turn in his varied course, and this time a decisive one ; 
but we mark first — 

I. The good work or consolidation. He " had established the kingdom, and had 
strengthened himself." The reference is, principally though not perhaps exclusively, 
to the action chronicled in the previous chapter (vers. 5 — 12, 22, 23). When he found 
that it was not open to him to regain the seceded tribes by force of arms, he set himself, 
like a wise man, to secure the fraction that was left him. He may have consoled him- 
self with the thought — which is not only a thought but a truth — that a small estate 
that is well governed and well kept is far better than a large one that is ill managed, 
and that, consequently, soon shows signs of feebleness and decline. Those three years 
of consolidation, spent in the service of Jehovah, and under the sanction of his priests 
and prophets, were years of real worth to the country, and probably of happiness to 
Rehoboam. In the conduct of our estate, whether that be some business in which we 
are engaged, or some institution or Churcli we are serving, or some character (another's 
or our own) that we are building up, we spend our time and our strength well in the 
work of "establishing and strengthening." In the supreme matter of human character 
we can hardly lay too much emphasis on this matter of consolidation. Character must 
be fortified by knowledge, by the understanding and the cordial acceptance of Christian 
principles, by exercise, by the nourishment and growth of a strong love for what ia 
pure and true and generous, and by a hearty hatred of all that is corrupt and mean 
and false. 

II. The temptation of supposed gEoxmiTT, When Behoboam had attained to a 
position in which he felt himself secure, then he relaxed his hold on his early convio- 
tions, he surrendered his trust iu Grod, he abandoned the faith and practice of his &then. 
While conscious of danger from without, he was glad to be able to look for help to the 
Power that was above, and he remained loyal to Jehovah ; as soon as he felt or fancied 
himself secure witum his ramparts, he flung away his spiritual support. Here we have 
guilt and folly in equal measure — guUt, for it was singularly ungrateful of him to for- 
sake the God who had so clearly placed his dynasty on the throne, and impious of him 
to turn from the worship of him whom he believed to be the one true and living God ; 
folly, for he might have known that his material defences would avail him nothing tf 
the anger of the Lord was enkindled and the hand of the Lord directed against him. 
Supposed security is a strong temptation. 1. When we believe ourselves to be possessed 
of a sufficiency of material treasure, we think we can afford to be independent of the 
aid of the Divine provision. 2. When we think we have surrounded ourselves with idl 
needful sources of earthly and human joy, we are apt to think we can dispense with tha 
consolations and the satisfactions which are in Jesus Christ ; when we have attained to 
some strength of mind and of will, to some measure of maturity, we are tempted to 
suppose that there is less necessity, if any at all, to look upward for Divine support, to 
lean on the Divine arm. To yield to this temptation is to err sadly, to sin grievoudy. 
(1) To err sadly ; for we shall find that no defences or securities that are of earth 
or that are of man will avail us against all the difficulties and hazards that are around 

II. CHRONICLES. t, 



146 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHEONIOLES. [ch. xii. 1— IB. 

and against us, without the aid of an almighty arm ; and the end will he failure and 
dishonour. (2) To sin grievously ; for God is demanding of us, in terms we cannot fail 
to understand and with a frequency we cannot fail to mark, that we should put our 
trust in him, and not in man ; in him, and not in ourselves ; in him, and not in " the 
chariots and horses " of this world. 

in. The bbbponsibiutt of hioh position. Rehoboam " forsook the Law of the 
Lord, and all Israd with him." His people were not unaccountable for following him, 
hut how weighty was his responsibility for leading them astray 1 — 0. 

Vers. 2 — 12. — Penalty, penitence, and forgiveness. It was not many months before 
Rehoboam found out the heinousness of his offence, the magnitude of his niistake ; for 
in the path of sin comes penalty, and behind penalty steals shame. Happily for him 
there was mercy behind that. We look at this succession — 

L As BXPEEiENCBD BY THE KiNQ OF JiTDAH. First of all, following fast on his 
transgression, came : 1. Divine displeasure and humiliating defeat. There came in to 
his palace-gates the stern spokesman for God, the prophet of Jehovah, with the 
language of cutting censure on his lips, " Thus saith the Lord, Te have forsaken me, 
therefore have I also left you," etc. (ver. 5) ; and with this anger of the Lord came 
disgraceful defeat on the field of battle. Those strong places he had so carefully 
fortified, of which he was so proud, and on which he so much relied, went down one 
after the other at the approach of the enemy, and left the capital at his mercy (vers. 
3, 4). Then came : 2. Spiritual agitation. Shame, fear, confession. Rehoboam was 
ashamed of his great folly ; he was afraid for the safety of Jerusalem, and even for his 
own liberty or life; he made a humble confession of his sin. He and his prince* 
"humbled themselves" before God (ver. 6). And then came : 3. The Divine clemency. 
(1) God took him back into his forgiving favour (ver. 7). " The wrath of the Lord 
turned from him" (ver. 12). (2) He promised him deliverance in a short time, and he 
graciously fulfilled his word ; for Shishak went back without destroying or sacking the 
capital, and without taking the life or liberty of the king. (3) His mercy included 
discipline. God let Rehoboam be subject to the Egyptian king for a while that he 
might know the difference between a degrading servitude and an ennobling service (see 
next homily) ; and he suffered Jerusalem to be stripped of some of its proud treasures, 
that the king and his princes might learn that their strength and wealth were as 
nothing in comparison with the favour of God, and would be forfeited by their 
disobedience and disloyalty. God's mercy was of such a kind as to justify repentance, 
hut to discourage rebellion and wrong-doing. 

II. In oub own exfebienoe. Following our sin against the Lord, whether this be 
Bome special act of transgression, or whether it be the condition of estrangement and 
separation from him, is : 1. The Divine rebuhe. This comes to our heart through the 
written or uttered Word of God, or through the pricking and piercing of our own 
conscience, or through the coming of God to the individual soul by his Divine 
providence. In some form or other God says to us, " Thou hast sinned, and done evil 
in my sight." 2. Spiritual agitation and return. Our heart is humbled; we are 
conscious that we have violated the Law and grieved the Spirit of God, and our soul is 
filled with a holy and a manly shame. And then our heart turns toward CK)d ; we " set 
our hearts to seek the Lord God," our Father and oxir Saviour and our Friend ; we 
earnestly desire to be taken into his service. And then comes : 3. Divine forgiveness. 
God receives us fully into his favour ; he takes us back to his heart and to his home,, 
so that we are no longer aliens or enemies, but children at his hearth and table. Yet 
he makes us to know that our past sin has left some of its marks behind it. It has 
rubbed us of some treasure ; it has injured us, perhaps in our circumstances ; certainly in 
our soul. We cannot break his righteous Law, we cannot oppose his holy and loving 
will, we cannot violate the laws of our own spiritual nature, without being something 
the poorer for our folly and our guilt. Nevertheless, the capital is not taken, the 
enemy withdraws ; we have left us our liberty, and our power to serve the righteous 
and the Loving Saviour. — 0. 

Ver. 8. — Servitude and service. " They shall he servants to him [for a short time]» 
that they may discern my service and the service of the kingdoms of me lands ; Le. that 



on. m. 1—16.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHEOXICLES, 147 

they may see that my rule is not so oppressive as that of foreign kings " (Keil), God 
would let Behoboam and the princes of Judah be for a time subject to Shishak — be in 
his power, be at his mercy, be compelled to go through the miserable humiliation of 
buying him off — that he might be able to contrast the honourable and happy service 
which he had known for three years (ch. xi. 17) with the unendurable subjection to 
which he was now reduced. He should feel and know that the way of transgressors is 
h»rd ; that between the bonds of the Lord and the yoke of the stranger there was all 
the difference between blessedness and misery, between a holy service and a degrading 
■ervitude. 

I. The desbading servitude. " Know ye not that to whom ye yield yourselved 
servants to obey, his servants [or, ' slaves '] ye are to whom ye obey ? " " Ye were the 
servants [slaves] of sin;" "Beiug made free from sin, ye became the servants of 
righteousness" (Rom. vi. 16 — 18). 1. Sin is a foreign power. It is a stranger; it ia 
an interloper ; it has stepped in between ourselves and God ; it is like the Egyptian 
forces that came up against Judab and Jerusalem, and sought to bring the people of 
God into captivity. ,Sin is our natural enemy, whom we have greatest reason to dread. 
2. Sin proves a hard master, and forces to a cruel bondage. It is the ultimate source 
of poverty, and that is a hard master ; it leads to vice, and that holds its victims in the 
most degrading thraldom ; it throws around its subjects the coils oi procrastination, and 
these hold the spirit in an evil circle from which it tries vainly to escape; it takes men 
further and further away from God, and leads them down to sources of satisfaction that 
are sure to fail and to end in disappointment and heart-ache ; it is a sorry servitude in 
which to suffer ; it is in very striking contrast to — 

II. The holt service of the Saviour. To recognize the claims of our Divine 
Father and Redeemer, to yield ourselves in glad self-surrender to him, to spend our 
days and powers in his service — what is this ? 1. It, is the one right thing to do. It is 
to be fulfilling the greatest and strongest of all obligations. 2, It is the path of true 
liberty. Every servant of a Divine Saviour can say and sing — 

" In a service which thy love appoints 
There are no bonds for me, 

A life of self-retiounoing love 
Is a life of liberty." 

8. It is the secret and the source of lasting peace and of abiding joy. 4. It Is the 
commencement of that life which is " life indeed," which is the beginning and foretaste 
of " eternal life" — the life which is of God, for God, with God, in God. — 0. 

Vers. 1, 2. — The apostasy of Behoboam. I. Eablt in its commbnoembnt. After 
the three years already mentioned (ch. xi. 17). Rehoboam's piety was short-lived, like 
the morning cloud and early dew (Hos. vi. 4), and like the seed upon stony groimd 
(Matt. xiii. 5). Want of stability and permanence is a chief defect in man's goodness. 
Many begin well who neither continue long nor end aright. 

II, Pbebumptuous in its spirit. Rehoboam's declension began after he had 
established tiie kingdom and strengthened himself. His fit of reforming zeal continued 
no longer th^n the fear which caused it. When this expired that vanished. So long 
as the country was defenceless, Rehoboam deemed it prudent to have .Jehovah on his 

I side, and with that end in view he patronized Jehovah's altars. The moment his 
garrisons were erected, manned, and storeH, he began to reckon that Jehovah's aid was 
not so indispensable, and that his reforming zeal need not be so extremely hot. So 
men still think of God, and assume a semblance of religion when they feel themselves 
in peril, but the instant peril passes they dcff the cloak of piety they have erstwhile 
worn — like Pharaoh (Bxod. viii. 8, 15; ix. 27, 34), like the Israelites (Numb. xxi. 7; 
XXV. 1 : Ps. Ixxviii. 31 ; cvi. 6), like Ahab (1 Kings xxi. 29), and others. 

III. Thorough- G CINQ in its character. 1. Neg'itive. He forsook the Law of the 
Lord, probably by violating its moral precepts and discontinuing its ceremonial rites, 
by abandoning the worship and deserting the altars of Jehovah. 2. Positive. He 
returned to the heathen idolatries which for three years he had npglcoted (1 Kings xi. 
7, 8), like a dog to his vomit, etc. (2 Pet. ii. 22). So a merely negative declension in 



148 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xii. 1— 18. 

religion is impossible. He who abandons the service of God cannot stop short of 
serving the deviL No man caa serve two masters (Matt. vi. 24) j but every man must 
■erre one. 

IV. Contagious in its intluencb. As Achan perished not alone in his iniquity 
(Josh. xxii. 20), so Kehoboam sinned not alone in his apostasy, but by means of his 
royal example or command drew all Israel after him. " One sinner destroyeth much 
good" (Eccles. ix. 18); "A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump" (1 Cor. v. 6). 
One asks, where were the priests and Levites who had so bravely resisted the profana- 
tions of Jeroboam, and rather sacrificed their suburbs and possessions than defile their 
consciences (ch. x\. 14) ? and where were the pious Israelites who had set their hearts 
to seek the Lord God of Israel (ch. xi. 16)? In one short year their fervour had been 
quenched, their fidelity shaken, their courage damped. 

v. DiSABTEOUs in ITS CONSEQUENCE. " Evil pursueth sinners " (Prov. xiii. 21), and in 
two years Nemesis overtook Rehoboam in the shape of an Egyjitian invasion. Of all 
sinners it is true, "their feet shall slide in due time" (Deut. xxxii. 35); of apostates it 
is written, " I will recompense their way upon their own heads, saith the Lord " (Ezek. 
xi. 21). 

Learn : 1. The sin of apostasy. 2. The danger of prosperity. 3. The impossibility 
of neutrality. 4. The fickleness of crowds in religion as in politics. 6. The corrupting 
influence of evil example. 6. The certainty of retribution. — W. 

Vers. 2 — 4. — Shishak's invasion. I, The invadeb. Shishak King of Egypt, the 
Sesonchis of Manetho, the Sbashanq I. of the monuments (b.o. 966). Originally the 
soil of an Assyrian king named Nimrod, "who had met his death in Egypt and been 
biuied at Abydos," Sbashanq I. of the twenty-second dynasty established his seat of 
royalty at Bubastis, in Lower Egypt (Brugsoh, ' Egypt under the Pharaohs,' ii. 215, 
216; Ebers, in Riehm's 'Handworterbuch,' art. "Sisak;" 'Records of the Past,' xiL 
93). His mother's name was Tentes|ieh, his wife's Tahpenes (1 Kings xi. 19). One 
of his wife's sisters married Hadad the Edomite; another became the wife of Jeroboam 
(Stanley, ' Jewish Church,' ii. 275 ; Ewald, ' History of Israel,' iii. 217 ; iv. 32). 

U. The abmy. 1. Chariots. In ancient times a common instrument of war (Exod. 
xiv. 9 ; 2 Sam. xv. 1 ; 1 Kings xx. 1). Shishak had twelve hundred, or twice the 
number of Pharaoh's chosen chariots in the time of Jloses (Exod. xiv. 7). The 
Philistines once collected against Israel thirty thousand (1 Sam. xiii. 5). Solomon had 
fourteen hundred (1 Kings x. 26), Rehoboam likely not so many in consequence of the 
disruption of the kingdom. 2. Horsemen. Sixty thousand ; five times as many as had 
belonged to Solomon (1 Kings iv. 26), and twelve times as many as the Philistines 
had brought against Israel (1 Sam. xiii. 5). Forty thousand mounted warriors once 
fell before David's troops (2 Sam. x. 18). 3. Infantry. Without number, composed 
of native forces and mercenaries or foreign troops — Lubims, Sukkims, and Ethiopians. 
Q.) The Lubims, or Libyans (ch. xvi. 8 ; Dan. xi. 43), the Lehabim of Gen. x. 13, the 
Temhu, or Tehennu, or more accurately the eastern portion of this people, the Lubu of 
the monuments (Ebers, ' Egypt and the Books of Moses,' p. 104), were the inhabitants 
of the districts of Mareotis and Libya west of the Canopic arm of the Nile (Knobel), 
or in the larger sense the Liby-.iEgyptii of the ancients (Keil), the people dwelling 
between Lower Egypt and the Roman province of Africa (Kautzsch in Riehm, art. 
"Libyer"). (2) The Sukkim were aborigines of Africa, "cavemen," troglodytes 
(LXX., Vulgate), "probably the iEthinpian troglodytes upon the mountains on the 
west coast of the Arabian Gulf" (Bertheau), whom Strabo and Pliny mention, the 
latter speaking of a troglodyte city Suche, which has been identified with Suakim 
(Kautzsch). (3) The Ethiopians, or Cushites, introduced among the forces of Shishak 
(fit Nah. iii. 9) were drawn from the African territory south of Egypt. 

III. The beabon. 1. Shishak^s. Perhaps to assist Jeroboam in his measures of 
hostility against Rehoboam, and eventually to secure the supremacy of Judah, possibly 
•Iso of Israel as welL 2. Jehovah's. To punish Rehoboam and Judah for their 
•poatasy. Though second causes need not he overlooked, they must not be permitted 
to obscure, far less to deny, the first. Had Rehoboam remained faithful to Jehovah, 
all the intrigues uf Jeroboam would have failed to start Shishak on the expedition here 
reported. 



CH. XII. 1—16.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 149 

IV. The pbooress. Shishak captured all the fenced cities of Judah in which 
Behoboam trusted (ch. xi. 5 — 9), and encamped his army before the walla of Jerusalem. 
Vain, after all, had been Behoboam's confidence. His garrisons and soldiers had yielded 
to the first assault. The props on which men lean often prove broken reeds. The 
shelters to which sinners run in the day of calamity mostly turn out refuges of lies 
(Isa. xxviii. 17). 

Lessons. 1. The certainty of sin being sooner or later overtaken by retribution 
(Numb, xzxii. 23). 2. The weakness of all defences, whether for nations or for 
individuals, when God is not within them (Ps. cxxvii. 1). 3. When God has a sinner 
to chastise he can easily find an instrument wherewith to do it (Isa. x. 6). — W. 

Vers. 6 — 8. — Two messages/rom Jehovah. I. A message of wabnino. (Vers. 5, 6.) 
1. £y whom sent. Shemaiah the prophet, or man of God (oh. xi. 2). When Jehovah 
has a message for any age, people, or individual, he can always find a messenger to 
bear it — a Moses to go to Pharaoh, a Samuel to speak to Saul, a Nathan to send to 
David, an Elijah or a Micaiah to warn Ahab, a John the Baptist to preach to Israel 
and testify against Herod. The hour never comes without the man. When a Paul or 
a Polycarp, an Athanasius or an Augustine, a Calvin or a Luther, a Enox or a Wesley, 
is needed in the New Testament Church, he appears at the moment when most 
required. 2. To whom addressed. To Bthoboam and the princes of Judah whom 
Shishak's invasion had caused to convene in Jerusalem. They had come together to 
consult about the safety of the capital ; they had not called Jehovah to the council. 
They had not realized that in such a crisis as had arisen " vain was the help of man," 
and "through God alone could they do valiantly" (Ps. Ix. 11, 12); that unless God 
kept the city, they the watchers would watch in vain (Ps. cxxviL l). ,Yet they seem 
to have discerned that their best efforts would prove ineflectual, and they were filled 
with fear. Happily Jehovah thought of them, though they forgat him. 3. In what 
terms it ran. (1) It intimated a fact: "Ye have forsaken me." This showed that 
Jehovah had been cognizant of all that had taken place since Behoboam got his 
garrisons erected, had witnessed the idolatries and unspeakable abominations of the 
faithless king and his coward princes, though perhaps they had reasoned that, as God 
was in the height of heaven, he could not know what transpired upon the earth (Job 
xxii. 12 — 14). But though they had not seen him, he had observed them (Prov. xv. 3 ; 
Amos ix. 8). (2) It announced a consequence : " Therefore have I also left you in the 
hand of Shisliak." Thus did Jehovah signify that it was he himself even more than 
Shishak that had come up against Behoboam and his princes; Shishak had not 
appeared before their gates without his permission; and without his assistance nothing 
they could do would prevent them falling into Shishak's hand. Jehovah, indeed, could 
avert that calamity. He could put a hook into Shishak's nose and lead him back by 
the way he came, as he afterwards did to Sennacherib (2 Kings xix. 28; Isa. xxxvii. 
29); but in the mean time, as they had left him for the calves of Egypt, he had left 
them to be the prey of Egypt's lord. 4. What effect it produced. (1) Contrition, or 
at least seeming contrition : " They humbled themselves." To be sure, their penitence, 
like their previous reformation, was only skin deep. Nevertheless, it had the semblance 
of reality, and God accepted it as such. (2) Confession : " They said. The Lord is 
righteous," i.e. in punishing them as he had done ; in which was implied an acknow- 
ledgment that they had sinned. This the design of all God's chastisements, whether 
national or individual, to excite personal humiliation and hearty recognition of the 
holiness and justice of God (Deut. viii. 5, 16 ; Bzek. xx. 37, 43 ; Hos. v. 15). Only 
confession may be on the lip where no real contrition is in the heart. 

II. A MESSAGE OP MEBCT. (Vers. 7, 8.) 1. Its occasion. The success of the first 
message in the (at least seeming) penitence of the king and his princes. " Grod speaketh 
once, yea twice' (Job xxxiii. 14), to men, even to his people, who often fail to under- 
stand his first voice (1 Sam. iii. 4 ; Dan. xii. 8 ; Mark ix. 32 ; John xi. 13), or under- 
stand but refuse _ to hear (Isa. Ixv. 12), though occasionally also they listen and 
submit (Jonah iiL 6). In the first case, his second speaking may be nothing more 
than a repetition of the first, or an explanation of its contents; in the second, it 
commonly assumes the_ form of increased warnings and severer threatenings; in the 
third, it is usually a voice of mercy following on a voice of judgment. It was so with 



150 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHEONICLES. [ch. mi. 1—16. 

EehoVioam and the princes of Jiidah. 2. Its contents. (1) Their humiliation had been 
observed and accepted: "They have humbled themselves." So Gud still sees and 
regards with favour all who abase themselves before him (Jer. xxxi. 18; Ps. ix. 12; 

1. 17; 1 Kings xxi. 29). (2) A de;j;ree, at least, of clemency would be extended 
towards them : " 1 will not destroy them, but I will grant them some deliverance, and 
my wrath shall not be poured out upon Jerusalem by the hand of Shishak." So God 
delights to meet the first advances of returning penitents with such foretastes of mercy 
as will lure them on to desire its full fruition. (3) Nevertheless, a measure of correc- 
tion would be laid upon them. Though Shishak should not be suffered to work his 
will either upon them or their city, they would, nevertheless, fall into his hand. They 
Bliould be his servants, either as captives or as tributaries; and would learn the 
difference between Jehovah's rule and the domination of foreign kings. So God still 
deals with his people — forgives them, but permits them to reap the temporal fruits of 
their transgression, that they may know what an evil and bitter thing it is to forsake 
God (Jer. iL 19), and how much more easy is Christ's yoke (Matt. xi. 29, 30) than 
that of sin (Lam. L 14). 

Learn : 1. The omniscience of God : " All things are naked," etc. (Heb. iv. 13). 

2. God's compact with the soul : " The Lord is with us," etc. (ch. xv. 2). 3. The 
mercifulness of God: he is "long-suffering, and slow to wrath" (Bxod. xxxiv. 6; Ps. 
Ixxviii. 38). 4. The misery of sin : it ever entails sorrow (Ps. xxxii. 10). 6. God's 
ability to execute his own sentences : " It is a fearful thing," etc. (Heb. x. 31) ; 
" Though hand join in hand," etc. (Prov. xi. 21). — W. 

Ver. 9. — 7^ first sacking of Jerusalem. L Its histobio certainty. That Shishak 
gradually drew his lines closer round the capital, and in the end stormed its citadel, 
has received confirmation from the monuments. 1. In the temple of Karnak, at 
Thebes, on the walls of which Seti I. and Rameses II. had by means of pictorial 
representations and hieroglyphic inscriptions preserved a record of their victories, 
Sheshonq, on returning from Palestine, caused a bas-relief to be executed in commemo- 
ration of his expedition. 2. On the south wall, behind the picture of the victories of 
Bameses II., to the east of the hall of the Bubastids, appears a colossal image of the 
Egyptian sovereign, arrayed in warlike costume and dealing heavy blows with a club 
or iron mace upon his captives, who are Jews or, at least, Asiatics, whom he grasps by 
the hair of their heads. 3. In another representation he is depicted as leading captive 
a hundred and thirty-three cities or tribes, each one of which is personated by the 
figure of a chief whose name is written on an embattled shield, and whose physiognomy 
has been supposed (Lenormant) to declare them Jews, though this is probably imagina- 
tion. 4. In the lists of names occur those of (1) cities of Judah proper, as e.g. Adoraim 
(Adurma), Aijalon {Ajulon), Shoco (Shauke), Gibeon (Qeleana), etc; (2) Levitical 
cities of Isiael, as e.g. Taanach {Ta'ankau), Rehob (Rehabau), Mahanaim {Mahcmema), 
et<j. ; and (3) Canaanitish oitiis, as e.g. Berhshan {Beithshanlan), Megiddo {Makethu). 
6. Among the names is one styled Judah-Malek ; not " the King of Judah " (Stanley), 
but "the kingly Judah" (Ebers), or "Judah a kingdom" (Rawlinson), which is 
supposed to point to Jerusalem. 6. The conquered nations are designated as the 
" 'Am of a distant land," and the Fenekh or the PhcEnioians. The former expression, 
" 'Am," answers exactly to the Hebrew word for " people," and may have been intended 
to denote the Jews (Brugsoh, 'Egypt under the Pharaohs,' ii. 215 — 219; liawlinson, 
'Egypt and Babylon,' 334—339; Ebers, in Eiehm, art. "Sisak"). 

II. Its actual extent. Whether Shishak ravaged the city is doubtful. The 
plundering reported suggests that he did (Bertlieau, Keil), but, " like Hezekiah on the 
occasion of Stiunacherib's invasion (2 Kings xviij. 13 — 16), Rehoboam may have 
surrendered his treasures (1 Kings xiv. 26) "to save his city from the horrors of 
capture" (Rawlinson). In any case, Shishak carried off valuable spoil. 1. The 
treasures of the temple, or house of the Lord, the sacred utensils employed in worship, 
which were then material, and the loss of which greatly hindered the observance of 
religion — a calamity which cannot now befall the Church of God in gospel times, since 
in Christian worship the outward ritual is nothing, but the inward spirit everything. 
2. T%e treasures of the palace, or king's house iu the city of David, t.e. the regalia or 
crown jewels, which are always more or less an object of desire to victorious generals 



OH. xu. 1-16.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 151 

and armies — a smaller calamity than the former, as the deatniction of a nation's wealth 
is a lesser evil than the extinction or suppi ession of its religion. 3. The golden shields 
in the house of thu forest of Lehauon (oh. ix. 16), which Sdomon had made, the LXX. 
(1 Kings xiv. 26) adding that he likewise carried off the golden armour David had 
taken as spoil from the King of Zobah (1 Chron. xviii. 7) — the least calamity of the 
three, the shields being luxuries of which king or nation mi^ht be deprived without 
hurt, and tiie armour spoil of which either might be deprived without wrong. 

III. Its speedy bbpakation.' 1. The nation's loss concealed. Rehoboam covered up 
as far as he could the damage wrought, especially in his palace, by constructing shields 
of brass to take the place of those of gold which had been abstracted (see next 
homily). 2. The king's vanity soothed. He also endeavoured to heal his own wounded 
vanity, by causing these brazen shields to be borne before him in state procession every 
time he entered the temple. Just as they had done before with the golden shields, tha 
guards fetched out their spurious substitutes with solemn pomp on every ceremonial 
day, and when the show was concludoi replaced them in the guard-chamber, the 
spectators probably not being aware of the imposition. 

Lessons. 1. The instability of earthly things. A greater king than Shishak will 
one day plunder kings and common men alike of their material possessions. 2. The 
facility with which men impuse upon themselves, the efforts they make, and the 
stratagems they resort to, to prop up their fallen greatness or restore their faded glory. 
Solomon's weak and vain son not the only man who has made brass shields do duty 
for golden ones. 3. The historic credibility of Scripture. The Shishak invasion is not 
the only instance in which the monuments have surprisingly corroborated Bible 
history. — W. 

Ver. 10. — Brazen shields /or golden. I. A vikttjb. To conti'nt one's self with 
■hields of brass when shields of gold cannot be got. " Be content with such things as 
ye have" (Heb. xiii. 5). 

II. A HYPOCEiSY. To pretend that brazen shields are golden, either : 1. To hide th» 
truth, that our shields of gold have been stolen, lost, or never had an existence: 
" Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees," etc. (Luke xii. 1, 2) ; or : 2. To keep up 
appearances, and so gratify our vanity by seeming richer or more socially exalted than 
we are : " Beware of the scribes, who desire to walk in long robes," etc. (Luke xx. 46). 

III. A SEBMON. 1. To such as serve Ood with brass when they should do so toith 
gold — an exhortation to liberality. 2. To those who serve Qod with the appearance of 
gold when the inward reality is awanting — a discourse upon sincerity. 3. To them who 
would serve Ood with gold hut have only brass — a promise of better days when 
Jehovah's word shall be fulfilled, "For brass I will bring gold" (Isa. Ix. 17). — W. 

Ver. 12. — Good things in Judah. I. A penitent monarch. II. A merciful God. 
III. A eestbained enemy. IV, A prosperous people. — W. 

Vers. 13 — 16.— The biography of Rehoboam. I. His ancestry. 1. The son of 
Solomon, the son of David. 2. The son of Naamah the Ammonitess, the daughter of 
Hanun the son of Nahash (ch. x. 1). 

II. His kingdom. 1. Its extent. Jndah, with a portion of Benjamin. 2. Ita 
capital. Jerusalem, the city of the great King. 

III. His reign. 1. The beginning of it. When he was forty years of age. 2. The 
length of it. Seventeen years; short in comparison with that of Solomon. 3. Tha 
character of it. (1) Vigorous: "he strengthened himself " (ver. 13). (2) Idolatrous: 
"he did evil, because he prepared not his heart to seek the Lord" (ver. 14). (3) 
Troubled : " there were wars continually between him and Jeroboam " (ver. 15). i. 
The end of it. Behoboam slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David. 

IV. His acts. 1. All written. Prom first to last (ver. 15). What a calamity to 
any man it would be to have all his deeds recorded on the page of history ! Yet first 
and last every action of every man is being engrossed upon the page of God's book of 
remembrance. 2. Where written t In the book of Shemaiah the ]irophet, and in that 
of Iddo concerning genealogies. A small honcir compared to being written in the 
book of life. Not so serious a matter to have one's deeds inscribed upon a perishing 



152 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xni. 1—22. 



page by a human biographer as to have them graven " as with a pen of iron in the 
rock for ever," by the hand of Clod's recording angel upon the tablets of eternity. 

V. His successok. 1. His Tiame. Abijah, or Abijam (ch. xiii. 1). 2. His reign. 
In Behoboam's stead. An honour to Behoboam that he had a son like Abijah ; • mercy 
to Jud«h that Abijah was better than his father. — W. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTEB Xin. 

The career of Abijah begins and ends 
with this chapter, the twenty-one verses of 
which are paralleled by only eight in 1 
Kings XV. 1 — 8. The difference is caused 
by the fact that the writer of Kings only 
mentions that there was war between 
Abijah and Jeroboam, while the writer of 
Chronicles, besides giving particulars of the 
irar, rehearses the splendid, dramatic, rheto- 
rical address and appeal of Abijah on Mount 
Zemaraim to the people of the ten tribes. 

Ver. 1. — ^In the eighteenth year. Beading 
this literally, it will appear that Behoboam 
bad completed a full seventeen years. 

Ver. 2. — Uichaiah the daughter of Uriel 
of Gibeah. As before noted (ch. xi. 20), and 
as in the parallel (1 Kings xv. 2), this name 
is one with " Maachah, daughter of Absa- 
lom" (parallel, Ahiihatom). The different 
alphabetic characters may be attributed to 
error, and that error the error of transcrip- 
tion merely. As in our note (ch. xi. 20), 
the word "daughter," as in many similar 
cases, stands for granddaughter. Thus the 
father of Maachah was Uriel of Gibeah, 
and her mother Tamar, daughter of Ab- 
salom. Josephus ('Ant.,' viii 10. § 1) 
proffers us this connecting link of explana- 
tion. On the other hand, Babbi Joseph's 
Targum on Chronicles says that Uriel 
means Absalom, but was a name used to 
avoid the use of Absalom. We have no 
clue as to which out of many Gibeahs is 
here intended. The Hebrew word (nyaa) 
signifies a hiU with round top, and hence 
would easily give name to many places. 
The following are the chief places of the 
name (as classified by Dr. Smith's 'Bible 
Dictionary,' i. 689—691) : 1. Gibeah in the 
mountain district of Judah (Josh. zv. 57; 
1 Chron. ii. 4:9). 2, Gibeath among the 
towns of Benjamin (Josh, xviii. 28). 3. The 
Gibeah (1 Sam. vii. 1 ; 2 Sam. vi. 3, 4). 4. 
Gibeah of Benjamin (Judg. xix., xz.), be- 
tween Bethlehem and Jerusalem. This 
should strictly be quoted eithei' as " Gibeali 
belonging to Benjamin," or " Geba (yaa) of 
Benjamin" (see also 1 Sam. xiii., xiv'; 2 
(Sam. xxiii. 29 ; 1 Chron. xi. 31 ; Hos. v. 8 ; ix. 
9 : z. 9> 5. Gibeah of Saul (1 Sam. x. 26 ; 



XV. 34; 2 Sam. zxL 6> Josephni ('BelU 
Jud.,' V. 2. § 1) states what helps to the 
identifying of the place as the modem TufotZ- 
el-ful, about thirty stadia from Jerusalem (see 
also Isa. X. 28—32). The Gibeah of 1 Sam. 
xxii. 6; xxiii. 19; xxvi. 1, is this Gibeah 
of Saul. 6. Gibeah in the field (Judg. xx. 
81). Lastly, our Autboiized Version gives 
ns seven other Gibeahs, only translating 
this word, eg. " The hill ai the foreskins " 
(Josh. V. 8) ; "The hill of Phinehas " (Josh, 
xxiv. 33); "The Mil of Moreh" (Judg. 
vii. I); "The hiU of God" (1 Sam. x. 5); 
"The hill of Hachilah" (1 Sam. xxiii. 19; 
xxvi. 1); "The hiU of Ammah " (2 Sam. 
ii. 24) ; " The hill Gareb " (Jar. xxxi. 39). 

Ver. 3. — It is not within the province of 
an expositor to assert dogmatically that 
numbers like these in this verse should 
be deprived of one cipher, and that the 
slaughter of ver. 17 must be, consequently, 
similarly discounted. It would be, however, a 
great relief to faith to be able to give proof 
that this treatment would be true to fact. 
At present the numbers can be shown to be 
consistent with other numbers, such as those 
of the entire man-population (1 Chron. xxi. 
5 ; ch. xi. 13 — 17); and this seems the best 
that can be said in support of them. It does 
not, however, sufBoe to bring comfortable 
conviction. It is remarkable, among the 
difSculties that the question entails, that we 
do not get any satisfactory explanation as to 
how such vast numbers of slain bodies were 
disposed of in a compass of gionnd com- 
paratively so small. 

Ver. 4. — Uoimt Zemaraim. This mount 
is not mentioned elsewhere. Presumably it 
was a mountain or hill above the place called 
Zemaraim, mentioned in Josh, xviii. 22 •■ 
in Benjamin's allotment, and mentioned 
between the places called Beth ha-Arabah 
(i.e. the Jordan valley) and Bethel. Ac- 
cordingly, it may be that itself lay between 
these two, or near enough to them one or 
both. This will quite suit our connection 
as placing the hill near the borders of 
Benjamin and Ephraim. It is said to be 
in Mount Ephraim, t.e. in the range of 
Mount Ephraim, which was one of con- 
siderable length, running through the midst 
of what was afterwards called Samaria, from 
the Plain of EsJraelon to Judah. Zemaraim 
may be so named from the Zemarite tribe, 
who were Hamites, and related to the 



OH. xm. 1—22.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 



153 



Hittitea and Amorites (Gen. x. 18 ; 1 Ohron. 
i. 16), descendants of Canaan; there are 
some faint traces of their having wandered 
from their northern settlements into mid 
and south Palestine. The Septuagint render 
Zemaraim hy the same Greek as Samaria, 

Vew. 5 — 12. — ^The idea of Abijah in this 
religious harangae, addressed or sapposed to 
be addressed to the kingdom of the ten tribes, 
was good, and the execution was spirited. 
'While, however, he preaclies well to others, 
there are not wanting signs that he can 
blind himself as to some failure of practice 
ou hia own part. The points of the argu- 
ment running through his harangue are 
correct, skilfully chosen, and well and re- 
ligiously thrust home on the heart of his 
supposed audience. The practical trust of 
himself and his army are testified to in vers. 
14, 15, and abundantly rewarded. This 
sequel-practical trust is the best credential 
of the sincerity of his foregoing appeal and 
harangue. 

Ver. 5. — Gave the kingdom ... to David 
for ever. With the thrice-repeated " for 
ever "of what we call 2 Sam. vii. 13 — 16, 
and tbe very emphatic language of the 
fifteenth verse in that passage, in the memory 
of Abijah, no one can say he was not justified 
by the letter and to the letter in what he 
now says. At the same timo, how is it that 
Abijah does not in all fairness quote the 
matter of ch. vi. 16 last clause, and of its 
parallel, 1 Kings viii. 25 laet clause, and 
of Ps. Ixxxiz. 28 — 37 ; oxxiii. 12? Covenant 
of salt (see Lev. ii. 13; Numb, xviii. 19; 
Ezek. xliii. 24; Mark ix. 49). The use of 
■alt was ordered first for the meal offerings, 
which, consisting mainly of flour, did not 
need it as an antiseptic ; afterwards it was 
ordered for "all" offerings, including the 
" burnt offering : " as surely as leaven was 
proscribed, salt was prescribed (Lev. ii. 11). 
" The covenant of salt " meant the imperish- 
ableness and irrevocableness of the engage- 
ment made between the two parties to the 
covenant. The widespread and deeply sig- 
nificant use of it among other and heathen 
nations is remarkable indeed, and is attested 
by Pliny (' Hist. Nat.,' xxxi. 41) in forcible 
words : " Nulla (sacra) conficiuntur sine 
mola salsa " (Hor., 2 Sat. iii. 200 ; Virgil, 
• Mn.,' ii. 133 ; Horn., • ILad,' i. 449). Some 
think it a sufficient explanation of the text, 
" covenant of salt," that, especially in the 
East, solemn engagements and vows were 
often recognized and strengthened by hospi- 
talities, as shown to guests, and of these 
salt was an indispensable element. It is 



true that some of the ancient indications 
and descriptions of friendship and close 
friendships turned on phrases (similar ones, 
indeed, still existing) into which the word 
" salt " entered, but that these phrases arose 
from the fact that salt was so general a 
constituent of human food seems insufficient 
explanation, where we can find one of a 
more direct and more directly religious, or, 
as the case might be (e.g. with heathen 
sacrifices), superstitious birth. Beligion and 
superstition between them have been the 
most world-wide, incalculable, and untrace- 
able originators and disseminators of half the 
possible phrases of human language I 

Ver. 6. — The servant of Solomon. 1 Kings 
xi. 28 is evidently the apter reference for 
this verse, rather than 26, as generally given. 

Ver. 7. — Are gathered . . . have strength- 
ened themselves. The aorist tense is 
needed for the rendering in both these cases ; 
e.g. "And vain men gathered to him, and 
strengthened themselves against him." 
Vain men ; Hebrew, □'p^. This word, and 
one very slightly diffeieiit in form, and their 
adverb, occur in all forty-one times; ren- 
dered in the Authorized Version " empty " 
nineteen times, " vain " eighteen times, and 
"without cause," "to no purpose," and 
" void " the remaining four times. It is the 
word that is used of the " empty " pit of 
Joseph (Gen. xxxvii. 24); of the "empty 
ears" of com (Gen. xli. 27); of "empty" 
pitchers and other vessels (Judg. vii 16; 
2 Kings iv. 3; Jer. xiv. 3; Ii. 34; Ezek. 
xxiv. 11). Anil in all the other cases 
expresses metaphorically the emptiness of 
head, of heart, or of reason, with the same 
simple force of language appropriate, it ap- 
pears, then as now. Children of Belial; 
Hebrew, hyjh:^. This word is fotmd twenty- 
seven times, and, including seven marginal 
options, is rendered in the Authorized Version 
"Belial" twenty-three times; the four ex- 
ceptions being " wicked " three times, and 
"naughty" once. The derivation of it 
marks the one expressive meaning of " with- 
out profit." Young and tender-hearted. 
Hard as it is to put these objections to the 
credit of a man forty-one years of age (see 
our note, ch. x. 8 ; xii. 13) at all, yet, if so, 
they can only be explained as some do ex- 
plain them, of a blamable ignorance, inex- 
perience, and instability. 

Vers. 8, 9. — The five succeeding thrusts 
of these two verses, prefaced by the some- 
what self-conscious but, nevertheless, validly 
pleaded orthodoxy of his own position, are 
well delivered by Abijah. Jeroboam ia 
scathed (1) for his confidence in a great 
multitude; (2) for his golden calves for 
gods ; (3) for what amounted necessarily to 
the excommunication and repudiation of 



154 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xiii. 1—22. 



the priests of the Lord, time- and nation- 
honoured; (4) for the mere manufacture of 
a new-fangled priesthood, and that after the 
model of nations foreign and heathen ; (5) 
for the fact that, when these were made, they 
that made them, and the goda for whom 
they were made, were all three " like to " 
one another — no true people, no true priests, 
and no gods at all! A yonng hnllock and 
■even rams. The oonsecration sacrifice for 
the whole line of priests was " one young 
huUook and two rams without blemish" 
<Exod. xxix. 1, 15, 19; Lev. viii. 2). Of 
eouise, Jeroboam felt his own position in 
the matter so weak, that each false, illegiti- 
mate candidate for the priestly service must 
bring his sacrifice, and that a larger one by 
five rams than the divinely ordered one of 
Moses. 

Vers. 10, 11. — The professions summarized 
in these two verses were confessedly formally 
true of the king and priests and nation, 
although Abijah and kingdom certainly did 
not carry a clean conscience in them (Matt. 
XT. 8; Mark xii. 33; 1 Sam. xv. 22; Isa. 
i 11, 16, 19). They were, moreover, beyond 
a doubt really true of multitudes of indi- 
viduals in the kingdom of Judah and Ben- 
jamin. And these were " the salt of the " 
kingdom (Matt. v. 13). They burnt . . . 
sweet inoense (so our ch. u. 4 ; Exod. xxx. 
7 ; Eev. viii. 3, 4). The pure table ... the 
candlestick. Although ten of each of these 
were made, only one was used, or only one 
at the time (see our note on ch. iv, 8, com- 
pared with ch. xxix. 18 ; 1 Kings vii 48). 
We have not forsaken Mm ... ye have 
forsaken him. If all the difference that 
these words have it in them to express 
could have been put to the credit of Abijah, 
what tremendous strength would have now 
belonged to his position and to his heart 1 

Ver. 12. — The concluding utterances of 
Abijah certainly did nut fall below what had 
preceded or the occasion in itself; and the 
echoes of them, while they died on the ear, 
must have lived, indeed, and stirred life in 
the hearts of many (Josh. v. 14 ; Numb. x. 
9 ; xxxi. 6 ; our ver. 14, imd ch. v. 12, 13). 

Vers. 13—16. — These verses purport to 
tell how Jeroboam, with all his vastly pre- 
ponderating numbers (ver. 3), left nothing 
undone to secure the victory, and resorted 
even to the ambushment described ; how, on 
the other hand, Abijah and his people 
honoured God by their cry and confident 
shout, and were delivered because they 
trusted in him (1 Sam. xvii. 45 — 17), and as 



follows, ver. 18, " relied upon the Lord God 
of their fathers." 

Ver. 17.— Slain; Hebrew, D'77n. Even if 
we acoept for a moment the immense num- 
bers written here and elsewhere as authentic, 
a considerable deduction may be made from 
our difficulty by virtue of the fact that this 
word need not mean to desiribe the actually 
elain. It occurs about ninety-one times. 
Of these, in our Authorized Version, it i« 
found Tendered, including marginal options, 
as many as fifteen times " wounded," or by 
even a less severe meaning. However, 
whether " slain " or " wounded and slain," 
the alleged numbers of our present text are, 
in our opinion, incredibly enormous. 

Ver. 19. — Bethel. Abijah was, perhaps, 
the rather permitted to take this city as the 
head-quarters of Jeroboam's irreligious wor- 
ship. Jeshanah. A place not known else- 
where in Scripture by this name, which 
by derivation means " old." Grove (Dr. 
Smith's 'Bible Dictionary,' i. p. 1035) 
quotes Josephus ('Ant.,' xiv. 15. § 12) as 
speaking of a place so named, the scene of 
a battle between Herod and Antigouus's 
general. Pappus, but Josephus does not 
assign its site. Ephrain; or, accor<ling to 
Chethiv, Epron. (xrove (Dr. Smith's ' Bible 
Dictionary,' i. p. 569) says that conjecture 
has identified it with the JEpliraim of 2 Sam. 
xiii. 23, with the Ophrdh of Josb. xviii. 23, 
and with the Ephraim of John xi. 54; 
possibly the modem EUTaiyibeh (Dr. Ro- 
binson, i. 44), about five miles from Bethel. 

Ver. 20. — The Lord struck him, and he 
died. The writer of Chronicles here, fur 
brevity's sake, and not to recur to his name 
again, records the death of Jeroboam, which, 
however, did not happen till after Abijah's 
death, in the second year of Asa's reign 
(1 Kings xiv. 20; xv. 25). That the Lord 
struck him, may glance at the fearful an- 
nouncement conveyed to him through hia 
wife by Abijah (1 Kings xiv. 6 — 16). 

Ver. 21. — Waxed mighty. For this our 
Authorized Version reads, "waxed fat and 
wanton" (Hebrew, pjnn;), and grew too 
like his father Behoboam and his grand- 
father Solomon, forgetting the " Law " (Deut, 
xvii. 17). 

Ver. 22.— The story of the Prophet Iddo. 
If this be the same work as that mentioned 
in ch. xii. 15 (see our note there), it is, at 
any rate, not called by the same title, but 
by the name well known for metnoirs, of 
Midrash. 



HOMILBTICa 

Vers. 1 — 22. — A royal and manly manifesto in the rights of godly truth. The 
narrative of Abijah's short reign of three years is distino^uished by one clear account, 
at any rate, of the wars that had arisen and were prevailing between the two parts of 



OH. xni. 1—22.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE 0HR0N1CLB3. 155 

the recently rended and bleeding kingdom, of which a very brief statement only had 
been made, at the close of the history of Behobuam's reign, whether here or in the 
parallel. It is also, and most chiefly, distinguished by the graphic description of the 
very forcible manifesto, so dramatically delivered as well, in the name and right of 
religion, and of the truth handed down to him by his fathers, by Abijah King of Judah, 
before, as it were, all the dissenting and separate congregation of Israel and their king. 
This subject awaits below some further analysis. And once more, so far as our Book 
of Chronicles goes, the narrative of this short reign and public career of Abijah is 
remarkable, in that we should have supposed certainly, when we shut our book, that 
they were, as nearly as might be, immaculate every way to the honour of God, aud by 
his grace to the credit of the man and the king, with his heroic challenge to all Israel's 
conscience, towering in the midst of all the rest. The parallel, meanwhile, in Kings 
undeceives us unwelcomely in this impression, and mournfully disabuses our mind, 
where with startling precision it is recorded that " Abijah walked in all the sins of 
his father, which he had done before him : and his heart was not perfect with the Lord 
his God, as the heart of David his father." Whether the unrelated sins of his private 
life, or the chances of war, or the directer judgment of God, brought his career to so 
early a close, we are not told. Mi an while the contents of this chapter are most 
Interesting. They read like an episode almost unique among even the many and 
varied, the concise and telling monographs that abound in the pages before us. War 
is waged, armies are ready, and are already face to face ; battle itself is ready to begin, 
or has already begun, when — no spectral figure — King Abijah himself stands on Mount 
Zemaraim ; the King of Israel, and the army of Israel, and, as it were, all the rended-off 
ilation of Israel, fortunately and conveniently congregated before him. If ever man 
*' preached," Abijah preached, and for tlie day and the occasion lifted up his voice 
worthily, and was " not afraid," Truth and facts are unmistakably on his side. We 
seem, for a moment, to be under the spell of an Old Testament Demosthenes, and to be 
listening to the snatch of an earlier philippic. If we seek some analysis of this mingled 
argument, denunciation, appeal, we notice — 

I. The safe qround of the case made aoaikst Israel and Jeroboam. "The 
Lord God of Israel gave the kingdom over Israel to David for ever — to him and to his 
sons by a covenant of salt." Perhaps, indeed, Abijah remembered well the solemn 
proviso of that covenant, emphatically made, and put into psalm as well, " If thy 
children will keep my coven.int and my testimony that I shall teach them, their 
children shall also sit upon thy throne for evermore" (Ps. cxxxii. 12). Though he 
neglected to quote it into his argument, and let us say probably hy desi/n, yet it was 
substantially true that the perpetual kingdom was made over so, by divinest engage- 
ment, to Judah, as against all other cumers whomsoever, and up to the coming of the 
Lord Jesus himself, of whose kingdom there should be indeed no end. For Abijah 
might, if challenged, have gone on also to quote (Ps. Ixxxiz. 33 — 37), " Nevertheless 
my loving-kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to faiU 
My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. Once 
have I sworn by my holiness that I will not lie unto David. His seed shall endure for 
ever, and his throne as the sun before me. It shall be established for ever as the moun, 
and as a faithful witness in heaven." So Abijah begins successfully, putting larael 
and Jeroboam essentially in the wrong. 

n. The moral element fluno so bffeotivelt and opportunblt by Abuah 
INTO THE AROUMENT. " Ought ye not to know this, that the Lord God of Israel gave 
the kingdom over Israel to David for ever ? " Israel and Jeroboam did know it, knew 
it well ; and Abijah and all Judah knew that their separated brethren knew it, and 
knew it well. It was a well-conceived addition to the argument of the king of the true 
line. How many persons know the right most assuredly, to whom, for neglecting to do 
it, the most telling and most stinging expostulation and rebuke might well be couched 
in the same form of question, " Ought ye not to know ? " 

in. The PATENT AOGBAVATIONS OF THE CONDUCT OF JeROBOAH. Viz. that : 1. 

It was a case of a subject rebelling against his own king (ver. 6), not of one foreign to 
the kingdom obtaining sway by conquest over a portion of it. 2. It was a case of that 
subject also taking advatitaa;e of the youth and inexperience of the rightful monarch 
Eehoboam, who was actually in possession of the throne at the time of the schism. 



156 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHBONICLBS. [oh xiu. 1— is^ 

8. It was a case of the usurper relying on a " multitude " (ver. 8) — a mere majority I 
Nothing of a moral kind can safelt/ be decided, on the strength merely of a majority, in 
this world; or, at any rate, up to the present time, in this world. And often the 
decision of something of a physical kind, on the strength of a majority, is most uncertain 
— the very ground beneath the feet of that majority being so liable to be undermined 
on a large scale (as is so notable in the sequel of this very history, ver. 18), or other- 
wise honeycombed by invisible moral forces. God's selection of Israel, his whole 
conduct of them, of their education, of their government and their legislation, was and 
is one protest against reliance on the many. 4. It was a most iniquitous and crying 
case of idolatry in the setting up of the golden calves. This most glaring instance of 
the basest sort of supposed expedience did not bear that a word be said on its behalf 
or in its defence. Had there been not another weak point in the comiuct or tactics of 
Jeroboam and Israel, this carried the sentence of death in itself. 5. Although it were 
a corollary most readily to be understood, that the priests and Levites of the true 
religion's ministry should find themselves no longer in place or at home in such an 
Israel, yet Abijah notes this also, probably that first prominence may be given (as 
great historic interest has certainly been given) to the fact that of the same priests and 
Levites were found none to sympathize with Jeroboam's evil doings, to countenance 
them, or to consent, under any pretext of policy, to uphold them ; and secondly, that 
the flagitious, sacrilegious, and absolutely reckless defiance of the true religion, of 
which Jeroboam was guilty, in the sham consecration of sham priests, in imitation of 
heathen nations and in observance of heathen precedents, might be openly made to 
confront him, and publicly be hurled as the last aggravating charge against him. 
Jeroboam "cast out the priests of the Lord . . . and the Levites . . . and made 
priests after the manner of the nations of other lands." 

IV. The prokouncbd declaration, unboastful because true, and ebadilt 

AOKNOWLBDOED TO BE ONLY THBIB DUTY AND PRIVILEGE UNITED, WHICH AbIJAH 

MAKES ON BEHALF OP HIMSELF AND KINGDOM. 1. They soomed goldeu calvcs, and 
had not forsaken the one Lord their God. 2. Their priests and Levites are the 
divinely appointed and consecrated ministers of the sanctuary and altar. They do 
their work. The altar smokes morning and evening, and tne odour of the sweet 
incense ascends. The shewbread is in its place and duly renewed. The golden 
candlestick burns every evening. They have received the charge of the Lord God, and 
they keep it faithfully, obediently in each respect, and to each time punctually. Z. 
God is practically looked to as their Captain, and his ministers are looked to to sound 
the alarm alike to themselves and for them " against " their foes. 

V. The short parting appeal. The whole argument, remonstrance, rebuke, has 
been in an eminent degree addressed to the conscience, and to the distinct and un- 
doubted knowledge of revealed religion, which had been equally the portion of Israel 
with Judah. And now the parting brief appeal is fully charged with the same spirit. 
It is an appeal to conscience and religious knowledge and feeling, and legitimately 
concludes with that warning which has so long been, which is still, the divinely fore- 
shadowed sanction of command or of prohibition. It depends on the faculty of faith, 
it is part of the discipline of faith, and — ^to be mindfully remembered by all — it is some 
of the most critical and tremblingly anxious exercises of faith. He who believes in 
nothing but the present does not believe in warning, and he who does not believe in 
warning is, in one word, the infatuated, and ever liable to be the reckless. In this 
brief pregnant appeal we seem to notice (1) that Abijah turns away his address from 
Jeroboam altogether, anxious if haply he may just move the people ; (2) that there is 
breathed in it a tender, affectionate, fatherly suasiveness, as with last words of hope, 
or last words of despair, or as with last dying words; and (3) that there is the deep 
earnestness of the true man, who yearns that men shall know the day of their merciful 
visitation, and not speed on in that " way of transgressors," which is " hard," and which 
" ihaU not prosper." 

HOMILIES BY VABIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 20. — The folly of unnatural severance, etc. The whole chapter presents to 
OB a number of lessons, not very closely connected with one another. 



OH. xm. 1—22.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 167 

L The folly op an unnatural sbvbranob. The first thing we read about th« 
reign of Abijah is that there " was war between him and Jeroboam " (ver. 2). What 
else was to be expected? How, in those times, or indeed in any time, could it be 
otherwise? Tribes descended, as they were, from a common ancestor, speaking the 
same language, holding the same faith, having the same history, under a sacred obliga- 
tion to worship at the same sanctuary, with no natural boundary between them, were 
bound to be united together and form one strong nation, or else to be at perpetual 
variance. There are two great mistakes, of which one is as foolish and as mischievous 
as the other — ^to insist upon organic union when everything in constitution and 
providential ordering points to separation ; and, on the other hand, to attempt separation 
when everything clearly points to union. Whom God hath joined together let no man 
try to put asunder ; if he does, he will certainly reap mischief and misery for liis harvest. 
This will apply not only to nations, but to Churches, to social communities, to families, 
to individuals. 

II. The dutt and wisdom of bbmonstbanoe. It was right enough of Abijah to 
Vtter the strong and effective remonstrance here recorded (vers. 4 — 12). Perhaps, as 
one descended by both parents from David, he had a very strong sense of the disloydty 
of the two tribes ; but he certainly made a very vigorous appeal to them, urging them, 
by considerations of duty to God and of regard for their own interests, to rally to hit 
side. He did not succeed in the attempt ; probably he did not expect to do so. When 
men have carried disloyal or disobedient thought so far as to be guilty of actual rebellion 
or active opposition, they are not often moved even by the most cogent and persuasiva 
words. Nevertheless; it is always right to try to move them before resorting to violent 
measures. We may succeed, as men have succeeded before now, in saving sanguinary 
strife, or in averting that which is, "in all but the bloodshed, a duel." Eemonstranco 
should be made (1) in time ; (2) without provocation in tone ; (3) in the sorrow which 
carries dignity, and not in the passion which only excites contempt ; (4) with a feeling 
that our common brotherhood is a greater thing than our individual interests. 

III. The place fok stbatagem in the battle of the Lord. Jeroboam seems to 
have been in the way of succeeding by his stratagem (vers. 13, 14), and had there been 
no strong and special reason for Divine interposition, he would undoubtedly have 
prevailed against Abijah. Persuasiveness of speech is good, but sagacity in action is 
better still in any serious campaign. And while simple stiaightforwardness is the 
weapon we should commonly use, there is a guile we may employ when our spirit is 
wholly unselfish, and when we do not invade inviolable truth (see 2 Cor. xii. 16). 

IV. The success of faithfulness. After all, it was not the cleverness of the 
orafty Jeroboam, but the faithfulness, thus far, of the obedient Abijah which secured 
the victory. The men of Judah " cried unto the Lord," and " God smote Jeroboam 
and all Israel." As we read the chronicles of the two kingdoms, we are amazed that 
kings and people failed to see that just as they were obedient to Jehovah they pros- 
pered, and just as they were disobedient they were overtaken with national calamity. 
But it is so much easier to distinguish other people's duty than to perceive our own, 
to see where others missed their way than to find or to keep our own. Continually 
are we tempted to abandon the path of simple Divine wisdom for that which has its 
own fascinations, but to which no finger-post of duty points us ; and invariably we 
find that " the end thereof " is sorrow and, disillusion. Often the path of righteousness 
is unattractive and unpromising at the outset; but in that way lies success. Further 
on the prospect brightens ; and at the end of that road is victory and joy. Be faithful 
onto death, and you may make quite sure of the crown of life. — 0. 

Ver. 12. — Four reasons for swrender. 1. Jesus Christ has taught us that in the 
great spiritual campaiga in which we are engaged there can be no neutrality ; he that 
b not with the Lord is against him (Matt. xii. 30). We have, therefore, to include 
fimong those who are in arms against Christ, not only (1) those who deny him by 
speaking evil of him and disparaging him ; and (2) those who refuse to recognize the 
great claims he makes on the homage and obedience of mankind, reducing him to the 
rank of a fallible human teacher ; but (3) those also who are wholly heedless of his 
claims, who show an utter disregard to his will, who stand outside his Church, or who 
do those things which he has expressly denounced and forbidden. These are his 



158 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONIULES. [cii. xni. 1—22. 

enemies, and their name is legion; tlieir resources are great; they compose an army 
overwhelmingly strong in numbers and material equipments. 2. Before these there 
come the prophets of the Lord, summoning them to leave the ranks in which they 
stand, and to surrender themselves to him and his service. These speakers for God 
entreat thera to lay down their arms and to serve under Christ. Their reasons are, at 
least, fourfold. To be where they are is — 

I. To BE OVERTHROWING THAT WHICH THEIR FATHERS BOILT UP. "Fight yC not 

against the Lord God of your fathers." Long and patiently, with many tears and 
prayers, often in the face of the most determined opposition, in health and sickness, in 
youth and in strength and in decline, on to old age and even unto death, our fatheri 
fought for the truth they loved; they built up the Church, the institution, the 
Christian stronghold in which we found ourselves when we awoke to life and thought. 
And now are we going to take that sacred building down ; gtone by stone, are our 
hands — their children's hands — going to demolish it? Are we content to lower the 
flag they held high so bravely and so nobly? Shall it be our function to undo the 
large and long result of all their toil? Shall we bring into disrepute the name they 
honoured far above their own ? Shall we fight against the Lord God of our fathers ? 

IL To BE OPPOSING THAT WHICH THE BEST MEN ARE SUSTAINING. " God's prieStS 

. . . cry alarm against you." Invested in the sacred garments, with the appointed 
signals in their hands (Numb. x. 8), the holiest in the land are urging the people to 
maintain their ground. The cause of Christian truth has not only the presence uf a 
noble host of good and holy men ; it is led by the best of the good and wise. Those 
who are clothed with righteousness, whose voice is the sound of earnest and irresistible 
conviction, are summoning all who love God and man to oppose themselves to the 
enemies of Christ. If we league ourselves " with these his enemies " we must make up 
our mind to contend with the worthiest and the wisest, with the most pure and brave 
and devoted, that ever drew mortal breath, that ever sounded the note of battle. 

III. To BE FIGHTING AGAINST GoD. " God himsclf is with us for our Captain." 
In the Christian Church it is the assured conviction that the invisible Lord is not the 
absent One; he is the very present One. "Lo, I am with you al way," etc. (Matt. 
zxviii. 20). We who fight /or him fight under him — under his eye, his observant eye; 
under his direction — the directiun of a hand that is not seen, but that is felt. They 
who fight against his cause are fighting against him himself. They have to overcome 
the Almighty. 

IV. To BE ARRAYED AGAINST A FORCE THAT MUST PROVE VICT0BI0U8. "Ye 

shall not prosper." Many times has Christianity seemed to be doomed to defeat and 
even to extinction, but out of every terrible contest it has emerged successful, even 
triumphant. Persecution, ridicule, argumentation, corruption, — these have done their 
worst, and they have failed. To-day the friends of Christ are more numerous, and the 
cause of Christ is more advanced, than ever. And he who is in arms against the Lord 
of all love and power, who is seeking to undermine his influence, who is contemptuous 
of his holy will, who is opposin<: his own indifference or his worldliness to the com- 
mands and the invitations of a Divine Saviour, he is in the ranks of the army that 
will be defeated; no voice of victory will greet his dying ear, no hope of commendation 
and award will then fill his heart. — C. 

Vers. 19, 20. — Jeroboam ; career, character, reputation. There are three things 
which belong to every uian, with the shaping of which he himself has much, though 
not everything, to do, and which are of the first importance to him. We look at them 
in connection with Jeroboam. 

I. His career. At first, and for some time, we find him steadily rising ; beginning 
low, he distinguishes himself by the character of his work, is promoted to a post of 
some importance (1 Kings xi. 28) ; he gains the confidence and good will of the |)eople, 
is regarded as one who may aspire to the highest position in the state; be has to retire 
for a time from the presence of Solomon, who suspects his loyalty, but upon the deaih 
of that sovereign he returns, takes advantage of the inexperience and foolhardiness 
of Rehoboam, and mounts the throne, reigning over ten-twelfths of the whole land. 
Then he maintains his position for some nineteen years, keejiing up a chronic war with 
his royal rival at Jerusalem, and apparently holding his own. Then he has a pitched 



OH. xiu. 1—22.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 15» 

battle with Abijah, and, spite of clever generalship (vers. 13, 14), he is signally 
defeated ; his troops are utterly routed, and he has to sacrifice three important places. 
From that time he declines in strength and spirit, until, cowed if not crushed by hia 
defeat, he dies of disappointment and chagrin. " The Lord struck him." 

II. His ohabaoteb. He was evidently an active and able workman, competent to 
undertake the more difficult and responsible posts in the building of fortifications ; he 
was a man of ambition as well as of resource, willing to enter the open door to mount 
the " fiery courser of opportunity ; " he was capable of patience as well as of Tigoroua 
action ; he could bide his time in Egypt as well as strike the blow when the hour was 
ripe; he was courageous and self-confident, not shrinking from the dangerous position 
of heading a revolt against the rightful ruler of the land (ver. 6) ; he was utterly 
unscrupulous as to the measures he adopted to retain the loyalty of his people (vers. 
8 — 10) ; he was prepared to abolish the accepted and true faith, and import a false and 
low religion ; also to rid himself of the best men as priests, introducing the lowest to 
take their place (1 Kings xii. 31). All piety and principle he subordinated to the one 
end of preserving his throne and his dynasty. Thus he made shipwreck of faith and 
of a good conscience. 

IIL His keputation. For reputation is to be very carefully distinguished from 
character. A man may have a good reputation, and, in the sight of him who is the 
Truth, a very bad character ; such were the Pharisees of our Lord's time, and such 
have been hypocrites of all time. Or a man may have a bad reputation and a noble 
character ; such was Paul amongst his countrymen ; such have been the reformers and 
martyrs of all ages. But Jerobuam's reputation has answered to his character. He 
was, indeed, regarded as a man of considerable ability (1 Kings xi. 24); but the one 
chief and continual association with his name is that of the great mischief-maker, the 
man who wrought dire evil to his country ; he was known, and is known, as the man 
"who made Israel to sin." From his character, career, and reputation we may be 
reminded : 1. That it is right to be concerned about our career, right to wish for one 
that is bright and pleasant and honourable ; and with this desire in our heart we should 
(1) ask for Divine guidance and aid; (2) do all that industry, patience, and moderation 
will accomplish to compass that end ; and (3) be quite prepared to take a lower place 
if that should be the will of our heavenly Father concerning us. 2. That it is ol more 
importance that we should possess a good reputation ; not that we need trouble our- 
selves about what the sinful or the foolish are saying of us, but that we should care 
much to win the esteem of the good and wise. 3. That the essential thing is a sound 
character in the sight of God. That is the foundation of all ; on it rests a good reputa- 
tion and a bright career. Therefore let us ask ourselves what we are ; and let us be 
dissatisfied with ourselves unless we can believe that we are true disciples of Jesus 
Christ, "children of our Father who is in heaven," resembling him in spirit and in 
principle. — 0. 

Vers. 21, 22. — Abijah: the lessons of his life. These concluding verses, which 
dispose of the latter end of the life of Abijah, may bring before ns the lessons which 
are to be gathered from his career. 

I. The slightnesb and yaluelessnebs of human faue. He was a descendant 
of David, and a king reigning at Jerusalem, and he gained a somewhat brilliant victory 
over his rival at Mount Ephraim — " the rest of his acts and his ways and sayings are 
written in the story of the Prophet Iddo ; " but who reads them there, or who can tell 
us anything of what is there contained ? Tn the Book of the Kings (1 Kings v. 7) we 
are referred to our text for the details of his career. But how scanty we find them to 
be I How little do we know of this once proud and " mighty " monarch ; and how 
content we are that we know so little ! And of what entire valuelessuess to him 
would any fuller knowledge on our part be I We need not be concerned that our name 
and fame will traverse so small a part of this globe, and travel so short a space of 
time; that we shall be so soon forgotten. Kings and statesmen, whose chancea 
of fame were far greater than ours, have found bow ephemeral and how worthless 
a thing is fame. To be loved by those whom we have blessed, to be esteemed by the 
good and trne, to be honoured of God to take some part in the promotion of his glorious 
kingdom, — that is the heritage to be coveted and to be gained. 



160 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xiii. 1—22. 

II. The BRiTTLENESs OF EARTHLY FORTUNE. When Abijah ascended the throne 
of Judah, he had, probably, good reason for expecting a long period of honour and 
enjoyment. But three short years brought his hopes down to the ground. Some 
disease showed itself in his frame, or some accident befell him, or some treacherous 
blow struck him, and he went down to the grave with his early hopes unfulfilled. 
And who shall say that the young man of our acquaintance, of our connection, of our 
afiTection, who has such bright prospects before him, will not find, by a sad disillusion, 
that the term of his happiness and his honour is a very brief one ; that a few yeari, 
or even months, will bring him to his grave? " Love not the world, neither the things 
which are in the world. . . . The world passeth away . . . but he that doeth the will of 
God ahidethfor ever." 

III. The danger of great success. We read in the preceding verse (ver. 20) 
that Jeroboam never " recovered strength again " after his humiliating defeat at Mount 
Ephraim. We might with equal truth say of Abijah that he never recovered from his 
success. He was apparently elated by it, and, in the perilous mood of complacency, 
he gave himself up to culpable domestic licence (ver. 21). His latter days were spent 
in home luxuries and (it is only too likely) in revelries and follies. His success was 
too much for him; as, indeed, success very often proves to be. Many men can stand 
misfortune ; comparatively few can stand prosperity. It is a " slippery place," where 
the unguarded human spirit falls, and is badly bruised, if not broken. If the tide of 
success should set in, whether of wealth, or honour, or power, or affection, let there be 
unusual watchfulness and multiplied devotion ; for the hour of prosperity is that hour 
when the archers of the enemy will be busy with their arrows. 

IV. The value of whole-hbartbdnbss in the service of the Supreme. Where 
shall we look to find the fatal flaw that accounts for this royal failure ? We find 
it here (1 Kings xv. 3). Abijah's heart was " not perfect with the Lord his God ; " 
that is to say, his heart was " divided," and therefore he was " found faulty " (Hos. x. 2). 
He did not seek God " with his whole heart." He was willing enough to try and 
charm with the Divine Name and the Divine will and Law (see vers. 6 — 10), but he 
was not prepared to walk uprightly and faithfully, as " the heart of David his father," 
before the Lord his God. If our devotion be nothing more than a desire to have God 
on our side in the day of battle, we shall show small consistency of conduct and little 
excellence of character. The religious character that will stand the test both of sun- 
shine and shadow is that of the man who realizes the supreme claims of God, his 
Father and his Saviour, and who solemnly and determinately dedicates himself, heart 
and life, to " the Lord his God." It is only whole-heartedness in the service cf Christ 
that will ensure us against the perils of adversity and prosperity. — C. 

Vers. 1, 2, 21, 22. — The successor of Sehohoam. I. His name. Abijah, "whose 
father is Jehovah" (1 Kings xiv. 1) ; Abijam, " father of the sea," t.e. a maritime man 
(1 Kings xiv._31 ; xv. 1) ; or Abia (LXX.). If Abijam be not a clerical mistake, then 
the hypothesis is at least interesting that the Chronicler adopted the form Abijah 
because he did not intend to describe this king's reign as wicked, while the writer 
of the Kings, having this intention, frequently selected the form Abijam (Kitto). 

II. His MOTHER. Micaiah, or Maacha (oh. xi. 20), the daughter of Uriel of Gibeah, 
and the daughter (equivalent to granddaughter by the mother's side) of Absalom 
(ch. xi. 20), or Abishalom (1 Kings xv. 2). The notion (Bahr) that Abijah's wife, the 
mother uf Asa, was also called Maacah (ch. xv. 10) is not necessary, and still less the 
hypothesis (Bertheau) that in this place the name of Abijah's wife has been substituted 
for that of his mother. 

HI. His wives. Fourteen in number, of whom one was (on the supposition just 
named) Maacah, the names of the others being unknown. Like his father Rehoboam, 
grandfather Solomon, and great-grandfather David, Abijah practised polygamy. A 
parent's vices are considerably easier to copy than his virtues. Those also are likelier 
than these to be transmitted by heredity. 

IV. His OFFSPRING. Twenty-two sons and sixteen daughters. Of the former only 
one is known, Asa his successor, the rest having disappeared from the stage of history 
iis from that of time. Obscurity, the common lot of men; yet not always a disadvau- 
tage in itself, or a proof of inferior merit. Some of the world's greatest men have 



OH. xni. 1— 22.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHEONICLES. 161 

been unknown to their contemporaries ; and Abijah's unnamed sons may have been 
superior persons to Asa, 

V. His reion. 1. Its sphere. Judah, the southern kingdom, Jeroboam still exer- 
cising sovereignty over the northern, 2. Its seat. Jerusalem, the capital of Israel 
being Samaria. 3. Its duration. Three years, beginning in the eighteenth and ending 
in the twentieth year of Jeroboam. 4. Its <iiaracter. Troubled. " There was war 
between Abijah and Jeroboam." 

VI. Ebs END. 1. His death. "He slept with his fathers" (ch. xlv. 1). 2. His 
burial. " He was laid in the city of David." 3. His biogrctphy. The story of his 
life, of his acts, ways, and sayings, was written by the Prophet Iddo. 

VII. His CHAKAOTEE. 1. Bis ability. Undoubted. (1) A vigorous ruler (ver, 21); 
'?) M able speaker (ver. 4) ; (3) a powerful reasoner (vera. 8 — 12) ; and (4) a valiant 
leader. 2. His piety. Decided. Notwithstanding his polygamy, he was (1) sincere 
(vers. 10, 11), (2) lively (ver. 12), (3) trustful (ver. 18), and (4) courageous (ver. 12), 
though (5) not perfect (1 Kings xv. 3). 

Lessons. 1. Jehovah in the heart is better than Jehovah in the name. 2, A weak 
and wicked father may have a capable and good son. 3. The value of a man's life is not 
determined by the length of his days. 4. One may have faults and yet be reli^ous. 
5. Every one should strive to live so as to be remembered for good after death. — W. 

Vers, 3 — 19. — A great war in a short reign. I. The oontbndino armies. (Ver. 8.) 
1. Their leaders. Of the army of Ju(iah, Abijah ; of the host of Israel, Jeroboam^ 
both capable generals, and each the inspiring spirit of his troops. 2. Their numbers. 
Of Judah, four hundred thousand men — one hundred thousand fewer than Joab num- 
bered to Judah ; of Israel, eight hundred thousand — exactly the number Joab counted 
to Israel (2 Sam. xxiv. 9). 3. Their quality. (1) Abijah's troops were (o) heroes 
of war, veterans experienced in former campaigns under Rehoboam, and (6) chosen or 
picked men, literally, " men of youth," whose powers were at their best (Jer. xviii. 31). 
(2) Jeroboam's soldiers were also (a) chosen men and (6) mighty men of valour. Thus 
both armies were well matched. 4. Their position. Over against each other, in the 
vicinity of Mount Zemaraim, near Bethel (Josh, xviii. 22) — " probably ,the large ruin 
Samrah, north of Jericho " (Conder, ' Handbook to the Bible,' p. 427), and perhaps at 
that time the northern limit of Abijah's territory (Ewald) ; obviously so close to one 
another that to them the words of Shakespeare (' King Henry V.,' act iv. chorus) may 
be fitly applied — 

* From camp to camp, thro' the foul womb of night. 
The hum of either army stilly sounds, 
That the fix'd sentinels almost receive 
The secret whispers of each other's watoh : 
Fire answers fire : and through their paly flames 
Each battle sees the other's nmber'd face : 
Steed threatens steed, in high and boastful neighs 
Piercing the night's dull ear ; and from the tents. 
The armourers, accomplishing the knights, 
With busy hammers closing rivets up, 
Oive dreadful note of preparation." 

n. The sfseoh of Abijah. (Vers. 4 — 12.) 1. Whence spoken. From Moont 
Zemaraim, in Ephraim, as Jotham had formerly spoken to the Shechemites from Mount 
Gerizim (Judg. ix. 7). 2. To whom addressed. To Jeroboam and all IsraeL Generals 
commonly harangue their troops before going into action (1 Sam. iv. 9; 2 Sam. x. 
11,12; 2 Chron. xviii. 30; cf. 'King Henry V.,' act iv. sc. 3); Abijah directs his 
speech to his foes, as David did to Goliath (1 Sam. xvii. 45), and Babshakeh to the 
envoys of Hezekiah (2 Kings xviii. 28 — 35 ; cf. ' Richard II.,' act iii. sc. 3). 3. 0/ 
what composed. Of a long, earnest argument, dissuasive, and appeal, for the purpose 
of inducing Jeroboam and his warriors to desist from their mad enterprise of attempting 
to conquer Judah. According to Abijah they could not succeed, for a variety of reasons. 
(1) Their rebellion was a sin against their own better knowledge (ver. 5) — a sin against 
the ligM. They knew, or might have known, that Jehovah the God of Israel had 
u. chronicles. k 



162 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES [oh. xm. 1—22. 

^ven the kingdom over Israel to David for ever, even to him and to his sons by a covenant 
of salt, i.e, by a perpetual covenant (Numb, xviii. 19). This promise had been made 
to David (2 Sam. vii. 12 — 16), confirmed to Solomon (1 Kings ix. 4, 5), and reported 
to Jeroboam (1 Kings xi. 31 — 38), who must have known that whatever sanction he 
had from Jehovah to ascend the throne of Israel, he had none to aspire after that 
of Judah. Abijah's statement was true only of the throne of Judah ; the lovereignty 
of undivided Israel was guaranteed to David and hig ions on conditions which had not 
been fulfilled. Jehovah's language concerning David'g throne has been realized in 
Christ, to whom the absolute and unbroken supremacy over God's spiritual Israel has 
been committed for ever by a covenant of salt (Ps. ii. 6 ; Ixxii. 17 ; Dan. vii. 13, 14). 
Hence rebellion against the authority of Christ cannot prosper. (2) Their rebellion 
was a revolt against their rightful lord (ver. 6). Though Jeroboam had beforehand 
been informed of Jehovah's intention to wrest t«n tribes from Behoboam, it was none 
the less an act of insubordination on the part of Jeroboam and the Israelites to raise 
the standard of revolt against the son of Solomon. So the Divine foreknowledge that 
men will sin, reject Christ, and continue in unbelief, does not render it the less culpable 
on their part so to do. Christ, the Son of David, is their rightful Sovereign (Acts x. 36), 
and to disown his regal authority is to be guilty of spiritual high treason. (8) Their 
rebellion was promoted and fostered by wicked men (ver. 7). Jeroboam had collected 
round him an army of vain men — light persons like those Abimelech on a former 
occasion had hired to follow him (Judg. ix. 4) ; children of Belial, or of worthlessness, 
of the stamp of Nabal (1 Sam. xxv. 17), or of those who followed David when he 
rescued his wives from the spoilers of Ziglag (1 Sam. xxx. 32) ; " lewd fellows of the 
baser sort" like those who assaulted the house of Jason (Acts xvii, 5); "men of the 
most abandoned principles and characters, or men without consideration, education, or 
brains" (Adam Clarke). Hence it was impossible their nefarious project could thrive 
(Prov. iii. 35 ; Ps. i. 6). (4) Their rebellion was aggravated by the time when it had 
been conceiveid and carried out, viz. at a time when Solomon's son had not been able 
to withstand them, having but newly ascended the throne, and as a consequence been 
unprepared when the mine, as it were, wiis sprung beneath his feet (ver. 7). Abijah 
speaks of Behoboam as having been at the time of Jeroboam's rebellion " young and 
tender-hearted ; " but, as Behoboam was then forty-one years old, Abijah may have 
purposed by the expression to allude to his inexperience as a king, which laid him open 
to be misled by designing men, or to the instability of his throne, which would natu- 
rally invite the attacks of watchful adversaries. (5) Their rebellion was supported 
only by human warriors and golden calves (ver. 8). But vain is the help of man, even 
when the battle is against a fellow (Ps. Ix. 11 ; cviii. 12), and much more when against 
God (Ps. ii. 1). " There is no king saved by the multitude of an host" (Ps. xxxiii. 11), 
as Israel afterwards often came to know (Hos. x. 13) ; and they that trust in golden 
calves or idols of silver and gold are like imto them (Ps. cxv. 8; cxxxv. 18), and shall 
eventually be put to shame (Isa. xlii. 17 ; Hos. viii. 5). (6) Their rebellion was being 
maintained in the interest of idolatry (ver. 9). Although Jeroboam had been expressly 
informed that Solomon's apostasy had been the cause of the division of his kingdom 
(1 Kings xi. 33), and that the permanence of his own throne depended on his steiSfast 
adherence to the religion of Jehovah (1 Kings xL 38), yet had he wickedly ejected the 
priests of Jehovah from their ofBces, and instituted a new order of priesUiood for the 
golden calves and other idols he had set up (1 Kings liL 28—31). Nay, as if to pour 
contempt upon the true religion, he followed the fashion of heathen nations both in 
the kind of persons he admitted to the sacerdotal ofGce, and in the rites of initiation 
with which these were installed. The former were selected Irom the lowest of the 
people, and the latter were of the simplest description. Any one who could bring the 
necessary offerings for consecration, "a young bullock and seven rams" (cf. Exod. 
xxix. 1), was admitted to the new hierarchy, and no questions were asked. This was 
aU the recognition Jeroboam made of the true worship of Jehovah. (7) Their rebellion 
was being prosecuted against those who adhered to the true worship of Jehovah 
(ver. 10). Abijah in this verse gives a better account of himself than the writer of the 
Kings does (1 Kings xv. 3)— a natural and common, if not altogether justifiable, weak- 
ness. The probable explanation is that, while clinging to the idolatrous abominations 
introduced by Solomon and Behoboam, Abijab ha4 not abandoned the forma of the 



CH. xai. 1— 22.] THE SECOND BOOK OP TUB CHRONICLES. 163 

Mosaic cultus (vers. 10, 11). Like multitudes before and since, he and his people con- 
ceived it might be possible to do homnge on equal terms to Jehovah and heathen 
divinities, which ii was not (Isa. xlii. 8) ; just as many in the present day fancy they 
can serve God and mammon, which they cannot (Matt. vi. 24). (8) Their rebellion 
was directed against Jehovali himself (ver. 12), who was present in the camp of Judah 
as Captain, as he had been in the days of the conquest (Josh. v. 14), and as he still is, 
in the Person of Christ, in the army of the New Testament Church (Matt, xxviii. 20). 
This constituted the hopelessness of Jeroboam's attack (Exod. xv. 3 — 7; 1 Sam. ii. 10; 
Job xli. 10), as it does still of every assault upon the Church of Christ (Acts v. 39 ; 
xxiii. 9). No weapon that is formed against her shall prosper (Isa. liv. 17 ; Matt. 
xvi. 18). That Jehovah remained in Judah in the midst of so much corruption was 
entirely owing to his gracious covenant with David (1 Kings xii. 36); that Christ 
continues in the New Testament Church even when overrun with errors in doctrine 
and worship, as well as marred by defects in practice, is owing solely to his own faith- 
fulness and truth (Matt, xxviii. 20). (9) Their rebellion was foredoomed to failure, 
because the alarm-trumpets of Jehovah s priests were against them (ver. 12). Those 
alarm-trumpets were " the divinely appointed pledges that God would remember his 
people in war, and deliver them from their enemies" (Numb. x. 9). Against the 
Midianites Moses sent into the field, along with twelve thousand warriors, Phinehas 
the son of Eleazar the priest, with the holy instruments and the trumpets to blow in 
his hand" (Numb. xxxi. 6). So the duty of Christian ministers is to sound an alarm 
in God's Name against every thing and person that would injure Christ's Church. 
Were this always done, timeously and earnestly, ultimate victory for the Church would 
be ensured (Acts xx. 31 ; 1 Cor. iv. 14 ; Col. i. 28). 

in. The ambushmbnt of Jeroboam. (Vers. 13, 14.) 1. Skilfully prepared. 
(X) By Jeroboam. Wicked men often possess high talent, and, though not pious, make 
eplendid generals, eminent statesmen, successful merchants, etc. (2) While Abijah 
was orating. Neither praying nor preaching will suffice without watching. While 
performing every duty earnestly and thoroughly (Eccles. ix. 10), it must not be imagined 
that prudence, foresight, and vigilance are not duties. The Christian, while praying 
always with all prayer and supplication, must take unto himself the whole armour 
of God (Eph. vi. 13—18). (3) Bound about Judah. That Abijah had not perceived 
the stratagem of his opponent is explicable — he had been preoccupied with his harangue; 
that his generals and soldiers were not on the alert was hardly to their credit, even 
if they were listening to their monarch's eloquence. At any rate, as Jeroboam circum- 
vente'l Abijah and his army, while engaged in what inight be termed a religious duty, 
an attempt to avert the calamity of war and to promote the interests of peace, so does 
the prince of the power of the air commonly select the moment when Christ's soldiers 
are engaged in some religious service to cast around them his snares. 2. Courageously 
met. Though surprised, the men of Jndah were not thrown into panic. Realizins: 
their danger, they confronted it : (1) With faith : " they cried unto Jehovah," whom they 
believed to be their Captain (ver. 12) — an excellent lesson for the Church (collectively 
and individually), which, though professing to regard Christ as her Captain, does not 
always turn to him for help in duty or relief in difficulty, but often repairs to worldly 
policy, human wisdom, or material props and defences. (2) With hope : " The priests 
sounded with their trumpets," thus showing they anticipated victory. So should the 
Church of Christ never enter the field against her adveisaries in a doubtful, but always 
in a confident, spirit (Ps. Ix. 12 ; cviii. 13), expecting to be victorious (Rom. viiL 37). 
(3) With spirit: "The men of Judah gave a shout" — not merely sounded with their 
war-trumpets (Bertheau, Keil), but shouted like men contending for the mastery (Exod, 
xxxii. 18), as soldiers do when rushing into battle (Josh. vi. 20 ; Judg. xv. 14 ; 1 Sam. 
xvii. 20). So should the Church give expression to her confident anticipations of 
victory in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs (Ps. cxxxii. 9 ; cxlix. 3, 5 ; Eph. v. 19), 

IV. The viotoey op Jddah. (Vers. 15 — 18.) 1. The source of it. God. Not 
Abijah or Judah, but Elohim smote Jeroboam and all Israel. " Safety [' victory,' 
Bevised Version] is of the Lord " (Prov. xxi. 13), and " it is he that giveth salvation [or, 
'deliverance '] unto kings" (Ps. cxliv. 10). " Jehovah is a Man of war," san<; Miriam 
(Exod. XV. 3) ; while David owned, " He teacheth my hands to war, and my fingers to 
fight " (Ps. xviii. 34 J cxliv. 1). 2. The time of it. " As the men of Judah shouted. ' 



164 THE SECOKD BOOK OF THE CHEONICLES. [oh. xin. 1—24 

Bo " the Lord is nigh unto all that call upon him " (Pa. cxIt. 18) ; and " whosoever shall 
call upon the Name of the Lord shall be delivered" (Joel iL 32 ; Acta ii. 21 ; Rom. x. IS), 
even while they are calling (lea. Ixv. 24). Ct the rescue of Jehosbaphat at Ramoth- 
Gilead (oh. xviii. 31). 3. 2%« ground of it. " Because they relied upon the Lord God 
of their father* " (ver. 18). That Jehovah should prove a Buckler to them that trusted 
in him accorded exactly with the representations of the Divine character furnished by 
Scripture (Gen. iv. 1 ; Deut. xx. 1 ; Josh. i. 9 ; Ps. xvii. 7 ; cxv. 9), and had frequently 
been verified in the experience of both sections of the kingdom— Joshua's soldiers at 
Jericho (Josh. vi. 12, etc.), and Gideon's at the well of Harod (Judg. vii. 1, 21), because 
they trusted in thft sword of Jehovah more than in their own weapons. So David 
prevailed over the Philistine (1 Sam. xviL 45), Hezekiah over the Assyrian king, and 
the Philistines (2 Kings xviii. 5, 8) and the Beubenites over the Hagarites (1 Chron. 
V. 20). Confidence in God the strongest guarantee a Christian can have of emerging 
triumphantly £rom any moral or spiritual conflict (Ps. xxvi. 1 ; xxxiii. 20, 21 ; Isa. xii. 2 ; 
2 Cor. i. 10 ; Rom. viii. 38). 4. Ute extent of tt. (1) Jeroboam's army was routed 
(vers. 15, 16). (2) Five hundred thousand chosen men were slain. A slaughter so 
terrific suggests that the numbers must have been exaggerated ; and certainly nothing 
like it can be cited from either ancient or modem warfare. If, therefore, fifty thousand 
ihould not be read instead of five himdred thousand (Rawlinson), the figures may be 
regarded as a popular expression of the opinion of contemporaries of the war that 
Jeroboam lost more than half of his troops (Keil). Cf. Shakespeare's description of a 
routed army: "The king himself, of bis wings destitute, the army broken," etc. 

S' Cymbeline,' act v. ec 3). (3) The kingdom of Israel was completely prostrated 
ver. 18). Their power to harass Israel was seriously impaired, which confirms the 
preceding statement that no ordinary blow had been inflicted on Jeroboam's army. 
(4) Several cities with their surrounding domains were captured — Bethel, the present- 
day Beitin, an old patriaichal settlement (Gen. xii. 8; xxviii. 19; xxxv. 1, 6), and one 
of the seats of Jeroboam's idolatrous worship (1 Kings xii. 29, 33), with the townships 
or villages in the district ; Jeshanah, probably the Isanas of Josephus ('Ant.,' xiv. 15. 12) 
and the Jesuna of the LXX., occurring only here, and identified with the modern 
'Ain Sinia north of Bethel, with many rich springs and rock-tombs in the vicinity 
(Conder, 'Handbook,' p. 416; Riehm, ' Handworterbuch,' i. 705); and Ephraim, or 
Ephron (LXX., Vvdgate), the former of which points to the Ephraim near Bethel 
(Josephus, ' Wars,' iv. 9. 9), whither Jesus retired (John xi. 54), while the latter can 
hardly be connected with Mount Ephron on the south-west border of Benjamin (Bertheau), 
but must also be sought in the neighbourhood of Bethel. (5) Jeroboam never again 
recovered strength (ver. 20). He outlived the war by several, and Abijah by two, 
years ; but the decisive defeat he had sustained left him ever afterwards a crippled and 
comparatively feeble sovereign. 

Lessons. 1. The sinfulness of unjustifiable rebellion. 2. The horrors of war. 
8. The political value of religion. 4. The power of faith, 6. The reward of sin. — W. 

Ver. 20. — The career of Jeroboam. I. A» example of disappointed ambition. 
A striking illustration of how " vaulting ambition overleaps itself, and falls on the 
other side." Its stages reveal the insatiable character of that "fire and motion of the 
soul which will not dwell in its own narrow being, but aspires beyond the fitting medium 
of desire" (Byron). 1. Promoted to a position of trust. Originally a servant of 
Solomon, he was appointed master of works for the house of Judah, i.e. superintendent 
of the Ephraimite contingent of workmen (1 Kings xL 28). 2. Plotting sedition. 
Invested with " brief authority," he began to meditate ambitious thoughts, which 
probably the Shilonite with his prophetic glance discerned (1 Kings xi. 37). 3. Married 
te a princess. Compelled to flee from Palestine, he found in Egypt, at the court of 
Shishak, both a barlx>ur of refuge and a balm for his wounds — he became the husband 
of a princess and the brother-inrlaw of Pharaoh (1 Kin°;s xi. 40). 4. Further promo- 
tioni. Recalled to Palestine, he was first elected a spokesman of the northern tribes 
in their diplomatic liealings with Behoboam, and ultimately chosen to be their sove- 
reign (1 Kings xii. 20). 6. More sedition. Barely was lie seated on the throne of 
Israel, than tie adopted measures to render permanent the separation of the two kingdoms ; 
turning his back upon Jehovah, and setting up a new and rival religion to the Jehovah- 



OH. xm. 1—22.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 165 

eultua in Judah (1 Kings xii. 28). 6. Renewed ambition. Not content with thii, h« 
aimed at the subjugation of the southern empire. 7. Firuil collapse. This point 
reached, he hastened rapidly towards an ignominiuus end. Byron says — 

" One breast laid open were a sohool. 
Which would unteach mantdad the lust to iliiae or role." 

One may be permitted to lioubt this ! 

II. AJs IKBTANOE OF MISAPPLIED ABiLiTT. That Jeroboam as youth and man, aa 
private person and public official, as servant and sovereign, possessed high capacities, 
need not be questioned. Energy, industry, enthusiasm, ambition, faculty for organiza- 
tion, power of impressing, directing, leading, and ruling others — qualities needful for 
generalship, statesmanship, kingship)— appear all to have belonged to him in more than 
ordinary measure ; yet in every situatiun of life in which he was placed these powers 
were misapplied. The governing idea of his soul was to use all, in himself and others, 
for the advancement of his private interest. For this end he fomented sedition amongst 
his countrymen, encouraged disa£fection amongst the subjects of Solomon, took advan- 
tage of Behoboam's inexperience to raise the standard of revolt, perverted to wicked 
purposes the high position as a sovereign to which he in providence attained, did his 
utmost to propagate irreligion, diffuse idolatry, foster immorality, dissolve the fabric 
of social order, crush and annihilate the true worshippers of Jehovah. The annals 
of mankind afford many illustrations of the same phenomenon — magnificent powers of 
body and mind prostituted to ignoble ends, e.g. Samson, Saul, and Judas from sacred, 
Caesar (Julius), Mark Antony, and Napoleon from profane history. 

III. Ax iLLUSTBATiofT OK KEaLECTED oppoRTONiTiES. 1. When promoted 'by 
Solomon to be master of works for the house of Joseph, he might, with his com* 
maading talent and great force of character, have done much to soothe the rufBed spirit! 
of his countrymen, and so have nipped the poisonous flower of revolution in the bud. 
But he did not ; rather he acted on a contrary hint. 2. When recalled by the northern 
trihes to be their spokesman, had he chosen, he might have poured oil upon the troubled 
waters, allayed the ferment of their passions, appealed to them to give the young king 
a trial, and remember the danger which would accrue to the empire from disunion- 
might have crushed down his own ambitious thoughts, and like Caesar (' Julius Caasar,' 
act iii. sc. 2) — not to speak of a greater (John vi. 15)— put bravely from him the crown 
which in the people's eyes he saw preparing for him. But he did not ; rather, in th« 
popxilar disaffection, he beheld that " tide in the affairs of men which, taken at tha 
flood, leads on to fortune," and launched himself upon its stream without delay. 3. 
WTien favoured by ProvideTice so far as to secure the crown, had he carried out the 
trust committed to him, to erect a kingdom in which the worship of Jehovah should 
be faithfully and purely maintained, he should have been established on his thron* 
beyond the possibility of overthrow, and the house of Jeroboam should have shone with 
a lustre as brilliant as, if not excelling, that of the house of David. But he did not{ 
rather in him was verified the sentiment — 

" That lowliness is young ambition's ladder 
Whereto the olimber-upward turns his face ; 
But when he once attains the utmost round, 
He then unto tlie ladder turns his back. 
Looks in the clouds, scorning the base degrees 
By which he did ascend." 

(' Julius GsBsar,' act iL so. 1.) 

Jehovah had set Jeroboam on the throne of Israel ; Jeroboam when on the throns east 
Jehovah behind his back (1 Kings xiv. 7 — 9). 

IV. A MONUMENT ov DESERVED RETRIBUTION. Jcroboam, who might have attained 
to undying honour, reaped for himself a harvest of eternal infamy. To such a pitch 
of wickedness did he proceed, both in himself and in his people, whom he corrupted by 
his example and commanded by his authority, that not only did " the sin of Jeroboam " 
become ever afterwards proverbial as an expression for the highest possible impiety in 
an Israelitish ruler (1 Kings xv. 34 ; 2 Kings x. 31 ; xiii. 6 ; xiv. 24 ; xvii. 22), but it 
drew down upon him swift and appalling retribution. "The Lord smote him." 1, 
In hit army with defeat. His troops were routed on the field of war, his fenced cities 



166 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHEONICLES. [oh. xiv. 1^15k 



were captured, his military power was broken. 2. In his house with l&reavement. The 
sudden death of his child Abijah was a sore stroke, to which was added a sorer in the 
curse that none other of the house of Jeroboam should come to hia grave m peace 
(1 Kings xiv. 12, 13). 3. In himstlfwith disease. To this the language of ver. 20 is 
believed by some to point (Clarke, Jamieson). i r i i j 

V. A VICTIM OF ALL-DEVOURING HEATH. Jeroboam succumbed to the fatal malady 
two years after the death of Abijah, and in the twenty-second year of his reign. He 
expired at Tirzah, and was buried with his fathers. 

" Sceptre and crown must tumble down. 
And in the dust be equal made 
With the poor crooked scythe and spada.' 

W. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XIV. 



This chapter commences Asa's long reign 
of forty-one years. Asa was son of Abijiih 
and grandson of Maaohah (ch. xv. 16; 
1 Kings XV. 13). The reign was remarkable 
for the devotion of Asa to the true God, 
and for the signal successes given to him in 
consequence, but it did not reach its end 
without a mournful defection on Asa's part 
from trust in God (ch. xvi. 2 — 4, 12), which 
entailed its reward (ch. xvi. 9), and which 
has left tarnished for all ages a fame that 
would otherwise have been fairest among all 
the kings of Judah. The disjointed and 
grndging parallel to the foi-ty-eight verses 
of this and the following two chapters re- 
specting Asa, in Chronicles, is comprised 
within the sixteen verses only of 1 Kings 
XV. 8—24. 

Ver. 1. — Buried ... in the city of David 
(see our note, ch. xii. 16). Asa his son. If, 
according to the suggestion of our note, ch. 
X. 8 and xii. 18, the alleged forty-one years 
of the age of Behoboam be made twenty- 
one, it will follow that Asa could not now 
be more than a boy of some twelve years of 
age. It is against that suggestion that 
there is no sign of this, by word or deed, in 
what is here said of the beginning of Asa's 
leign ; the signs are to the contrary, espe- 
cially taking into the question the indications 
given ns respecting the tendencies, if not 
contradicted, of tlie queen-mother Maachah 
(oh. XV. 16 ; 1 Kings xv. 13), and it is not 
Bupposable that a boy of twelve years of age 
could contradict tliem. This point must be 
held still moot. In his days . . . quiet ten 
years. No doubt one cause of this was the d e- 
feat that Jeruboam and Israel had sustained 
at the hands of Abijah (ch. xiii. 18 — 20). 
It appears also, from 1 Kings xv. 19, that 
•fter tliat defeat a league was instituted 



between Abijah and the then King of Syria: 
"There is a league between me and thee, 
and between my father and thy father." 
And these things, with Israel's Tiew kings, 
and perhaps Asa's extreme ycutii, would 
have favoured the repose of the land. 

Ver. 2. — That which was good and right. 
Our Authorized Version does not omit to 
mark the first three words with italic type, 
the simple and emphatic original being, the 
good and the straight 

Ver. 3. — The altars of the strange (gods); 
Hebrew, the altars of the stranger, meaning, 
of course, " the altars of the gods of the 
stranger." This expression, " strange gods," 
is found in the Authorized Version about 
thirteen times for the Hebrew nsi, or ij.sn, 
and would be most correctly rendered, " The 
gods [or, ' god 'J of the stranger," i.e. of the 
foreigner, as it is rendered in the solitary 
instance of Bent. xxxi. 16. The high 
places. Comp. ver. 5 and ch. xv. 17, which 
says, " But the high places were not taken 
away out of Israel;" and 1 Kings xv. 14^ 
which says, " But the high places were not 
removed," without limiting this non-removal 
to "of Israel." On the question of thia 
apparent inconsistency and surface-contra- 
diction, see our Introduction, § 7, pp. xri. 1 
and ivii. 2. Further, it may here be well 
distinctly to note how little is even the 
apparent discrepancy or contradiction 
alleged in this subject, throwing in (he 
analogous passages in Jehoshaphat's histury 
(ch. xvii. 6 ; xx. 33), in case these may 
reflect any light on the question. Firstly, w* 
will remove out of our way the parallel in 
1 Kings XV. 14, with the observation that it 
Is evident from its immediate context that 
it corresponds with the last statement of our 
Chronicles (ch. xv. 17), savouring of a retro- 
spective summarizing of the compiler, not 
with the first statements (ch. xiv. 3, 5X 
which set forth Asa's prospective purpose of 
heart, his resolution, and, no doubt. Ills' 
edicts. Secondly, we may notice that there 
is a plain-enough dittinction made by th» 



CH. XIV. 1—15.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, 



167 



writer in vers. 3 and 5 respeotively — the one 
saying that Aaa " took away the high places," 
without any further limitation; the other 
saying within two verses, " Also out of all 
the cities of Judah" (note by the vfay liere 
the suggestive stress laid upon " the ciliee," 
possibly as more easily coped with than 
country districts) " he took away the high 
places." The only legitimate inference 
(taking into account both the words used, 
and the fact that the last written are found 
dose upon the former, with the significant 
conjunction "also") must be that some 
dinerent information was intended in the 
two places. Yer. 3 finds Asa as much 
master of "Judah" as ver. 5. Therefore 
the natural interpretation of ver. 3 must be 
that Asa at once abolished " the high places " 
nearest home, nearest Jerusalem, most 
within his own personal reach ; then " also " 
that he did and ordered the same to be done 
in "all the cities of Judah," and it teas 
done at the time, if only for the time. 
Thirdly, include the statement of oh. xv. 17, 
if wo do not insist (as we might insist very 
faiily when pressed on a point of alleged 
inconsistency or contradiction) on the iact 
that now the high places " of Israel " are 
distinctly designated, and that therein those 
outlying parts of Asa's more or less acknow- 
ledged sway outnide of Judah and his 
thoroughest control are dBsignediy described, 
let us instead take the help of an exactly 
analogous (and analogously allegeii) dis- 
crepancy (oh. xvii. 7 compared with ch. 
XX. 33), and we find there that the very key 
wiih which to unlock the difficulty is pro- 
vided to our hand. Jehoshaphat (ch. xvii 
6) "took away the high places;" "the 
people " (ch. xx. 33) did not faithfully and 
with a constant heart follow suit, but had 
failed to prepare, i.e. to turn " their hearts 
unto the God of their fathers." How well 
the juxtaposition of these very words would 
tell, nay, do teU, with the emphatic words of 
1 Kings XV. 14 I " Nevertheless Asa's heart 
was perfect with the Lord all his days;" 
and with our ch. xv. 17, " Nevertheless the 
heart of Asa was perfect aU his days." In 
both these passages the antithesis is patent 
between Asa's heart and the people's hearts, 
between Asa's "all his days" and the 
people's uncertainty and apostasy. The 
fidelity of Bible history and its non- 
ounningly, non-fabnlously devised tenor 
are gratefully corroborated by the inqui- 
sition made into such a supposed "dis- 
crepancy," " inconsistency," " contradiction." 
9r«tice once more the confirmmg indication, 
so far as it goes, of the one verb tliat com- 
mands the next verse, as there noted upon. 
Brake down the images; Hebrew, num It 
occurs in the Authorized Version thuty-two 
times, and is rendered "pillar" or "pillars" 



twelve times ; " image " or " images " uiue- 
teen times; and "garrisons" once. It appears 
simply to have slipped from the signification 
of pillar into the rendering of the word 
" image," by aid of the intermediate word 
" statue." It is used of the pillar or statue of 
Baal in 2 Kings iii. 2 ; x. 26, 27, with his 
name expressed ; and in ch. xviii. 4 ; xxiii. 14, 
without that name expressed. Cut down 
the groves ; Hebrew, onjy^ji'j-nN v^jm. The 
verb here used implies the "cutting," 
*• cutting down," '' pruning " of trees. It is 
undoubtedly applied also to other cutting 
and cutting down, as of the " breaking" of 
a rod (Zech. xi. 10), of an arm (1 Sam. ii. 
31), of horns (Jer. zlviii. 25), of bars or 
bolts (Isa. xlv. 2). It occurs in all twenty- 
three times. It is here employed to describe 
the destroying of what according to the 
Authorized Version are called "groves" 
(Septuagint, Sao-oi; Vulgate, lucus)—a. word 
which with little doubt misleads for the ren- 
dering of our ongiN. Before this same 
word we have also another Hebrew verb for 
" cutting," of very frequent ocouiTence in 
its simple and metaphorically derived uses 
included, viz. nij. The first uses of tliia 
verb with the above word are found in Judg. 
vi. 25, 26, 30. That word means literally 
" fortune," but in its ultimate derivntion 
" straightness," and hence supposed to desig- 
nate, in Phoenician and Aramseari idolatry, 
Astarte or the planet Venus, who is con- 
stantly associated in such idolatry with Baal 
(Judg. iii. 7). But see for the first occur- 
rence of the word, Exod. xxxiv. 13, where 
there is no express mention of Baal, but 
where the idolatries of the Amorite, 
Canaanite, Hittite, Hivite, Perizzite, and 
Jebusite are being spoken of. When we 
take into consideration the probable ulti- 
mate derivation of the word, the fact of the 
verbs that speak of "cutting" being uni- 
formly applied to what it represents, the 
"burning" to which this was condemned 
(Judg. vi. 26) when cut down, and a series 
of statements that represent it as " set up 
under every green tree" (1 Kings xiv. 23; 
2 Kings xvii. 10 ; see also 1 Kings xv. 13; 
2 Kings xxi. 7; xxiii. 6; ch, xv. 16), it not 
only becomes perfectly certain that "grove" 
and "groves" cannot rightly render the 
word, but directs us with the light of those 
passages that speak of it coupled with Baal 
as an object of worship, and that speak of 
prophet and priest called by its name 
(Judg. iii. 7 (compared with ii. 13 ; z. 6 ; 
1 Sam. vii. 4); 1 Kings xviii. 19 ; 2 Kings 
xxi. 3; xxiii. 4), to the strong conviction 
that it should be at once written with a 
capital letter, and rendered as a proper 
name; that it may possibly be a synonym 
with Ashtoreth, i.q. Astarte, or a representa- 
tion in wooden piUar, stock or trunk iashioi^ 



168 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xiv. 1—16 



of some supposed aspect of her passion or 
dominion, very likely in the voluptuous or 
sensual direction (see the nevertheless very 
doubtful Septnagint and Vulgate, ch. xv. 16 ; 
and Vulgate, Judg. iii. 7). Ccmder, in 
•Handbook to the Bible,' p. 187, 2nd edit., 
speaks of " Baal-peor (Numb. ixv. 3) as 
identified by St. Jerome with the classical 
Priapus;" and adds "the Asherah (ren- 
dered 'grove' in our version) was also 
apparently a similar emblem". (2 Kings 
xxiii. 7). The analogy of tlie sacred tree of 
the Assyrians sculptured on the monuments 
of Nineveh ('Nineveh and Persepolis,' 
p. 299, Fergusson), which was probably a 
straight trunk or stock garlanded at certain 
times with ribbons and flowers, has been 
opportunely pointed to (see also Professor 
Dr. Murphy's 'Handbook: Chronicles,' 
p. 115). 

Ver. i. — ^And commanded Judah to seek 
the lord Ood of their fathers. What an 
indication lies couched in this word " com- 
manded " (confirmatory of the spirit of what 
is said above, 'in our previous verse-note) of 
the moral efforts of Asa, and that the efforts 
on which he may have largely relied for 
" taking away the high places " were moral 
efforts, rather than those of physical force. 

Ver. 5. — The images; Hebrew, D'jsn. 
The images spoken of here are, of course, not 
the same with those (noted upon already) of 
ver. 3. The present khammdnim are men- 
tioned seven times beslJe, viz. Lev. xxvi. 
80 ; ch. xxxiv. 4, 7 ; Isa. xvii. 8 ; xxvii. 9 ; 
Ezek. vi. i, 6. Gesenius eays Khammdn is 
an epithet of Baal as bearing rule over the 
sun (nnn, " heat," or " the sun "), in the 
oft-found compound expression, |Bn ^ja ; 
he thinks the plural (a'JQn), invariably 
found in the Old Testament, is short for 
D':!jn D'^^3. He does not agree with the 
translation of Haenaker (' Miscell. Phoen.,' 
p. 50), " sun-image " by aid of the word bps 
nnderstood, images said to have been of a 
pyramid form, and placed in the most sacred 
positions of Baal-temples. This, however, 
IS the rendering adopted by not a few 
modem commentators (so ch. xxxiv. 4). 
Oesenius would render " the Sun-Baal," or 
" the Sun-Lord," i.e. statues of the sun, repre- 
senting a deity to whom (see ' Phoen. 
Insoript.') votive stones were inscribed. In 
his ' Thesaurus ' (p. 489) Gesenius instances 
the Phoenician inscriptions, as showing; that 
our ehlmmanim denoted statues of both Baul, 
the lun-god, and Astarte, the moon-goddess. 

Ver. 6. — He built fenced cities in Judah. 
Though it is not taid so here, it is very 
prdbable that Asa diil again the work of 
Kohoboam (ch. xi. 5 — 12) which Shishak 
had done so much to unrfo (oh. xli. 4, 5, 8). 

Vor. 7. — We have sought him, and he 



hath given us rest. In three successive 
verses the blessings of peace and quiet, and 
no war and rest, are recorded (Isa. xxvi. 1 ; 
Zech. ii. 5). 

Ver. 8.— The " ten years' quiet " (ver. 1) 
begins to see its end Targets (ch. iz. IS) 
Bpears (ch. xi. 12); for both, see 1 Chron.xil 
24. Out of Benjamin, . . . shields and . . . 
bows. The minuter coincidences of the his- 
tory are very obser ^ablc and very interesting ; 
for see 1 Chron. viii. 40 ; xii. 2 ; and mnch 
earlier, Gen. xlix. 27 ; Judg. xx. 16, 17. 

Vers. 9—15. — The remaining seven Tenes 
of this chapter are occupied with the account 
of the invasion of Zerah the Ethiopian, and 
the successful defence and reprisals of Asa. 

Ver. 9. — Zerah the Ethiopian; Hebrew, 
't^on niJ, the "Ethiopian," Greek and 
Septuagint rendering for " Onshite." In its 
vaguest dimensions Ethiopia, or Oush, desig- 
nated Africa south of Egypt, but more con- 
cisely it meant the lands we now call Nubia, 
Sennaar, Kordofan, and part of Abyssinia. 
And tliese, roughly speaMng, were bounded 
north, south, east, and west respectively by 
Egypt and Syene, Abyssinia, Bed Sea, and 
Libyan Desert. When, however, Ethiopia 
proper is spoken of, the name probably desig- 
nates the kingdom of MeroS (Seba, Gen. x. 7 ; 
1 Chron. i. 9) ; and the Assyrian inscriptions 
make the Cushite name of the deified Nimrod 
OTie with Meroe), which was so closely asso- 
ciated at different times with Egypt, that 
sometimes an E°;ypt king swayed it (as 6.g. 
some eighteen hundred years before Shi- 
shak, Sesostris fourth king of the twelfth 
dynasty), and sometimes vice versa (as e.g. 
the three Ethiopian kings of the twenty-fifth 
dynasty — Shabak (^Sahakhou), Sethos (Sebe- 
ciws), and Tarkos {Tirhakah), whose reign- 
ing dates as between Ethiopia and Egypt 
are not yet certified). The name thus con- 
fined covers an irregular circular bulk of 
country between "the modern Khartoum, 
where the Aatapus joins the true Nile, and 
the influx of the Astaboras, into their united 
stream." From the languago of Diodorus 
(i. 23), harmonized conjecturally with Strabo 
(xviii. 821 ), the region may be counted as 
375 miles in circumference and 125 miles 
in the diameter of the erratic circle, its ex- 
treme south point being variously stated, 
distant from Syene, 873 miles (Pliny, vi. 
29. §33); or, according to Mannerfabook 
(' GeogT. d. Alt.,' X. 183), 600 miles by the 
assertion of Artemidorus, or 6'25 by that of 
Eratosthenes. Thence the " Cushite " ex- 
tended probably to the Euphrates and the 
Tigris, and through Arabia, Babylonia, and 
Persia. Some, however, think that the 
Cushite now intended was the Ethiopian of 
Arahia, who had settlement near Gerar (Dr. 
Jamieson, in ' Comm.') as a nomadio horda 



JH. xiT. 1— 16.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



16» 



Dr. Jamieson quotes Brace's 'Travels' to 
support this view, which seems a moat im- 
probable^ not to say impossible, one never- 
theless. The question as to the people 
intended will perhaps best be found in the 
solution of the question for whom the name 
of their king stands (see following note). 
Zerah. Hebrew as above. It is noteworthy 
that the four previous occurrences of this 
name — Oen. xxxvi. 13 and 1 Chion. i. S7, 
son of Beuel, grandson of Esau; Gen. 
xxxviii. SO and 1 Ghron, ii. 6, son of Judah 
and Tamar ; 1 Ghron. iv. 24, son of Simeon ; 
1 Ghron. t. 6, 26, Hebrew text, son of Iddo, 
a Gerahonite Levite — show it as the name of 
an Israelite, or descendant of S)iem. Our 
present Zerah is a Cushite, or descendant of 
Ham. The Septuagint forms of the name 
are Zap4, Xapi, Xapes, or Zapai, Zaapa% or 
(Alexandrian) 'Axaplas. Although Professor 
Ur. Murphy says (' Handbook : Ghronicles,' p. 
116) that " it is plain that Zerah was a sove- 
reign of Kufch, who in the reign of Takeloth, 
about B.O. 944, invaded Egypt and pene- 
trated into Asia," the balance of probability, 
both from the names themselves and the 
synchronisms of history, corroborated by the 
composition of Zerah's army (Cushim and Lu- 
bim, ch. xvi. 8) and some other tributary con- 
siderations, is that our Zerah was Usarken II., 
the fourth king of the twenty-second d^asty 
(or possibly Usarken I., the second king of 
the dynasty). The invasion of the text was 
probably in Asa's fourteenth year, his reign 
thus far being dated B.C. 953—940 (or B. c. 933 
— 920 if Manasseh's be taken at only thirty- 
five instead of fifty-five years). The alleged 
army of this Zerah was an Egyptian army, 
largely made of mercenaries (compare the de- 
scription of Sliishak's army, ch. xii. 3). The 
present defeat of Zerah would go far to ex- 
plain the known decline of the Egyptian 
power at just this date, i.e. some twenty-five 
to thirty years after Shishak. At the same 
time, it must be admitted that it is not pos- 
sible to identify with certainty Zerah with 
either Usarken. Whether he is an unknown 
Arabian Cusbite, or an unknown African 
Cushite of Ethiopia-above-Egypt, or one of 
the Usarkens, has yet to be pronounced. 
Hareshah (see our note, ch. xi 8). It lay 
the '•second mile" (Eusebius and Jerome) 
south of Eleutheropolis and between Hebron 
(1 Maco. V. 36; 2 Hacc. xii. 35) and Ashdod 
(Josephus, ' Ant.,' xii. 8. § 6). The mention 
of the valley of Zepbathah in the following 
Terse will half identify its exact position. 
It is probable that Dr. Robinson (*£ibl. 
Bes.,' ii. 67) and Toblev in his interesting 
• Dritte Wand.' (pp. 129, 142), have reliably 
fitxed the site one Roman mile south-west of 
the modern Beit-Jibrin. Maresliah is again 
mentioned in ch. xx. 37 and Micah i. 15, as 
quoted already, in references interesting to be 



consulted. A thousand thousand. Whether 
this number be correct or not, it may be noted 
that it is the largest alleged number of an 
army given in the Old Testament. 

Ver. 10.— The valley of Zepbathah at 
Hareshah. " At " some translate " belonging 
to," some more suitably to the exact oonneo- 
tion " near." The Hebrew here for " valley " 
is it'J. It can scarcely designate necei«anly 
a "ravine." It is a valley in the sense 
of being a low, flat region, in which springs 
of water "broke out." Prom Numb. xxi. 
20, the first occasion of its ocoiurenoe, to 
Zech. xiv. 5 it is found fifty-six times, and 
is always rendered (Authorized Version) 
" valley ; " it is the word used in the cele- 
brated passages, " Though I walk through 
the valley," etc. (Ps. xxiii. 4) ; and " Every 
valley shall be exalted " (Isa. xl. 4). Tlie 
Septuagint, however, do not render it uni- 
formly ; but though they render it generally 
^ipai, they also have vwnii, KoiXas, auhiv, 
and in some cases the nmple word y^, 
as e.g. iy yf (ye) 'EyyS/i (ch. xxviii. 3; 
xxxiii. 6), which, nevertheless, elsewhere 
they describe as ipipa^ 'Evvi/i (Josh. xv. 8). 
The full explanation may probably be that 
the word is used for the valley that narrowed 
up to a ravine-like pass, or gorge, or that 
opened out into one of the wide wadie> of 
the country; but see Stanley's ' Sinai and 
Palestine,' Appendix, pp. 482, 483, new edit., 
1866. It is supposed that Zepbathah is not 
mentioned elsewhere, but see the Zephath 
of Judg. i. 17 ; and comp. Niunb. xxi. 3 ; 
1 Sam. XXX. 30, which Eeil and Bertheau 
think conclusively to be not the same. 

Ver. 11. — Nothing with thee; Hebrew, 
■'IBJ-pN. In the passage of very similar 
tenor (1 Sam. xiv. 6) the exact rendering 
is mure easily fixed, "It is nothing to the 
Lord," i.e. it mukes no difference to the Lord, 
" to save by many or by few." Probably the 
oorrecter rendering of our present Hebrew 
text would be, " It makes no difference with 
thee to help those whose strength is great or 
whose strength is nothing (between the 
much even to the none of strength)." Keil 
and Bertheau would translate " There is 
none beside thee." For another instance of 
the preposition p^ followed by h, see Gen. i. 6 ; 

and comp. ch. i. 13. The prayer must be 
counted a model prayer to an omnipotent 
Deliverer. It consists of opening invocation 
and the instancing of wlut postulates the 
crowning Divine attribute as the broad foun- 
dation for arg^ument ; of invocation repeated, 
warmed to closer clinging by the appro- 
priating "our;" attended by the defining, 
though very universal petition. Help us ; and 
followed by the argument of the unbending 
fidelity of trusting dependence. Tor we rest 
on thee, and in thy Name we go against this 



170 



THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xi^. 1—15. 



miiltitude ; and, lastly, of invocation re- 
newed or still determinedly sustained, pressed 
home by the clenching challenge of relation- 
ship and its correlative resiionsibility and 
presumable holy pride. The antithesis 
marked in these two last clauses will not 
escape notice — one made all the bolder, with 
the marginal reading of "mortal man" for 
the emphatic (a poetical, universal kind of) 
word here employed (eniK) for man. 

Yer. 12. — So the Lord smote the Ethio- 
pians. As Uttle as the real work was of the 
•rmy of Asa, so little is said of eveo the 
mere human method by which this great 
victory was obtained for Asa and Jndah. 
Again and yet again, in the fuUowing two 
verses, the glory is given to " the Lord." 

Yer. 13. — And the Ethiopians . . . before 
his host. It is evident that these words, 
with the clauses they include, should be 
placed in brackets, and so leave " tliey," the 
subject of the verb "carried" in the last 
clause, to refer to its proper noun-subject, 
Asa and the people. Oerar. This place is 
mentioned as defining a full distant spot as 
the limit of the pursuit of the flying army. 
While it was nearly four hours south of 
Gfaza, on the road to Egypt, it is calculated 
that it was more than twenty miles distant 
&om Mareshah. 

Yer. 14. — The fear of the lord came upon 
them ; •'.«. on tlie cities round about Geiar. 
This and the following verse illustrate in 
particular the very graphic character which 
attaches to the entire stretch of the descrip- 
tion of the scene, introduced so suddenly in 
Ter. 9 and closing witli vcx. 15. Stuoh spoil. 
The Hebrew word here used for "spoil" 
(nja) is found only in Chronicles, Ezra, 
Esther, Nehemiah, Daniel, and once in 
Ezekiel (zzix. 19). 

Yer. 15. — The tents of cattle. This word 
"tents" O^ni}, oonstruct state) is used just 
825 times, and this is the only time it is 



spoken of as the place of cattle ; there ko, 
however, four passages looking the same way 
(Gen. xiii. 5 ; Judg. vi. 5 ; 2 Kings vii. 7 ; 
Jer. xlix. 29). It is the word usud for the 
tabernacle of the wilderness many times, and 
many times for the place of abode that lias 
highest associations (Ps. xv. 1 ; cxviii. 15), 
and of the usual abodes of people (ch. x. 10). 
The use of the word here, though unique, will 
occasion no surprise, considering the camping 
of the vast invading army. Camels in abun- 
dance. The mention of this spoil reminds 
ns both where we are, on desert border 
(1 Sam. xxvii 7 — 10; xxx. 16, 17), and 
what was the personality or nationality 
within some latitude of choice of the in- 
vaders. Betumed to Jerusalem. The ex- 
pression awakens inevitably, though inaptly, 
a reminiscence of Scripture language in 
strangest contrast — the climax in a descrip- 
tion also, but of a victory infinitely vaster 
and grander and fur ever (Luke zxiv. 52; 
Acts i. 12), This return of "Asa and the 
people that were with liim" to Jernsalem 
dated the commencement of a period of com- 
parative internal peace and reform for the 
kingdom of Judah, that lasted twenty-one 
years, and yet more of exemption from Egyp- 
tian attack, that lasted abuut three hundred 
and thirty years (B.C. circ 940—609). It 
was a doubtful benefit, but Judah and Egypt 
came to be found in alliance against Assyria 
(2 Kings xvii. 3—6; xviii. 20, 21, 24; 
Isa. xxx. 2; Hos. vii. U). The ' Speaker's 
Commentary ' points out the interesting fact 
that this was one of the only two occasions 
known of the Jews meeting in open field 
either Egypt or Assyria (the other occasion 
being the unfortunate one of Josiah against 
Necho, ch. xxxv. 30), and adds, " Shishak, 
Sennacherib, Ksarhaddon, Nebuchadnezzar, 
Alexander, and Ptolemy I., were either un- 
opposed or only opposed from behind walls." 



HOMILETICS. 

Ven. 1 — 15. — The quiet often years. The former half of this chapter may be said 
to tnm upon the welcome subject of the " quiet " (spoken of twice), the " no war " 
(spoken of once), and the " rest " (spoken of three times), which were now for ten years 
the portion of Judah. The tender youth and the pious promise of King Asa combined, 
no doubt, in the providence of God, with external circumstances, to secure that interval 
of quiet and repose from war from which many blessings were able to flow. We may 
nonce generally, from such induction of illustrations as are yielded by the far less 
complex instances of those wars that belong to early history and to the histories of 
Scripture, some of the essential and intrinsic advantages and blessings of being, in this 
most impressive sense, " quiet." 

I. ThI FKEB, legitimate operation of the APFEOnONS OF HUMAN NATURE. What 

more dreadful subversion could be known to human nature than that live should bo 
called and should become hate, and to labour to destroy human life should take the 
place of labour and zeal to save and to serve it I A nation that is at peace, and undis- 
turbed by apprehension of war, is, by the very fact, delivered from being the victim of 



OH. XIV. 1—15.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 171 

passions and of the sure operation of principles which must be only one degree lesi 
destructive to the unconscious subjects than to theii- designed and deliberately marked 
objects. War shakes not merely to its foundatiuns thin or that fabric of human society, 
tint to its centre the fabric called human nature itself, which is compacted of affections, 
and, invisible though they may be, bound of bo other bonds so real. Nothing, there- 
fore, can justify it but that kind of necessity which declares, and can demonstrate what 
it declares, that that disaster of "shaking " confronts, and is within measurable distance 
of, the one alternative of shattering, and may therefore be counted the lesser evil or risk. 
The mutual hate and ill will of nations is a monster form of the sin of individual hate, 
and it is the violating on a gigantic scale of the second great commandment. It is 
true that there are some reliels to this indictment, in respect of those compositig the 
actual armies that confront one another, and of those who may be called the mere 
machinery of war ; but there is little relief, indeed, to it, in regard to all who may be 
called principals. But in the "quiet" of a nation, its proper human affections find 
their opportunity and feel their way with some uniformity and some regularity of 
growth ; not swept across, on the one hand, by the destructive tornado of animosity, 
prejudice, hate, and by all the hurricane of evil-doing ; nor, on the other hand, goaded 
into partial, frenzied action by the anguished imagination, or the sickening sight of 
the unspeakable horrors of the actual battle-field — its mangled limbs, its cries and 
groans, and, for months afterwards, its bleeding hearts and wasted homes, and that 
whole crew of consequential vices and indirect calamities which overspread equally the 
land of conquered and conqueror! 

II. The thought of a people not subject to the unhealthy stbain or one usdep- 
INO interest, one imperious, tyrannous, constant, excitinq theme, but free to 
ascertain, to follow, to develop, the leading and the instincts op its fbopeb 
genius, whatever that mat be. The loss is, of course, simply incalculable which 
has resulted from this one source of perversion, so varied in its operation. No eye, 
even with all the aid of historic retrospect, can track its disturbing, distracting, deso- 
lating tyranny. The interaction of the exceedingly diverse genius of different; people* 
must be equally significant with the same phenomenon as between different individuals 
(as e.g, even within the range of one family), and is amazingly tributary to the general 
and, let us say, universal well-being, when permitted, as it never yet htu been, free 
play. For what areas of lands, bounded and unbounded in dimension, and through 
what stretches of the ages, has it substituted the ravnging headlong course of the turbid 
mountain-torrent for the flow of some beneficent river, with the generous, fertilizing 
streams, and the everywhere meandering rills, and the unnumbered perennial springs ! 

III. Outer works of wide and endurinq influence, and monuments of real 
AND ENUUHINO HONOUB, AMONG THE PEOPLE. With what a mourning heart we look 
back upon many, nay, the most part, of the greatest monuments of antiquity, and are 
often tempted to do so with cynical look and cynical speech I How many of them 
perpetuate the names and memory of those who were the scourges of their kind, the 
pestilences of human society, barriers to the health, wealth, and real well-being of the 
world, from whom they wrung unwilling and undeserved honour, which time has 
reversed and revenged 1 By unfortunate irony of events, the useful works of our text 
even were largely those of the surer preparation for war ; but we may perhaps lay 
more grateful stress on the thought that they are described rather as preparation* 
agaimt war, and defensive in character. Modern history and, in especial, the history, 
in God's mercy, through som^ few longer stretches of time, of Grent Britain — that 
antitype in so many most real senses of J udaea of old — have done enough just to exem- 
plify sufficiently the fact that, in " quiet," the useful works of art, the pursuit of the 
most beneficent sciences, the material well-being of a people, find the occasion to rise 
and to spread more equably. Material well-being may not at first seem to bs of the 
highest moment, but (the expression being rightly understood) it certainly is of very 
high moment. The world was not meant to be a scene of beggary, nor the mere 
triumph of moral and spiritual force, with constant strain and effort over material 
exigence. So far as at any time and any where it is such a scene, it yields no honour to 
religion, no testimony to its power, no furtherance of its imperial claims. 

IV. Favourable opportunity fob the fairest of growths — that of belioion, 
AND 01 A healthy STATE OF RELIGIOUS FEELING AND LIFE. The " quiet" and " regt 



172 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xiv. 1—15. 

■0 repeatedly apoken of are instanced partly, indeed, as the reward of practical leligion, 
bat partly also (here as very emphatically elsewhere) as the opportunity of setting the 
house of Ood, its worship, and its priests and ofBcerg in order, and of breaking down 
and breaking away from the evil practices and habits of idolatry. It can scarcely be 
doubted that the scourge of war was used, has often been used, (1) as the just judgment 
on irreligion ; (2) a* a strong corrective and loud call to remember God and righteooa- 
ness ; and (3) as, generally speaking, such an awakener of the minds of men from that 
dormant, sluggish state that grows with hardening tendency on easy and undisturbed 
lives, that deep convictions of a religious character have been known to seed themselves 
under the unlikeliest of circumstances. There are abundant analogies to this in the 
individual life, which would quite prepare us for corresponding phenomena in the col- 
lective life of a nation. Nevertheless, the blessed reality has been of rare-enough 
occurrence. We cannot say that the holy dove lights often on such lands, in the 
midst of scenes where foes make fiends and where fiends triumph. War is too great a 
curse, and, where the blame may be the least, too directly the mark of the cloven foot. 
Golden harvest-fields of illimitable stretch do not bless the eye across rock-rent and 
gaping lands, of the scenery of which savagery is the first, the chief, the last character- 
istic. The still aspect of the rich, ever-ripening, abounding; fruits of the retired, 
fertile, unstricken country, figure, not unaptly, the "no war," the "quiet," the "rest" 
of tliat land and nation, where the good leaven of God, by truth and practice, is 
blessedly leavening the whole lump. 

Vers. 9 — 15.— 27te human tnut and prayer tJiat herald Divine victory. Though 
God gives nuthin;; for— that vanishing point— our merit, yet he constantly of old gave, 
now constantly gives, in connection with our own right-doings and right-praying, in 
order that his freest gifts may establish a healthy reaction on our experience and on 
uur practical conduct. In the prayer, the appeal, the trust, the simple, practical 
account of Asa, according to the narrative contained within the compass of the above 
verses, we have vividly portrayed — 

I. The bovbbeign Mastbb of and over all mFFiouLTiEs. What comfort we for- 
feit, what source of courage we fling away, when we permit to lie as though the mere 
eommonplice of faith, the truth that God is the Equal of all ocr confronting difficulties, 
let them be what they may — equal to them at all times, in all places, imder all circum- 
stances and conditions ! How much is written in the canon of confidence, the charter 
of our " liberty of speech " at the throne of the heavenly grace (1 John v. 14, 15), 
where we read, " If we ask anything according to his will, he heareth us : and if we 
know that he hear us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions that we 
desired of him " 1 As much as is thus written, so much do we lose, when we fail to ■ 
live in the strength thereof. Asa did now live so. 

II. The EXAMPLE OF AN tJNCONDlTIONED, UNLIHITED, AND tmiNTBBrBRlNO COHMIT- 
TINO OF THE ENTIRE CONTROL OF A PRESSING CASK OF HUUAN DIPFICULTT INTO GOD'S 
HAND, WHILE MAN REMAINS SIMPLY OBEDIENT TO THE DUTY OF ACTIVB WORK. Some- 
times we are called upon to stand by and stand still, and see, as it were, at one 
view, whether more or less sustained in its diiration, "the salvation of the Lord;" 
but more frequently, as in the example of the present narrative, we are reminded of 
the advisableness and duty of putting our own hand and all our own strength into 
the work, which still depends supremely on the " saving strength " of God and hit 
Anointed. 

III. One earnest entreaty that he will be qraoiously pleased to assume th« 

BOVEREIQN MASTERY OF THE DIFFICULTY OF THE SITUATION, AND TAKE THE CONTROL 

OFFERED TO HIM, IN LOVING FAITH AND TRUST. God waits for this On the part of his 
creatures — our heavenly Father on the part of his children. He loves to be asked, and 
desires that we should seek and knock. And it is, indeed, a most inspiring thought, 
as well as a thought warranted of inspiration, that our prayer, faith, trust, avail so 
often as the very signal of Divine action. 

IV. The COMPLETENESS OP THE TRIUMPH, WHICH THENCE RESULTS, OBSERVABLE. A 

faith that can scarcely be described as anything better than a lame faith ; a trust that 
is suspicious and doubtful all the while; a prayer that has no earriejtness nor force of 
•nticipation inherent in it, are poor preparation for conflict, and no augury of decisive 



OH. xiT. 1— 15.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHE0NICLE8. 178 

and trenchant triumph. They, at all events, in no sense deserve, as certainly they 
cannot merit nor earn, the shout of victory when the day's sun is ready to go down. 
Such a ihout follows on decision of mind, glowing love, and trust of heart, and a tons 
in prayer, divinely warranted, that might itself be mistaken for a summon*. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTH0K8. 

Vers. 1, 6 (latter part), 6, 7. — " Sett on every tide,'' It is significant enough that the 
Ohronicler considered it a noteworthy fact that " in his days the land was quiet ten 
years." It indicates very forcibly that the chronic condition of the country in those 
times was one of unsettlement and strife. We should think it strange, indeed, if the 
historian of our country thought it worth while to record that for ten years the sove- 
reign "had no war" (ver. 6). But it is painful to think that for very many centuries, 
in many lands, if not in all, war was regarded as the normal condition ; an attitude of 
armed hostility toward the neighbouring nation was considered the necessary and 
natural relation. History then was not the account of discovery, of invention, of 
achievement, of advance ; it was the story of international or civil war. This was the 
rule which, we may thank God, is now the exception, and which, we devoutly hope, 
will soon be obsolete. But for ten years the land " was quiet ; " it had " rest on every 
side." We may glance at — 

I. Thx national aspect of the subject, a nation has " rest on every side " when 
it (1) is at peace will all surrounding powers; and (2) is enjoying internal tranquillity, 
its various subjects living in concord, one class with another. To obtain and to pre- 
serve such a desirable condition, there need to be (1) a " foreign policy " that is not 
aggressive in aim or provocative in address; and (2) an internal administration that 
is based on justice, that promotes wholesome and fruitful labour, that encourages and 
rewards merit and ability, that observes a strict impartiality amidst all differences of 
custom and belief. Then there is likely to be " rest on every side," more especially if 
the citizens of the land are serving the Lord according to their conscientious convic- 
tions, and are continually seeking his blessing and asking for "peace in their time" 
(ver. 6). But let us rather consider-:- 

II. The individual aspect of it. How shall we have " rest on every side " ? 1. Not 
by securing outward and temporal success. A man may clasp the goal of honour, or 
of wealth, or of affection, and may think himself possessor of complete and lasting 
rest, and he may awake any morning to find that all his pleasant conditions are dis- 
turbed, and that the prize of peace is snatched ruthlessly from his brow. The heavens 
may be cloudless and the sun be shining in its full light and warmth to-day; but 
to-morrow those heavens may be draped in gloom, and the rain may be pelting pitilessly 
upon us. Not that way lies " rest on every side." 2. Nor by going down into the 
grave. The " rest of the grave " is only a false poetical metaphor. That is not rest 
which excludes all present consciousness and provides no refreshment and invigoration 
for the future. The darkness of death which the despairing suicide seeks and finds is 
not rest at all; it is entirely undeserving of the name ; the word is a complete misnomer 
as thus applied. It is not rest on any side ; it is defeat ; it is loss ; it is destruction. 
3. It is found in holy, filial service ; in the happy, honourable, rightful service of a 
Divine Redeemer. There is (1) peace with God — the rest that looks upward; (2) 
peace in our own heart — rest within, all our spiritual faculties consenting to the con- 
dition — the reason, the conscience, the will, the affections ; (3) rest in relation to those 
that are without — a prevailing spirit of good will and of love toward all men — "rest on 
every side." — 0. 

Vers. 2, 3, 6. — Destructive godliness. Human energy and capacity show themselves 
in two forms — ^in the destructive and in the constructive. Though action of the latter 
kind is the more honourable and admirable of the two, yet that of the former is also 
usefiil and needful in its time. Moses did a very good work for the people of Israel 
when he ground to powder the golden calf; and Hezekiab, when he broke in pieces the 
brazen serpent and called it " a bit of brass ; " and the Christiana of Ephesus did a 
wise as well as a worthily sacrificial thing when they burnt the " books " out of which 



174 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xiv. 1—16' 

they had been making large profits for their pocket (Acts ii. 19). Destnictive godli- 
ness sometimes indicates a devotedness, and sometimes renders a service which deserres 
to take high rank amongst the excellences and even the nobilities of human worth. 
We look at — 

I. The destructive piety shown by the kino. He removed the high places set 
apart for idolatrous worship, also the altars of false gods ; he " cut down the groves " 
where moral and devotional abominations were likely to be committed ; he " took away 
the sodomites out of the land, and removed all the idols that his fathers had made" 
(1 Kings XV. 12). And that which was, perhaps, more than all this, as evidencing • 
sincerity and thoroughness of heart toward God, and justifying the language used by 
the Chronicler (ver. 2) concerning him, he destroyed the idol of Maachah, and even 
removed that idolatrous queen from the official dignity she had been enjoying. A«a, 
therefore, struck a very decisive and damaging blow at the idolatry of his time ; he 
powerfully and effectually discouraged iniquity and immorality in three ways : 1. He 
showed his own pergonal and royal hatred of them. 2. He rebuked and punished the 
perpetrators of them. 3. He took away the means of indulging in them. By these 
measures he strove well and wrought successfully for the truth of God and for the 
purity of his people. 

H. OoR OWN ACTION IN THE SAME DiRBOTioN. In what ways shall we serve God by 
• destructive piety? 1. By promoting taise legislative measure*. There are evils 
which it is needless to name from which large numbers of people need to be protected. 
To be tempted by them is to be overcome, is to be slain by them ; they are active 
sources of evil and of suffering, of ruin and of death ; they ought to be suppressed ; and 
one part of a Christian man's duty is to join his fellow-citizens in cutting down or 
" removing those high places " of the land. 2. By excluding evil things and evil person* 
from the home. There are men and there is literature concerning whom and concern- 
ing which we can only say that they are sources of defilement ; and if we have not 
power, like an Oriental monarch, to forbid them the land, we can forbid them the home; 
we can see that, in respect of those who are in our charge and for whose well-being; we 
are responsible, that these men and these books are well beyond reach. 3. By putting 
down evil language. This we may do, in many quarters, by firmly discountenancing 
and fearlessly condemning it; the voice of righteous reprobation will soon silence the 
profane and lascivious tongue. 4. By expelling from our own life that which imperils 
our moral or spiritual integrity. Every man must know, or should know, what habits 
(in eating or drinking, in recreation, etc.) are fascinating, absorbing, dangerous to 
himself ; must know in what direction it is perilous to set out, lest he should go too 
far. There let him determinately bar the way ; that threatening habit let him exclude 
rigorously from his life (see Matt. v. 29, 30). — C. 

Yers. 2, 4, 6, 7. — Constructive godliness. It is better to construct than to destroy 
(see preceding homily), and though Asa did well in demolishing the strange altars 
and expelling the sodomites from the laud, he did even better in (1) encouraging all 
Judah to seek God in worship and to obey his Law, and in (2) fortifying his territory 
•gainst the enemy while the land was in his full possession (while the land was "yet 
before" them). The patriotism and the piety that expended themselves in spiritual 
and in material edification were of the best. We shall find their analogue among 
ourselves in — 

L BuiLDiNO UP OURSELVES ou our holy faith (Jude 20). A man's first duty is that 
which he owes to his own spirit ; for God has given him that, above all things, to have 
In charge and to present pure and perfect before him at the last. We are, therefore, 
most sacredly bound to build up ourselves in faith, in love, in purity, in truthfulness, 
in moral and spiritual integrity, in mercy and magnanimity. And this we shall do 
(1) by the study of our Lord Jesus Christ (of his life and character); (2) by the 
worship of him and fellowship with him, both in the home and in the sanctuary ; 
(3) by an earnest and prayerfal endeavour to do and bear his will, and to follow his 
example until we attain to his likeness. 

IL Edifying those whom we can influence ; bringing to bear upon the Inmates 
of our home, upon those whom we employ (or by whom we are employed), upon our 
nearer neighbours, upon our fellow-townsmen, upon our fellow-worshippers and fellow- 



on. XIV. 1—15.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 176 

workers in the kingdom of God, all the strengtheaing, stimulating, elevating influeno* 
we can possibly command. 

III. Caring foe and consultino the welfare of our codntbt. Asa bnilt thoss 
"fenced cities in Judah" that he might make timely provision against the enemy and 
thus keep him off, or repel him if he attacked. What are the enemies of our native 
land? These are not to be found (chiefly) in invading hosts ; there is but little to ht 
feared from them. We find our national enemies in intemperance, in impurity, in 
dishonesty and fraud, in unconscientious and unfaithful labour, and, therefore, in poor 
and unsound production, in political charlatanism and pretence, in ecclesiastical bittei^ 
ness. We want to call into the field forces that will expel these evils from the land. 
Where shall we find them ? 1. In Christ-like men ; in men imbued with the spirit, 
possessed of the principles, living the life, of Jesus Christ. 2. In Christian institution$ ; 
in earnest, working Churches ; in Sunday schools ; in temperance societies ; in guild* 
for the inculcation of all that is pure and wholesome ; in philanthropic associations of 
many kinds. 3. In Christian literature. Not only tliat which is distinctively rali- 
gious, but that also which is sound in tone and spirit, which imparts and infuses • 
true idea of human character and human life. 

Our patriotic work must be found in building up these; building up these men In 
our homes and circles by the influence of our Christian character; sustaining these 
institutions by generous gifts of time and strength and money ; countenancing and 
supporting this wholesome, edifying literature. So shall we also " build and prosper.'' ~ 



Vers. 8 — 15. — The secret and the spirit of true de/enct. We may learn from this 
narrative of unprovoked attack and triumphant defence — 

I. That odb utmost preparation will not secure us from attack. Asa endea- 
voured to make his little kingdom impregnable to assault by (1) fortifying the out- 
posts, and (2) training and equipping a large army (vers. 7, 8). Nevertheless, the 
Ethiopians came up against him with an army far stronger than his. The military 
and naval preparations of one country usually incite to greater preparations in another, 
and instead of war becoming impossible because each nation is invulnerable, it becomes 
probable because the combative spirit has been developed ; one nation considers itself 
challenged by another, and because a large number of professional men are eager to 
exert their power and improve their position. But not only does "history repeat 
itself" thus; we have here an illustration of a wider truth — that whatever efforts we 
may make to guard ourselves against the inroad of evils, we shall surely faiL Sickness 
of some kind will attack us ; disappointment and disillusion will find their way to our 
heart ; sorrow will surprise us ; loss and separation will befall us ; death will knock at 
our door. There are no fortifications we can construct, there are no forces we can 
raise, be we never so vigilant and alert, which will keep all enemies from the gate. 
Spite of fenced cities and many thousands of Jewish spears and Benjamite bows, the 
Ethiopian army comes up against Jerusalem. 

II. That in the path op moral and spibitual rectitude wb abb in the wat of 
SAFETY. Asa had no need to be alarmed. Had he wickedly departed from the Lord 
he might well have been in the greatest consternation, for then the severe warnings of 
sacred Scripture would have been as a knell in his ears ; but as it was, his fidelity to 
Jehovah was an assurance of safety. He was God's servant ; he was in a position to 
" cry unto the Lord his God " (ver. 11) ; to say, " Lord our God ; " to claim that 
the Ethiopian's triumph would be a preVailing against the Lord himself: " Let not man 
prevail against th^." The king could bide in the cleft of the rock ; he could fall back 
cm almighty power ; he was safe before a blow was struck. He did the right thing <m 
the occasion. (1) He brought his army into the field, well equipped and well arrayed 
(ver. 10) ; and then (2) he made his earnest, believing appeal to the Lord his God. 
This is the path of safety, the place of wisdom. Let us, in days of peace and plenty, 
in the time of joy and honour, seek and serve the Lord our God, and then, when the 
darkness falls, when the enemy appears, when such power is needed as goes far beyond 
our small resources, we can turn with a holy confidence and with Christian calmness 
to the succour of the faithful and the mighty Friend. We shall indeed do as Asa 
did; we shall summon all our own powers and wisdom to confront the danger, to meet 
the difficulty ; but, like the King of Judah, we shall feel that our true hope is in tha 



176 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHBONIOLBS. Foh. xir, 1— 16. 

liring God, and we ihall hide in him, our Refuge and our Stren^h. " In hit Name " 
we shall " go against this multitude." 

III. That ab those who hoht fob God we havs a powebful plea. As those 
who are eulisted and engaged in the great campaign aoainst moral eril in this world, 
we have a strong plea to urge when we draw nigh to God in prayer and seek his con- 
quering power. 1. God is our God ; the God of our choice and of his own faithful 
Word. 2. God is able to give us the victory even against the greatest odds : " It is 
nothing with thee to help " (ver. 11). " If thou wilt, thou canst." " All things are 
possible " with him. 3. We do all that we do in his Name, for the axteniion of his 
liingdom. 

" The work is thine, not mine, O Lord, 
It is thy race we run." 

" Let not man prevail against tkee." 

IV. That, God with us, akxious feab will ohakse to jotodb tiotoet. " Th« 
Lord smote the Ethiopians, . . . and Asa and the people pursued them," etc. (vers. 
12 — 15). The king and the people of Judah went out of Jerusalem with the most 
grave concern in their hearts ; they re-entered the royal city with their souls full of 
joy and their arms full of spoil. Their courage and, more especially, their fidelity 
were crowned with a true and a great success. So in due time will ours also. It is 
true that our fight with wrong and woe is not (like this one of Asa's) a short sharp 
battle ; it is a long campaign ; it is a campaign in which fortune wavers, or seems to 
waver, from side to side; in which many eood soldiers of Christ are seen to fall. But 
there can be no doubt about the issue. The Lord is on our side. Victorious Love is 
our great Captain, and the time will come when we too shall " return to Jerusalem," 
with songs of joy and triumph on our lips. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — Quiet in the land. I. A great blessino. 1. Its character. No war 
(ver. 6). Pew, reflecting on the untold calamities of war, the expenditure of blood and 
treasure, the sorrow and desolation sent into many homes, the interruption of the arts 
of peace, the bad passions kindled by it in the breasts even of the victors, will doubt 
that peace is one of the foremost blessings a nation can enjoy. This was the condition 
of Judah during the first ten years of Asa's reign. Compare Shakespeare's description 
of " peace after a civil war " (' King Henry IV.,' Part I. act i. sc. 1). 2. Its source. 
Jehovah (ver. 7). " Every good and every perfect gift is from above " ( Jas. L 17) — true 
of national peace (Josh. xxi. 44 ; 1 Chron. xzii. 18) no less than of other things (Ps. 
xzix, 11 ; Isa. xlv. 7 ; Jer. xiv. 13 ; Hag. ii. 9). As no king or people can stir up war 
until God permits, so can none extinguish its flames without his help. But " when 
he giveth quietness, who can make trouble ? " (Job xixiv. 29). Hence national peace 
should be prayed for (Jer. xxii. 7 ; 1 Tim. ii. 1, 2). 3. Its medium. Righteousness. 
The peace of Asa's opening years was due, not to Abijah's successful campaigns (ch. 
xiii. 15), though successful campaigns are of God's giving (Ps. oxliv. 1, 2, 10); or to 
his own skilful diplomacy, since skilful diplomacy is not always from above (2 Sam. 
ivi. 20, etc.) ; or to his fenced cities, which would have been poor fortifications had they 
not been defended by Jehovah's battalions (Ps. cxivii. 1) ; but to his and his people's 
following after that righteousness which is a nation's best defence (Prov. xiv. 34) and 
a sovereign's surest security (Prov. xvi. 12). Asa and his people sought the Lord their 
God, and he gave them " rest on every side." The annals of Israel show that peace ever 
went hand-iu-hand with piety, and war with disobedience (Ps. Ixxxi. 11 — 16 ; Isa. 
Ixviii. 18, 19). Always when the people chose new gods there was war in the gates 
(Judg. V. 8). When they forsook God, he forsook them, with the result that " ther« 
was no peace to him that went out or to him that came in " (ch. xv. 5). So, in modern 
times, the military spirit exists in Christian men and nations in proportion as they 
depart from the religion of Jesus. If at any time " Christianity, socially regarded, 
does almost nothing to control the state of expectant war and the jealousies of nations," 
that is not because Christianity is a "failure," and " criminally complacent to these 
(and other) evils," or " because the religion of heaven and supernatural visions " ii 
" powerless to control this earth and its natural realities " (Harrison's ' New Year's 
Address to English Positivists,' 1889), but because its professed disciples do not honestlf 



OH. XIV. 1—15.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 177 

obey Its precepts (John xiii. 34; Rom. xiii. 8; Gal. v. 13; Bph, v. 2) and carry out 
its principles (Matt. vii. 12; Rom. xiii. 10; Jas. ii. 8). The reign of Christianity in 
•ny nation would put an end to civil feuds and wars of aggression. With the extinction 
of these, wars of defence would cease. 

II. A GOLDEN OPFOKTUNITT. 1, FoT the /urtkeranet of true religion. Besides setting 
m example of personal religion — the most effective way in which kings can promote 
national religion — Asa laboured with promptitude, decision, and assiduity in the work 
of abolishing the prevalent idolatry. (1) He demolished the " strange altars," i,e. 
altars to foreign divinities which had been erected by his predecessors, Solomon and 
Behoboam, and left standing by his father Abijah. (2) He removed the "high 
places " dedicated to idolatrous worship, though he allowed those which had been con- 
secrated to Jehovah to remain (ch. xv. 17 ; 1 Kings xv. 14). (3) He brake down the 
" pillars," obelisks or monumental columns dedicated to Baal (2 Kingsiii. 2; x. 26), 
resembling that erected by Jacob at Bethel (Gen. xxxv. 14), and perhaps also those 
set up by Moses at Sinai (Exod. xxiv. 4) in honour of Jehovah. (4) The Atherim, 
wooden idols or tree trunks, consecrated to Astarte (see Keil on 1 Kings xiv. 23), he 
hewed down. (5) From all the cities of Judah he removed the high places and the 
gun-images, i.e. pillars or statues consecrated to Baal as the sun-god, and erected near 
or upon the altars of Baal (ch. xxxiv. 4). So Christian kin°;s and statesmen should 
labour at the destruction of all false forms of religion within their domains ; not, how 
ever, by forcible suppression, which, though permitted and even demanded of Asa, 
is not allowed to sovereigns or, indeed, to any under the gospel, but by fostering in all 
legitimate ways what they believe to be the absolute and only true religion. 2. For 
promulgating useful laws. When nations are distracted by internecine feuds within 
themselves or between each other, it is hopeless to expect the work of good legislation 
to proceed. Hence the value of a "long peace" to any country, permitting, as it does, 
the cultivation of the peaceful arts, the development of trade and commerce, the spread 
of learning and culture, the growth of domestic institutions, and the promotion of 
measures for the welfare of the state. Asa, in the ten years of rest, " commanded 
Judah to seek the Lord God of their fathers, and to do the Law and the commandment " 
(ver. 4) ; and though under the New Testament dispensation it is not required of kings 
to command their subjects to worship and obey God — that being an obligation already 
laid on men by the gospel — and far less to punish them should they disobey, it is, 
nevertheless, allowed kings to follow in Asa's footste[)S so far as to utilize the years of 
rest their countries may enjoy in legislating for the comfort and happiness of their 
subjects. 3. For securing the safety of the realm. Asa did so by (1) erecting military 
fortresses, " fenced cities " in the land of Judah, surrounding them with walls and 
tuwers, and securing them with gates and bolts ; and (2) by collecting around him » 
well-equipped- army — from Judah 300,000 targeteers and spearmen, with heavy shields 
and lances (1 Chron. xii. 24) ; and from Benjamin 280,000, bearing light shields and 
furnished with bows (1 Chron. viii. 40). So should Christian states employ times of 
peace in constructing such bulwarks as their lands require, whether iu the shape of 
garrison cities, regiments of soldiers, or fleets of war-vessels, since self-preservation ii 
an instinct of nature as much for nations as for individuals, and is not forbidden to 
either by the gospel, while to be prepared for war is sometimes an effective means of 
securing peace (Luke xi. 21). 

Lesson. The duty of individuals and nations to shun war and follow peace. — W. 

Vers. 9 — 15. — An alarming invasion. I. The dtvadbb and his army. (Ver. 9.) L 
The invader. Zerah, the Ethiopian (or Cushite), commonly identified with Osorkhon 
(Usarkon) I. king of Egypt, the second sovereign of the twenty-second or Bubastio 
dynasty (Bossellini, Wilkinson, ChampoUion, Lepsius, Bawlinson, Ebers); but, 
inasmuch as no Ethiopian appears among the monumental kings uf this dynasty, k 
claim to be regarded as the Zerah of Scripture has been advanced in behalf of Azereh- 
amen, an Ethiopian conqueror of Egypt (Schrader, Brugsch), who, in the reign of 
Osorkhon, overran the entire dominion of the Pharaohs, and, though unable at that 
time to retain his hold, nevertheless paved the way for the subsequent conquest of the 
country by Pianchi, of the twenty-fifth or Ethiopian dynasty. If, however, the former 
identification be provisionally accepted, Zerah's designation as " the Cushite" may h» 
n. ciinoNictES. kt 



178 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE OHRONICLBS. lea. xn. 1—15. 



explained by supposing that his mother was an Ethiopian (Rawlinson), or that he bore 
the title " king's son of Cush " as crown prince of Bgv]it and viceroy of the south or 
Ethiopia (Ebers). 2. Eis ormy— 1,000,000 men— 900,000 infantry, with 100,000 
cavalry (Josephua, • Ant,,' viii. 12. 1), and 300 chariots. This immense host of Ethiopians 
and Libyans (ch. xvi. 8), only 100,000 fewer than all the fighting men of Israel, and 
more than twice as many as the warrioj s of Judah in the time of David (1 Chron. 
xii. 6), so far outnumbers the army of Shishak (ch. xii. 3), that it has been set down 
to popular exaggeration in making a rough estimate (Keil), or to legendary embellish- 
ment (Ebers), suggested by the vast armies of the Persians, with which the Chronicler 
was familiar (Ewald). The largest army ol invasion of which history speaks was 
probably that of Xerxes, which, when numbered on the Doriscan plain, amounted to 
nearly two millions and a half of fighting men, military and naval (Herod., vii, 60, etc. ; 
Smith's ' History of Greece,' p. 189). Eecent calculations show that " the total strength 
of the German army on a war footing is now rather over three millions and a half of 
men " (Scottish Leader, January 1, 1889). 3. Bis camp. At Mareshah, or Marissa, 
one of Behoboam's garrison cities, between Hebron and Ashdod (ch. xi. 8, which see). 

II. The monarch and the people of Judah. (Vers. 10, 11.) 1. A display of splendid 
tourage. " Asa went out against him." On either hypothesis as to Zerah's person, 
it was an exhibition of noble daring on the part of the King of Judah to confront him, 
much more to stand up against a million of highly disciplined troops, with only little 
more than half that number of spearmen and archers (ver. 8). As an instance of heroic 
fortitude, it was worthy to be placed alongside of the most brilliant feats of valour 
recorded in either sacred or profane history, as e.g. the pursuit of the victorious kings 
by Abraham (Gen. xiv. 14 — 16), the discomfiture of the Midianites by Gideon with 
300 men (Judg. vii, 21), the invasion of the Philistines' garrison at Michmash by 
Jonathan and his armour-bearer (1 Sam. xiv. 13 — 16), the combat of David with 
Goliath (1 Sam. xvii. 49, 50), the defeat of the Persians under Darius at Marathon by 
Miliiades, with a small body of Athenians and Plataeans (b,o. 490), and under Xerxes 
at Thermopyl», by Leonidas and 300 Spartans (b.o. 480), the victory of Bruce with 
30,000 Scotch over Edward II. with 100,000 English (a.d. 1314), of the Black Prince 
over an army seven times as large as his own at Poictiers (a.d. 1366), of Clive with 
3000 men over 50,000 led by the Nabob of Moorshedabad at Plassey (a.d. 1757). 2. 
An example of commendable prudence. Asa selected, as the spot on which to join 
issue with the enemy, the valley of Zephathah, near Mareshah, probably because there 
the advantage to be derived from superior numbers would less operate. He also dis- 
posed his troops in such a fashion as to enable them most efficiently to resist the onset 
of the foe. In so doing, he only discovered his sagacity and sense both as a general 
and a man. He knew that, while it was hopeless to expect victory without God's 
help, it was folly to cry for Divine assistance wliile neglecting to put his battalions in 
order. So in ordinary matters and in matters of religion. Prayer cannot supersede the 
use of common means. 3. A pattern of lofty faith. Having marshalled his forces, Asa 
prayed — sprayed upon the battle-field, as Moses did on the Red Sea shore when pursued 
by the Philistines (Exod.xiv. 10), as Jehoshaphat did when invaded by the Ammonites 
and Moabites (ch. xx. 18), as Cromwell and his Ironsides, Gustavus Adolphus and his 
Swedes, Colonel Gardiner and his Scotch dragoons, and other God-fearing generals with 
their regiments have been accustomed to do before entering into engagements with 
their enemies. Asa's prayer was remarkable for two things. (1) For the brevity and 
directness of its petitions. Necessitated in his case by the situation, these qualities 
•re excellent in all petitioners (Matt. vi. 7). Asa asked the help of Jehovah against 
his foei, as David before him had often done (Ps. lix. 4 ; Ixxi. 12 ; xxxv. 2), and as 
Ohristians may still do (Heb. iv. 16), especially against such foes as are spiritual and 
threaten the destruction of their souls (Ps. Ixxi. 12 ; Isa. xlix. 8 ; Hos. xiii. 9 ; Mark 
ix. 22, 24 ; Acts xxvi, 22), (2) For the excellence and strength of its arguments, 
God invites those who address him in prayer to fill their mouths with arguments 
(Job xxiiL 4), to bring forth their strong reasons (Isa. xii. 21), and to plead with 
him (Isa. xliii. 26), Asa urged: (a) Jehovah's covenant relation to him and his 
people. Jehovah was his God and their God (ver. 11) — a good argument for a Christian 
suppliant, (h) The multitude of the foe arranged against them. David derived a plea 
from the number of his adversaries (Ps. xxv. 19 ; Ivi. 2), and so may David's brethren 



OH. XIV. 1—15.] THE SECOND BOOK OP IHE CHRONICLES. 179 

(Eph. vi. 18). Compare the English king's prayer at Agincourt, " Gkxi of hattleg," 
etc. (• Henry V.,' act iv. so. 1). (c) The fact that the war was Jehovah's even more 
than theirs (ch. xx. 15), They were going out against Zerah in his Name, as in his 
Mame David had advanced to meet Goliath (1 Sam. xvii. 45). In this Name ali Christian 
warfare should be carried on (Fs. xx. 6 ; Acts iv. 30 ; xvi. 18 ; Col. iii. 17) ; when it 
is, a claim is thereby established upon God to uphold the honour of his Name (Pi. 
Ixxi. 9 ; John xii. 28). (d) The circumstance that he alone was able to assist tbem 
in the tremendous crisis that had come upon them. " There is none beside thee to 
help, between the mighty and him that hath no strength " (Eevised Version) ; or, 
" There is no difference with thee to help, whether the mighty or him that hath no 
strength" (margin) ; or, "It is nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with 
them that have no power " (Authorized Version). Whichever reading be adopted — though 
the first is the best — the sentiment was that Jehovah alone could assist in so unequal a 
combat, and that he could do so if he would, since it was not necessary for him to be" on 
the side of the strongest battalions " (Napoleon). He could win battles, as Jonathan 
long before observed, whether by many or by few (1 Sam. xiv. 6). Much more is God 
the only Befuge to which the Christian can turn in carrying on the unequal contest to 
which he is called against the principalities and powers of darkness ; and to his power 
nothing is impossible (ch. xx. 6; Matt. xix. 26; Mark xiv. 36; Eph. iii, 20; 1 Pet. 
i. 5). (e) The dishonour Jehovah himself would sustain through their defeat. The 
invasion of Zerah was practically a campaign against Jehovah, To suffer them to ba 
overthrown would be (seemingly at least) permitting himself to be overcome by a 
weak mortal. Happily, God condescends to allow this in matters of grace, as in the 
<;ase of Jacob (Gen, xxxii. 29 ; Hos. xii. 4), but not in ordinary aflairs when the interest 
of his kingdom would be thereby injured (Rom. viii. 28 ; Eph. i. 11), Asa's argument 
was good. Compare the boldness of Moses in pleading with Orod in behalf of Israel 
(Numb. xiv. 16). (3) The fact that they were deliberately trusting in God. "Help 
us, Lord our God, for we rest on thee." God has pledged himself never to disappoint 
those who trust in him (Ps. xxxiv. 22 ; xxxvii. 40 ; Isa. xiv. 17). 

III. Jehovah and the combatants. (Vers, 12 — 15.) 1. The Ethiopians were routed. 
(1) They were defeated on the field of battle. Jehovah " smote " them before Asa and 
Judah (ver, 12), (2) They were put to flight by the archers and spearmen that opposed 
them. The Ethiopians " fled." (3) They were pursued as far as Gerar, a chief city 
of the Philistines, now identified as the Khirbet-el-Gerar, in the Wady Jorf-el-Gerar, 
three leagues south-east of Gaza (Rowland). (4) They were massacred by the victorious 
monarch and his exulting warriors. They were " destroyed before the Lord and before 
his host," for the understanding of which there is no need to call in the help of a 
battalion of angels, as in Gen. xxxii. 2. Asa's army was Jehovah's host, because Jeho- 
vah was with it and in it; and the blood of Asa's enemies was poured out before 
Jehovah, because the battle had been undertaken in his Name and the victory achieved 
through his power. (5) They were so completely crushed that they could not recover 
themselves. They disappeared from Palestine, and ceased from troubling Judah. Such 
will be the end of the enemies of the Church of God (1 Sam. ii. 9 ; 2 Thess. i. 9), 2. 
The men of Judah were victorioita. (1) The monarch's prayer was answered. So did 
God hear the prayer of Moses when he cried for help against the Egyptians (Exod. 
xiv. 15), and that of the Israelites when they appealed for assistance against their foes 
^Judg. X. 11), and that of the Reubenites when they entreated succour against the 
Hagarites (1 Ghron. v. 20), and that of Hezekiah when he appealed to the Lord GKid 
of Israel against Sennacherib (1 Kings xix. 15, etc.). So God hears the prayer of the 
Church's King (John xi. 41, 42), and of the soldiers of the cross (Ps. Ixv. 2 ; Eph. iii. 
20 ; 1 John iv. 6). (2) The soldiers' courage was rewarded. They inflicted a decisivo 
blow upon the enemy ; they smote all the cities round about Gerar, these having proli* 
ably espoused the cause of the enemy ; they carried away much spoil, not only of 
ammunitions of war and provisions which had been laid up in those cities, but also of 
cattle and sheep and camels, which they had found in abundance, and which, in all 
likelihood, had belonged to the enemy. So did Christ, the Captain of salvation, achieve 
a brilliant triumph over the principalities and powers of darkness, despoiling them of 
victory, and making a show of them openly (Col. ii. 15) ; and so will Christ's followen 
be made more than conquerors over the same foes (Bom. viiL 37), and carry off from 



180 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xv. 1— 19. 



the fields of conflict where they meet their enemies much spiritual treasure (Bom. 
viii. 28). 

LEBBONi. 1. The sinfulness of wars of aggression, and the lawfulness of wars of 
defence. 2. The duty of combining working with praying, as well as praying with 
working. 3. The impossibility of achieying victury either without or against God, 
or of lufiering defeat with God upon one's side. — W. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XV. 



This chapter is something like an oasis in 
our history, and was perhaps such in the 
real life of Asa also. Presumably it covers 
a period of some twenty years. Beading 
between the lines, and indeed chapters, we 
may very well suppose that the mission of 
"Azariedi son of Oded" to Asa now was 
one of all mercy. Great salvation had been 
shown to him and his people, and as time 
went on they might forget the Saviour, and 
imagine the work was all their own. More- 
over, thoir own proper work had tarried, and 
beside caution and humility (in season for 
him es a returning conqueror-king, ver. 2), 
Asa needed stimulus ; perhaps the Lord's 
loving-kindness knew that he needed every 
kindly encouragement. For there are not 
wanting signs that he was before his people, 
and felt the drag of them upon him as Moses 
himself did. These are the features of the 
physical geogriiphy, so to say, of the chapter, 
which comprises the rousing warning of 
Azariuh the prophet (vers. 1 — 7); Asa's 
renewal of the altar in its own structure, 
and in worthy sacrifices upon it (vers. 8 — 11) ; 
his and his people's hearty reconsecration of 
themselves (vers. 12 — 15) ; and his own per- 
sonal, practical carryingout of reform, though 
hit people apparently did not keep pace 
with him (vers. 16—19). 

Yer. 1. — The Spirit of God came. For 
" oame," read the literal Hebrew " was," as 
ilao in our ch. xz. 14, where instead of 
"God" (D<n%), we find "the Lord" (n5n;> 
In OUT oh. xiiv. 20, we have again " God," 
with the verb "clothed" (ng^a^). The 
grand original of the expression is, of course, 
foand u Gen. i. 2, where the name is " God." 
Compare Pharaoh's question in Gen. zU. 38 ; 
Elxod. xzxi. 3 ; zxxv. 31 ; Nnmb. xxiv. 2 ; 
Judg. iiL 1 ; vi. 34 (the verb " clothed " is 
used in this last); five other timei in Judges 
we have " the Spirit of the Lord; " in Samuel 
■ix times, and "the Spirit of God" another 
■ix times ; in Kings, three times "the Spirit 



of the Lord." These passages exhibit in- 
contestably the function, and the manifold 
function, of the Spirit I Azariah the son of 
Oded. The Vulgate and Alexandrian Sep- 
tuagint read here simply Oded ; and Movers 
(p. 2Cl) has suggested that "Oded the son 
of Azariah " is the correct reading for what 
now stands in the text; these are con- 
trivances to meet the difficulty which the 
eighth verse occasions, and they are not so 
simple certainly as the proposal of Keil and 
Bertheau (following the Arabic Version) to 
omit altogether from ver. 8 the repetition of 
the name of the prophet, under the plea 
that the words, " of Oded the prophet," may 
so conceivably be owing to a copyist's 
meddlesome marginal reminiscence of ver. 1. 
It would have been, perhaps, a yet simpler 
method of overcoming thedifficulty toaceount 
that the words, " Azariah the son of," had 
through a copy error slipped out of the text, 
except that the previous word, "thi; pro- 
phecy," is not in tlie construct state, and tliis 
favours Keil and Bertheau's suggestion (see 
oiur ch. ix. 29), or rather the suggestion of the 
Arabic Version, wliioh before them omits the 
words, " of Oded the prophet." The Vatican 
Septuagint has the readings in both verses 
as Englislied in the Authorized Version. 
Some think Oded maybe one with Iddo of 
ch. ix. 29 ; xii. 15 ; xiii. 22 ; p'>inting out 
that the Hebrew chfiracters would permit it, 
if we suppose a van added to the name 
Oded. This conjectural attempt fo give 
this Prophet Azariah for son to Iddo seems 
to gain no great point. Of this Azariah 
nothing else is known ; he is described aa 
" son of Oded " probably to distinguish him 
from Azariah the high priest, son of Johanan 
(see Dr. Smith's ' Bible Dictionary,' i. 142, 
second column, 3). (For the rast on this 
subject, see note on ver. 8.) 

Ver. 2. — He went out to meet him; 
literally, into his presence ; but the Autho- 
rized Version rendering is very correct, n» 
well as happy in expression (see 1 Chron. 
xiv, 8; also see the remarkable and inter- 
esting verse, oh. xxviii. 9). Tiie prophet 
was the leader, the teacher, the sfuggester of 
the light and opportune thing to the people, 
but to the prophet the Lord himself wag 
Leader, Teacher, Prompter, and it was exactly 
so now. To the very moment the quickened 
moment of new thought and for new deed, 



on. XT. 1—19.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



18] 



divinest instTnction and suggestion are 
ministered. The Lord is with yon . . . will 
forsake yon. The original occasion of the 
beautiful langui'ge and word of covenant 
in the heart of this second part of the verse 
is enslirined in Deut. iv. 29 (see also 1 Chron. 
xxviii. 9 ; ch. xxlv. 20; Jer. xxix. 11 — 14). 
It is just conceivable that these words by 
them^elvoB are what are designated "the 
prophecy" (and " the prophecy") in ver. 8. 
They may be in the first place regarded as 
ancient quotations. They are also charac- 
terized by • certain self-containedness and 
weightiness of matter as cnmpRred with the 
historic illustrations of the following four 
verses. No corroborative external evidence 
of this conjecture, however, is forthcoming. 

Ver. 3. — Now for a long season. This 
translation is wrong; translate rather first, 
And many the days to Israel to »of have true 
God, and to not have teaching priest, and to 
not have Law. So far no tense is limited, 
however naturally tlirough the very di'ift of 
the passage it may seem that eofperience is 
being challenged, and so necescarily the past 
tense desiderated, not, howevert in aorist 
shape, but in what some French gram- 
marians call present perfect. For Azariah 
may well contemplate his illustration as 
good from long of old, to the very moment 
he was speaking. The unfortunate wealth 
•of illustration to hand of his position may 
pardon the doubtfulness of commentators as 
to the source from which it may be supposed 
he would have drawn his most effective 
instances. It will not be the unlikeliest 
guide to follow the triple description of the 
alleged apostasy, misfortune, or iniquity " of 
Israel," e.g. (say) it happened to them to not 
have the true God; happened to them to 
not have teaching priest ; happened to them 
to not have the law (this meaning, to not have 
it authoritatively proclaimed, taught, minis- 
tered). When did these three things happen 
altogether most notoriously f They describe,' 
not the transgressions of an individual king, 
but the state of the people and kingdom as 
n whole. If it were possible to conceive 
the description as a flagrant anachronism, a 
retrospective post-Oaptivity amplification, 
which the writer (in his glow of work and 
thought) was unconsciously and irresistibly 
betrayed into putting into the lips of the 
Prophet Azariah, all doubt would end ; for 
the description would suit no slate of things 
imd no period better than that of the divided 
kingdoms, especially applying to the career 
of the separate kingdom of Israel. Our ac- 
count, unfortunately, is unchecked just here 
by a parallel. It is, however, impossible to 
suppose this without any tittle of external 
authority for it, much less enough to proueed 
upon. Some so crave the illustration that 
they ue prepared to suppose all tiie tuudes 



of these verses present and future rathei 
than past and " piesent perfect." But, in 
fact, no doubt the history of Israel since the 
death of Moses illustrated the language of 
Azariah passim to a degree beyond all " that 
is written " or that we know. And then we 
may certainly consider that the expression 
chosen, " many days" (which some translate 
" many a day," " many a time "), even the 
word " years " not being employed, leaves it 
open to U8 to go to short episodes of an irre- 
ligious and disastrous character in the his- 
tory of Israel Lastly? the long stretch of 
fully three hundred years, extending through- 
out the Book of Judges (its last five chapters 
& right order or wrong) into the opening 
seven chapters of 1 Sa riuel, provides one 
running comment, superabundant almost to 
repetitiousness, for the illustriitiou of our 
vers. 3 — 7; in many cases absulutelyjMcftJnj 
out the very colours to match (e.g. Judg, 
V. 6 ; XX. 29, 31, cumpared with our ver. 5). 
To distinguish and separate the very numer- 
ous references that might be made is merely 
supererogatory, and spoils the unmatched 
mosaic work of the history (Judg. ii. 15, 18, 
19; iii 12—15; iv. 1—3; v. 6, 19—21, 31; 
vi. 1—5, 7—10; ix. 32—37; x. 6—16; 
xi. 19, 20; xii. 5, 6; xvii. 5, 6, 13; xx. 29, 
31 ; 1 Sam. ii. 30-85; iv. 9—22; vii. 3, 8; 
xiii. 19 — 22), It is a long-stretched-out 
history of a practically atheistic, priest- 
less, lawless life; divided into narratives of 
invasion, oppression, servitude (sevenfold, 
the Mesopotamian, Moabite, Canaanitish, 
Midianitisi I , Ammonitish, Philistine, and, it 
may be added, in order to comprehend all 
internal strife, Ishmaelitish larger and 
lesser, yet surprisingly general), smart, cry 
for help manifestly more the cry of pain and 
cowardice than of penitence and repentance, 
resolution and vow, and — for another trial 
and still another— of Divine pity, forbear- 
ance, and deliverance ! 

Ver. 6.— Among other patent instances, 
not the least remarknble are found in Judg. 
XX. 35—45 ; ix. 44 - 47 ; these forecast and 
heralded that final rupture of Behoboam 
and Jeroboam, which showed the "house 
divided against itself," and the sure conse- 
quences thereof. 

Ver. 7. — Work . . . rewarded (so Jer. 
xxxi. 16 ; Ecolea. iv. 9 ; Prov. xi. 18 ; and 
compare with them the crown of all the rest. 
Gen. XV. 1). 

Ver. 8. — These words and the prophecy. 
In nddition to what is said under ver. 1 on 
the question of the occurrence here of the 
name Oded, where we should have looked 
for the naaie Azariah, it may be noted that 
it is open to possibility that " these words" 
certainly referring to the language of Azariah, 
the "prophecy" may have in view some 
quotation more or less well known &om Odedi 



182 



THE SmCOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xv. 1— 19. 



Batisfied by the latter part of ver. 2 or by 
Ter. 7. This is not very likely; still, the 
eonjunction " and " woiud thereby better 
account for itse)fL Nevertheless, it would 
still remain that the word "prophecy" is 
not in construct but absolute state, and we 
cannot count the difficulty removed, com- 
paratively unimportaut as it may be. He 
took courage, and put away, etc. These 
words may express either Asa's accomplish- 
ing of the reforms spoken of in the former 
chapter (vers. 3 — 5), or quite as probably his 
perseverance and fenewed diligence and 
rigour in the same ; the language, " he took 
courage," favours this latter view. The cities 
which he had taken from, etc. Some say 
that the refsrence here and in ch. xviL 2 also 
must be understood to be to Ahijah'» victory 
and spoils (ch. xiii. 19), and that these two 
places must accordingly be in slight error. 
If this passage had stood alone, this view 
might have been more easy to accept, but 
the words in ch. xvii. 2 explicitly state that 
Asa Tmd taken such cities, and the mere fact 
that the history does not record when, nor 
even show any very convenient gap into 
which Asa's taking of such cities after con- 
flict with Israel might well fit in, can scarcely 
be allowed to override the direct assertion of 
oh. xvii. 2 (comp. ch. xvL 11). At the same 
time, the work that would devolve on Asa 
in holding the cities his father Abijah had 
first taken, may easily account for bU, and 
have been accounted Asa's taking, in the 
sense of talcing to them, or retaking them. 
Benewed the altar. The altar, the place of 
which was before the porch, was the altar of 
burnt offering. The Hebrew for "renewed" 
is B'ln. The Vulgate translates insufficiently 
dedicavit. Bertheau thinks the renewal 
designs simply the purification of it from 
idolatrous defilemente, although he admits 
that this is to assuTne that it had been 
defiled by idolatrous priests. Keil says the 
altar might well need genuine repair after 
the lapse of sixty years from the building of 
the temple. Of the nine occurrences of the 
word, five are metaphorical (as e.g. Ps. li. 10), 
but of the remaining four distinctly literal 
hkb, including the present, tliree must 
mean just strictly " repair " (oh. xxiv. 4, 12 ; 
ba. Ixi. 4), and the probability may there- 
tore be tliat such is the meaning now. Many, 
however, prefer the other view. The work 
of Asa, as described in oh. xiv. 3—5, was 
one of taking away, breaking down, and 
eutting down; but this item shows it now, in 
his fifteenth year, become also one of renew- 
ing and repairing. The poreh of (so oh. 
xxix. 17; 1 Kings vii. 6, 7, 12 ; Ezek. xL 7); 
D^K, though in eomtruat state, the kamett 
impure. 

Ver. 9.— He gathered. As the followiag 
vanes go on to show, Asa wisely gathered 



all beneath his sway, with a view to sacrifica 
and to record anew hallowed resolve as a 
nation. The strangers. It is a significant 
comment on the estranging effect of religious 
schism (for the schism was religious eveu 
beyond what it was national) that so com- 
paratively soon these of the tribes of Israel 
should have become called "strangers" by 
the side of Judah and Benjamin. They feU 
to him ... in abundance. Another signifi- 
cant comment on the sameness of human 
natru-e in all time ; the weak and the multi- 
tude will see, learn, do duty, less under pure 
conviction of right, than under the strong 
commanding influence of observation of 
where and with whom success goes, even if 
that success necessitate the owning of the 
Divine blessing as its cause (ch. xi. 16 and 
1 Chron. xii. 19). It should be noted, not for 
the sake of satire of human nature, but for 
the inculcation of the infinite importance of 
godly influence and example. Out of Simeon 
(see also ch. xxxiv. 6). The " lines " of the 
Simeonites fell to them originally (Josh, 
xix. 1) within Judah. The difficulty sug- 
gested by' their being called, apparently, 
" strangers," and being certainly classed 
with the comers from "Bphraim and Ma- 
nasseh," may be variously overcome, either 
by supposing that they had become more 
estranged from Judah in religious position 
than it was possible to them to have become 
in merely geographical ; or that they had in 
some degree outgrown their own proper Ao- 
bitat, and had to some extent colonized a 
more northerly region (Gen. xlix. 7) ; or that, 
tliough, indeed, our compiler's composition 
nndoubteilly places the Simeonites sum- 
moned, among the etranrjera, through men- 
tioniui"; them after Ephraim and Manasseh, 
yet this loiatiun of their name be held acci- 
dental, rather than due to special design. 

Ver. 10. -In the third month. The " Feast 
of Weeks" began about the sixth of tiiis 
tliird month Sivan (June). In the fifteenth 
year. It Ijas been conjectured from ch. xiv. 
1 that /ciah the Kthiopian, or Cushite, 
invadeJ Judah in Asa's eleventh year. The 
present sacrifirial festival, in his fifteenth 
year, evidently was held very shortly after 
the close of Asa's victory over Zerah. This 
infers a rather longer duration of the war 
than is otherwise to be gathered froci the 
face of the history. The interval, it is true, 
may be explained by supposing that Asa 
lingered long to restore the state of things 
where Zerah's vast host had unsettled it. 

Ver. 11. — These offerings were probably 
chiefly of the nature of peace offerings (Lev. 
vii. 11 — 21). In the mention of the " spoil " 
(ch. xiv. 13, 15) nothing is said of oxen. 
Seven hundred . . . seven thousand. Tlie 
number seven is common when the sacrifices 
were in units (as e.^/. Kumb. xxix. 82: 1 



OH. XV. 1—19.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHUONICLBS. 



183 



Chron. XT. 26, etc.), but. nnnommon in 
hundreds and thousands, for see 1 Kings 
viii. 63 ; oh. xxxv. 7 — 9, compaiing, how- 
ever, oh. zxx. 21. 

Ver. 12. — They entered into a covenant. 
For the original, see Exod. xxiv. 6 — 8; 
Deut. iv. 29 ; for two other solemn renewals 
of it, see 2 Kings xxiii. 1 — 3; ch. xxxiv. 
29 — 33; where, however, the stringent en- 
gagement of the following verse, though 
sufficiently to be inferred, is not notified. 
To seek ; Hebrew, B'^ltl'? (for similar use of 
h, with infinitive after, etc., see Neh. i. 30 ; 
jer. xxxiv. 10). 

Ver. 13. — 'Whosoever would not. . . should 
be put to death (see Exod. xxii. 20 ; Deut. 
liii. 9; xvii. 2 — 6). 

Ver. 14.— The loud voice, the shouting, 
and the trumpets, and cornets, spuke alike 
the determination, and the united joyful 
determination of the people (oh. xxiii. 13 ; 
Neh. xii. 27, 42, 43). 

Ver. 15. — For the probable duration of 
the rest round about, spoken of in the last 
clause, see under ver. 19. 

Ver. 16. — Maachah the mother of Asa; 
i.a. the grandmother (ch. xi. 20 — 22 ; xiii. 
2 ; 1 Kings xv. 2, 10, 13) of Asa ; and the 
statement amounts to this, that Asa removed 
her from the dignity she had enjoyed, with 
all its influences of "queen-mother." An 
Idol in a grove. Tliis, probably, literally 
translated, says, an hideous fright for, i.e. in 
place of Asherah, i.e. Ashtoreth, or Astarte ; 
but some translate to Asherah. Tlie word 
we translate "an hideous fright" (ns^DD) 
occurs only here and in the parallel (1 Kings 
xv. 13), and its derivation root guides to 
this rendering ; but some give it the idea of 
an object of reverent fear among idols. Asa 
cut down. 8o it was enjoined (Exod. xxxiv. 
13 — 15). And stamped it; Hebrew, p.'X'i; 
hiph. of pp7 ; the meaning being " stamped 
it" in the dust, from its upright position, 
finally burning it. The word is used in 
th. xxxiv. 4, 7 ; 2 Kings xxiii. 6, 15; Exod. 
XXI. 36; Micah iv. 13. The word used in 
the parallel is " out off," or " cut down," of 
course also preparatory to burning. At the 
brook Eidron. The Kidron was a torrent 
rather than a brooli. It flowed between 
Jerusalem and the Mount of Olives, and 
finally emptied itself into the Dead Sea. 
The references to Kidron in the Old Testa- 
ment are interesting, but all reinvested with 
heightened interest from those in the New 
Testament (John xviii. 1, compared with 
what the parallels infer ; Mark xiv. 26 ; 
Luke xxii. 39). The first two references in 
the Old Testament are 2 Sam xv. 23; 1 
Kings ii. 37. Passing these, the present 
place, with its parallel, brings the Kidron 
valley next under notice as the place of 



destruction for Maaohah's obscene phallio 
abomination, and then (2 Kings xi. 16) aa 
the place where Athaliah was destroyed. 
Its associations are similar when spoken of in 
2 Kings xiii. 4, 6, 12; oh. xxix. 16; xxx. 
14, becoming the " regular receptacle for 
the impurities an>I abominations of the idol- 
worship, when removed from the temple 
and destroyed by the adherents of Jehovah." 
In the time of Josiah, this valley was the 
common burying-place of the city (2 King* 
xxiii. 6; Jer. xxvi. 23; xxxi. 40). (For 
Eobinson's description of the modern state 
of the Kidron valley, see Dr. Smith's ' Bible 
Dictionary,' ii. 14 - 16). 

Ver. 17. — The high places were not takes 
away out of Israel It is possible, but 
scarcely tenable, that, by Israel, the northern 
kingdom may be here intended. But for 
the apparent discrepancy with those places 
which say tliat Asa did take away " the high 
plaees " (ch. xiv. 3, H), see notes under them, 
and § 7. 1, pp. xvi., xvii., of 'Introduction 
to 1 Olironioles.' " The iiigh places " were 
hills on which sacrifices were illegitimately 
offered instead of at the chosen place — at 
Jerusalem. The heart of Asa was perfect 
all his days. The words, " with Jehovah," 
following after the word "perfect" in the 
parallel (1 Kings xv. 17), makes the already 
plain plainer. The exact meaning is that 
Asa was consistently free from idolatry to 
the end. 

Ver. 18. — Except for an unimportant dif- 
ference of the Keri and Chetljiv kind in one 
word, this verse is iiientical with the parallel 
(1 Kings XV. 15). The silver, gold, and 
vessels were, of course, for the repair, resto- 
ration, and replacing of the revered fittings 
and omameats of the templo. From what 
sources and after what victories the father 
of Asa and Asa himself had drawn these 
supplies is not given either here or in the 
parallel, but it is natural to suppose that 
Abijah's victory over Jeroboam (ch. xiii. 
16) and Asa's over Zerah would have been 
the chief occasions to furnish them. 

Ver. 19. — There was no more war. The 
Hebrew text should be adhered to, which 
simply says, there waa not war unto, etc. 
The five and thirtieth year. There can be 
little doubt that the text originally said 
" twentieth," not " thirtieth " (see also ch. 
xvi. 1). The parallel, after the identical 
words of the previous verse already noted, 
goes on emphatically to speak of the fact 
that "there was war between Asa and 
Baasba all their days ; " and the same state- 
ment is repeated in the thirty-second verse 
of the same chapter (1 Kings xv. 16, 32). 
Tlie ibllowing verse (33) says that Baasha's 
twenty-four-year reign began in Asa's third 
year. Putting the various and apparently 
Domewbat varying statements together, they 



184 



THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xv. 1—19. 



must be hold to gay, firtt, that a state of 
war was, indeed, chronic between Asa and 
Baasha (which way of putting need not 
disturb the correctness of ch. xiv. 5, 6, and 
of the fifteenth verse of our chapter), but 
that in the six and twentieth year of Asa, 
wliich would be the last or last but one 



of Baasha's life, latent war gave place to 
active hostilities, and Baasha (ch. zvi. 1) 
came up to Jndah to invade it, and to build 
Bamah — a course of conduct which was the 
beginning of the end for him (comp. 1 
Kiugs xvi. 8 ; oui vei. 10 ; and ch. zvi. 1, 9). 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 19. — The hour of happiness improved. Perhaps we are not wnrranted to 
say that it was immediately after Asa's victory over Zerah, or able to say how soon 
it was after it, that Azariah the son of Oded came with his message to him and " all 
Judah and Benjamin," under that direct and ever-typical leading of " the Spirit." Nor 
does the parallel enlighten us on this point. The history, however, here follows on 
with the account of Azariah's appearance to Asa, and gives us the impression that it 
was at a certain favourable crisis, in happy quickened hours, due to the fresh memories 
of the divinely given victory, the manifest and most merciful interposition of Heaven^ 
that the prophet came. Coming, he did thus the very thing the prophet is ever ordained 
to do. He breaks in on the lower life, on the life prone to forget, on the life abls 
enough nevertheless to take higher ground and onward action, and reminds it, in 
plainest fidelity and undoubting firmness of speech, of such great realities as these. 

I. Its abiding frivileog — God's dwellin» presbnob, his constantly EEsiDEarr 

PEESBNCB, HIB HABITUAL INDWELLING, ON THE ONE SUPPOSITION AND CONDITION OF 

HIS people's ALLEGIANCE. " The Lord is with you, while ye be with him." It is a 
simple, powerful, ever-necessary reminder for the earliest, opening intelligence of the 
baptized ; for the unfolding, growing, intelligent piety of the confirmed ; for the 
devoutness and all the trembling awe of the communicant ; and for all the Church, 
individually or collectively, in the dangerous, doubtful, fickle, forgetful, tempted course 
of human life. He is faithful, his mercies fail not, his memory is ever fresh, punctual 
and to be relied upon, and — wonderful assurance to lay to heart — it is not we who have 
to wait for him! 

II. Its peepetdal oppokttinitt — the opportunity of obtaintng, simply for 
THE SEEKING, DiviNE INTEEPOSITION. Life and human character need and have the 
special and occasional as well as the abiding and daily, the exceptional as well as the 
familiar, hill and valley as well as the level way, dark trial and deep sirief as well as 
the wonted discipline of earth for imperfect creatures, joys as well as peace, and in a 
word abounding vouchsafements of grace and strength, as well as the unbroken stream 
of day after day. 

III. Its tebmbling dangee — the dangee of being foesaken or its chief good, 
THEOUGH FOESAKiNO ITS GoD. How lightly men treat the love which is most sensitive 
as well as most needed — liable to be grieved, offended, quenched, or absent none can 
tell how long, as none can tell where the sin and the folly that drove that love, shall 
cease to drive their victim I To be forsaken of God is absolutely the worst forsakenness, 
the dreariest solitariness, the poorest poverty. And the sentence, " Let him alone," or 
" Let them alone," how its echoes wander and trail — sometimes endlessly I 

IV. Its supreme exertion of enbkqy. There are times, and there are enterprisei, 
where no outer energy, no inner devotion, can be misplaced. Resolution, courage, and 
covenant, mutual exhortation, meeting together, edifying one another, and " the speak» 
ing oft to one another" on the part of them " that fear the Lord," vowing to the Lord 
and praying to him, and praising him with singing and music, and "with all the heart, 
and all the de-^ire," "putting away the idols, stamping them to dust, and burning 
them," " renewing the altar and renewing ever the s-acrifices thereof," — this enthusiasm 
becomes certain occasions and spreads a holy contagion. The life that is devoid of it 
has missed its way and its joy on earth even ; the lives that are destitute of it have 
doomed themselves. Other assnciaiions, other bonds, other enterprises, may make them 
sport, but can scarcely fail in the very act to make them their spoit! Now, Asa and 
hig people had found and were following the better way; and oh that such a heart 
may continue in them ! Grateful, happy, and insiiirited hours of life were used by tha 



«H. XV. 1— 19.J THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 18S 

propbet and the king and bis people for tbinking greater things, resolving on greater 
things, and carrying them into execution. They should be similarly utilized by us. 
In hours uplifted by genuine healthful happiness, in periods of higher feeling and tons 
of thought, we should gladly seize the opportunity to raise th» standard of our own 
conduct, and then^x the standard to which to work, and from which, even in lower 
mood, we shall, of God's help, not depart. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1, 2. — Ood^s presence and d^artwe. It is characteristic of the Hebrew prophet 
that M the king comes back flushed with victory he meets the conqueror, not with 
honied words of congratulation, but with faithful words of admonition. What he says 
to the king may be taken as applicable to the servant of God generally. 

I. A PROPHETIC CONFIRMATION OP THE GOOD MAN's EXPEEIENOB. " Jahve waS with 

you (has given you the victory) because ye were with him (held to him) " (Keil). So 
far fidelity to Jehovah had proved to be the condition of prosperity. Under his banner 
they had marched to victory ; while they were true to him, he had been in the midst 
of them, and had been there to bless them. This is the common, indeed the constant, 
experience of the good. The service of God is always a success. It means rest of soul 
at all times; it means calmness and a wise joy in prosperity ; it means resignation and 
comfort in the time of trouble; it means strength for duty and courage for temptation; 
It means excellency in life and hope in death. To be with God in the sense and spirit 
of self-surrender to his will is to have his gracious presence with us, shedding light 
and gladness on our path. This is the testimony of the good. 

II. A PROPnETio PROMISE OF THE GOOD man'b HERITAGE. "If yo scck him, he 
will be found of you." Behind U3 is a part (larger or smaller) of our life, and we 
thank God for all that he has been to us as we have held on our way. But before ui 
is another portion ; it may be a very serious, it may be even a critical, passage of our 
life. We shall want not only our own resources at their best, and the kindest and 
wisest succour of our friends, but the near presence aad effective aid of our heavenly 
Father. We shall want his guidance, that we may know the path we should take ; his 
guardianship, that we may be preserved from the wrong-doings, from the errors and 
mistakes, into which we shall otherwise be betrayed ; his illumination, that we may 
rightly discharge our duties and rise to the height of our opportunities; his sustaining 
grace, that we may bear ourselves bravely and meekly in the day of our adversity and 
defeat. All this we shall have ^ we seek it truly. And that means if we seek it (1) in 
moral and spiiitual integrity, our heart being set on the service of Christ ; (2) with 
our whole heart, earnestly and perseveringly ; (3) believingly, building our hope on his 
Word. 

III. A PROPHETIC WARNING OF THE GOOD MAlf's DANGER. " If ye forsake Mm, he 
will forsake you." 1. There is a piactical danger of spiritual and, therefore, of moral 
declension. Such is our nature, that we are apt to let love become cold ; to allow zeal 
to wane and wither; to permit our best habits to be encroached upon by the pressure of 
lower cares and pleasures ; to forsake God. The records of Christian experience contain 
only too many instances of such departure. 2. We have, then, to fear the withdrawal 
of God from ub; the loss of his Divine favour, of his indwelling Spirit, of his bene- 
diction and reward. 3. Therefore let ub watch and pray, that we enter not inV the 
outer shadow of condemnation. — 0. 

Ver. 7. — Bpiritu(d strength a sacred obligation. " Be ye strong therefore, and let no» 
your hands be weak." This is in the imperative mood; it is a commandment. Strength 
is represented as a sacred duty; and weakness, consequently, as a culpable failure. To 
be spiritually strong it an obligation as much as an endowment. It may, indeed, be 
tirged that there is — 

I. Constitutional weakness, which is to be home with rather than to be blamed. 
Some human spirits are less fully eudowed than others; some bring with them sad 
consequences of their progenitors' sin (Exod. xx. 5). It requires tenfold more spiritual 
courage and exertion on the part of these to be loyal and faithful than on the part of 



186 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHKONICLES. [ch. rv. 1— la 

their brethven who are more richly equipped or leas heavily weighted. We need to 
know mnch before we judge men. Only the Divine Father, who knows us altogether, 
who knows, therefore, the limitations and the propensities of our nature which we have 
received from himself or from oar ancestors, can say how much we are to be blamed, 
how much to be pitied. But undoubtedly there is— 

II. Moral wbakness, for which we are responsible, of which we are guilty, " Let 
not your hands be weak," But how often the hand is weak because the life has been 
low, and because the heart has been wrong I All vice leads down to weakness. And 
not vice alcne, but all/o% ; the foolish and blamewortliy disregard of the laws of our 
mind and of our body. Not only excessive indulgence in any one direction (mental 
or physical), but unregulated and ill-proportioned activity, ends in weakuess ; so that 
he who might have been an active and efBcient workman in many a good field of use- 
fulness is helpless ; his hand hangs down ; there is " no strength in his right hand," 
because there bas been no wisdom in bis mind, 

III. Spiritual strenoth, which we are under obligation to acquire. There is much 
of real, effective strength which it is open to us all to obtain if we will. God is saying 
to us, " Be ye strong ; " and if we do what he gives us the means of doing, we ahaM be 
strong. What are the sources of spiritual strength? 1. Ohristian morality. And 
this includes (1) the care of the body — the regulation of its instincts and cravings, 
ministering to its necessities ; (2) the culture cf the mind — ^increasing its knowledge 
and nourishing its power ; (3) the training of the heart. 2. Sacred service. Our 
capacity for serving Christ and man depends very largely indeed on our making a 
continuous effort to serve. " To him that hath is given," i.e to him that puts out his 
talent is given another ; to him that expends his strength in paths of holy usefulness 
is given multiplied power to speak and strike for God and truth. Our present strength 
depends upon our growth in power ; and that depends upon the measure of our exercise 
in the field of sacred work. 3. Divine communication, "Thou answeredst me and 
strengthenedst me with strength in my soul" (Pa, cxxxviii. 3); "In Christ who 
strengtheneth me " (Phil. iv. 13)., Strength is one of the " good things " our heavenly 
Father will give to "them that ask him" (Matt. viL 11). — C. 

Ver, 7, — The reward of Ohristian work. " Your work shall be rewarded." The 
very words recur in the prophecies of Jeremiah (xxzi. 16) ; and the sentiment is fre- 
quently expressed by our Lord and by his apostles. It appears distinctly in the solemn 
statement of Jesus Christ, " The Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father , . . 
and then he shall reward every man according to his works " (Matt, xvi. 27 ; see also 
Kom. ii 6, 7 ; 1 Cor, iii. 8 ; Bev, xxiL 12). What is the reward for which we are to 
look? Not— 

I. The: reward of hired laboub. Hired labour is rewarded precisely and partica- 
larly. So much money for so much work, measured by the hours occupied or the work 
done. There is a nice calculation of what has been wrought on the one hand, and of 
what is given in exchange on the other. It is supposed that the one is the equivalent 
of the other. But our Divine Saviour does not call us into his field on this arrange- 
ment. We are not bis day-labourers, engaged at a certain price ; we are his fellow- 
workers — employed under him, indeed, but engaged with him in the completion of his 
great " work," He is not treating us as slaves or even as common servants, but as 
children and as friends— as those whom he loves and desires to bless with true well- 
being. We aspire to — 

II, The reward of ths labottb of love. Our Divine Master invites us to stand 
by his side and work out with him the redemption of our race. He charges us to be 
as he was in the world ; to work as he did, in the spirit of entire self-surrender, of whole- 
hearted love ; to put forth our strength in his service and in the cause of righteousness 
and human elevation ; and he tells us that we shall secure a "full reward." We shall 
find that in : 1. TJie possession of his good pleasure. The true soldier finds his best 
reward in the commendation of his commander ; the true scholar in the approval of his 
teacher ; the true workman in the smile of him in whose service he is engaged. We, 
as Christian workmen, look for our deepest joy in the smile and the approval of our 
Lord, We hope for no moment of keener ecstasy than that when we shall hear him 
■ay to us, "Well done, good and faithful servant I" To live in the known and felt 



OH. XV. 1—19.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHKONICLES. 181 

possession of Jesus Christ's benediction is one of the purest, as it is one of the most 
appreciated, rewards we can receive. 2. The enlargement of our own powers of service. 
As we work in the cause of heavenly wisdom and of spiritual well-being, our power for 
Action 18 constantly enlarging, until feebleness becomes strength, and strength becomes 
might. The more we do the more we are capable of doing (see previous homily). 3. Tht 
expansion of our sphere of service. "Thou hast been faithful in a few things, I will 
make thee ruler over many things " (Matt. xxv. 21). " I will ask for no reward, 
except to serve thee still ; " or, may we not gay, " except to serve thee more " ? — to serve 
thee in that broader sphere, with those nobler opportunities into which thou wilt 
introduce me. For our Master does thus enlarge us now, as one fruit of our labour ; 
«nd he will soon reward us by a far more generous enlargement, when he " cometb 
with his Father" and when "his reward is with him."— 0. 

Vers. 14, 15. — The secret of Joy in the service of Christ. How comes it to pass that 
the service of Christ should be associated in any mind with austerity and gloom ? How 
is it that every one does not connect that service in his thought with gladness of heart 
and brightness of life ? This misfortune may be attributable to miaconcefition, to a 
mental error, to the misreading of some words of the Master or of his apostles ; or it 
may be the consequence, physical as much as spiritual, of a particular temperament ; 
but it is most frequently caused by lack of thoroughness in the service of the L"rd. 

L The mistake op half-heabtbdnebs in the sbeviob op Cheist. During the 
reigns of Behoboam and Abijah, when king and people both showed much abatement 
of zeal in the worship of Jehovah, we do not read of any record like that of the text. 
Of Behoboam we dud that " he fixed not his heart to seek the Lord " (ch. xii. 14, 
marginal reading). Abijah could say nothing more for himself than that he had " not 
forsaken the Lord " (ch. xiii. 10), and his later days, like his grandfather's, were appa- 
rently darkened by indulgence. There was no fervour of piety, and there was no fulness 
of joy in the land. And we find that everywhere and always it is so. Half-hearted- 
ness in holy service is a profound mistake. It gives no satisfaction toonrLord himself. 
It leads to no height of Christian worth, to no marked excellency of character. It fills 
the soul with no deep and lasting joy. It is very likely to decline and to expire, to go 
out into the darkness of doubt, or worldliness, or guilt. 

II. The wisdom of wholb-hbaktedness. "All Judah rejoiced at the oath; for 
they had sworn with all their heart, and sought him with their whole desire . . . and 
the Lord gave them rest." There was no imaginable step they could have taken which 
would have caused so much elation of heart and ensured so enviable a national position. 
Asa and his people showed the very truest wisdom, something more and better than 
sagacious policy or statecraft, when they sought the Lord with all their heart. They 
did that which gave them a pure and honest satisfaction in the present, and which, more 
than any other act, secured the future. And though we certainly are not invited to 
manifest the thoroughness of our devotion in the same severities that characterized 
their decision (ver. 13), we do well when we follow them in the fulness of their resolve. 
For to seek Christ the Lord with all our heart and our " whole desire " is the one right 
and the one wise thing to do. 1. It secures to us the abiding favour and firiendshiji of 
the Eternal; he is then "found" of us. 2. It brings profound personal rest; then 
Christ speaks " peace " to ua—his peace, such as this world has not at its command. 
3. It secures a feeling of friendship toward all around us : " rest round about." The 
heart is filled with that holy love which desires to bless all who can be reached. 4. It 
fills and sometimes floods the heart with sacred joy. The full realization of the presence 
and love of Christ, the fervent worship of the Lord of all grace and truth, earnest work 
done in his Name and in his strength,— these are a source of enlarging and ennobling 
joy. The true key-note of the Christian life is this : " Eejoice in the Lord alway : and 
again , , , rejoice," — C, 

Vers. 1 — 7. — A conquermr's welcome. L A mebsaok fbom God. (Vers. 1, 2.) 1. Fti 
hearer, Azariah, "Whom Jehovah aids," the son of Oded; mentioned only here. Jehovah 
may, and often does, transmit messages of moment through humble and obscure mes- 
sengers. What fitted Azariah to be the bearer of the Divine announcements was the 
cominf upon him of the Spirit of Elohim, the Spirit being the Bevealer and Interpreter 



188 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHR JNICLES. [ca. rv. 1—19 

of the Divine will to the soul of man (Numb. xi. 26 ; Job xxxii. 8 ; Ezek. ii. 2 ; 1 Cor. 
xii. 8). That the Spirit of God came upon a man did not prove him to have been 
a good man, Balaam (Numb. xxiv. 2) and Saul (1 Sam. x. 10) being witness ; though 
there is no reason to doubt that Azariah was a true prophet of Jehovah. The Spirit 
came by measure upon him, as upon other holy men of the oH dispensation through 
whom God spoke to his people ; on Christ, through whom God's highest and last mes- 
sage has been seut to mankind, the Spirit was poured out without measure (Isa. xi. 2; 
John iii. 34 ; Rev. iii. 1). Hence the supreme importance attaching to the gospel. 
2. Its recipients. " Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin." God claims a right to address 
sovereigns as well as their subjects. Between princes and peasants in his sight is no 
difference (Acts z. 34; 1 Pet. i. 17). God's messages in the Law and the gospel are 
directed equally to all. The monarch is as much under the Law as the subject ; the 
subject has as Talid a title to the provisions of the gospel as the monarch. Asa and 
his warriors were returning from a victorious campaign, when Jehovah's prophet inter- 
posed with notes of warning. These were timely, since the king and his veterans were 
in danger of self-laiidation and self-confidence — of ascribing their recent splendid 
exploits to their own skill and prowess, and of trusting to their own valour to pnjttct 
them in future, without troubling themselves to think about Jehovah, his religinn, or 
his help. So men (not excepting Christians) are never more in peril of forgetting God 
than when fortune smiles upon them (Deut. viii. 13), and never more need to be 
admonished than when rejoicing in deliverances wrought for them by God. 3. Its 
contents. A doctrine, a promise, a warning. (1) The doctrine. That Jehovah was 
with them, while they were with him. With all God is as to his immanent presence, 
since he fills heaven and earth (Jer. xxxiii. 24), and besets all individually behind and 
before (Ps. cxxxix. 1 — 12) ; but with his people he is, in the special sense of gracious 
manifestation, to accept (Numb. xvii. 4), protect (oh. xx. 17; Jer. xlii. 11), assist 
(1 Chron. xxii. 18; Hag. i. 13), and bless (Exod. xx. 24). Only his presence with them 
i-i ever conditioned by their being with him in the sense of believing in, loving, and 
obeying him (John xiv. 2C). (2) The promise. That if they sought .Jehovah, Jehovah 
should be found of them. If they sought him in the way of penitence, faith, love, 
obed'ence, he should be found of them in the way of acceptance, grace, assistance. 
This promise, always true of Jehovah in his relations with Israel (1 Chron. xxviii 9 ; 
ch. XXX. 19 ; Ps. cxix. 2 ; Jer, xxix. 13 ; Amos v. 4), is equally true of his relations 
with believers on Christ (Heb. xi. 6 ; Jas. iv. 8). (3) The warning. That if they for- 
sook God, God would forsake them. If they went back from the path of reform upon 
which they were entered, he also would withdraw his countenance and aid from them. 
So Moses (Deut. xxxi. 16, 17) and Joshua (xxiv. 20) had warned their contempo- 
raries and David his son Solomon (1 Chron. xxviiL 9). The same condition is addressed 
to all (Jer. xvii. 33; Heb. x. 38). 

II. A LESSON TBOM HISTORY. (Vers. 3 — 6.) 1. The potsihility of lapsing into reli- 
gious apostasy. Such times had formerly existed in Judah, and hence in the future might 
reappear (Eccles. i. 9 ; iii. 15). Whether Azariah's language depicted the condition of 
Judah then (Grotius), or in the future (Luther),\or in the past, in the days of Rehoboam 
and Abijah (Syriac, Arabic), or in the period of the judges (Vitringa, Bertheau), is open 
to debate. As the prophet has not definitely stated the time, he may have designed to 
express truths of force at all times (Keil). Of such days as the prophet alludes to, 
Juilah and Israel had both before had experience. The description of them is pecu- 
liarly affecting. (1) No true God ; i.e. no knowledge of the true God ; or, what is worse, 
the knowledge of the true God, but not his worship or service. Such times had existed 
soon after the death of Joshua (Judg. ii. 10 — 15; x. 6), and were yet to reappear in 
Israel under Ahab (1 Kings xviii. 20, 21), and in Judah under Ahaz (ch. xxviii. 1 — 6). 
" Without God " — a correct characterization of the unbelieving world (Job xxi. 14 ; 
Ps. X. 4; Eph. ii 12). (2) No teaching priest; i.e. the priests they had either possessed 
no knowledge of the true God, of his cliaracter and requirements, and so could not 
teach the people; or, if they did, they were satisfied with the mere performance of their 
altar duties, without caring for the spiritual welfare of the people. If the first, they 
were disqualified for being priests by reason of their ignorance (Mai. ii. 7) ; if the 
second, they were chargeable with indolence (Mai. i. 6) or hypocrisy (Neh. ix. 34), or 
both. If, under the old covenant, priests were required to instruct the poople in th« 



OH. XV. 1—19.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHKONICLKS. 189 

tenets and precepts of religion, much more is it incumbent on Christian pastors to be 
olso teachers (Bph. iv. 11). A ministry that does not preach or teach iyso facto stands 
condemned. (3) No Law ; i.e. the Torah of Moses, unknown, or forgotten, or disobeyed. 
When men or nations depart from Gud, they begin by pulling down his altars, and end 
by trampling on his commandments. And if there be no God, this is just as it should 
be. If God is not, to pretend to worship him is a farce, and ministers of religion may 
be dispensed with ; if God is not, there is no Supreme Authority to claim from man 
obedience, and man may at once assume lordship over himself. But if God is, it will 
be more prudent to let his altars remain, to see that his ministers teach, and take order 
that his precepts he obeyed. 2. The certainty that religious apostasy mil be fallowed 
by national disaster. So it had been in the past, and so it would be in the future. 
(I) Social disturbance, danger, and violence had been, and would be, the order of 
the day. "And in those times there was," or is, "no peace to him that went out 
or to him that came in," Such had been Israel's condition in the days of Shamgar 
the son of Anath (Judg. v. 6), and under the oppression of the Midianites (Judg. vi. 2). 
Irreligion necessarily gravitates towards violence. He that breaks God s command- 
ments without a qualm of conscience seldom scruples about making havoc with man'i 
when opportunity occurs. Exemplified in the age of Noah (Gen. vi. 4, 11, 12), in the 
last days of Greece and Home, and in the French Revolution of 1798. (2) Political 
anarchy had commonly attended these times in the past, and would more than likely 
do so again on their recurrence. " Great vexations came upon all the inhabitants of the 
countries, and nation was destroyed of nation, and city of city " — literally, " and they 
were broken in pieces, nation against nation and city against city;" "for God did," or 
does, " vex them with all adversity." The language, descriptive of such a reign of terror 
as commonly accompanies civil war, was verified in a form comparatively mild in the 
war of the tribes of Israel against Benjamin (Judg. xx. 20), and in the struggle of the 
Gileadites with Ephraim (Judg. xii. 4), Amos (iii. 9) depicted such commotions, con- 
fusions, tumults, as occurring, or about to occur, in Samaria in his time. In the final 
overthrow of the two kingdoms, the prophet's words received their most startling illus- 
tration (Isa. ix. 18 — 20). In the ultimate destruction of all peoples hostile to God, they 
will obtain their highest and fullest realization (Zech. xiv. 13 ; Matt. xxiv. 7). 3. The 
mily way of escaping from the miseries and horrors of such evil times, viz. by repenting 
and turning to Jehovah, " But when in their distress," etc. So had it been in the 
days of the Egyptian oppression (Exod. ii. 23), and in those of the Midianite supremacy 
(Judg. vi. 6). So had it been in the experience of Asa himself, whose cry unto Jehovah 
on the field of war had been heard (ch. xiv. 11). So would it be again, if in the season 
of their calamity they remembered God (ch. vii. 14). The doctrine here enunciated 
holds good of individuals as well as of nations ; e.g. David (2 Sam. xxl. 1 ; Ps. xviii. 6 ; 
xxxiv. 4; cxxxviii. 3), Jehoshaphat (ch. xvii. 4, 10), Uzziah (ch. xxvi. 5). 1'he ear 
of God is open to every cry of a distressed soul (Ps. xxxiv. 15). " Pools, because of 
their transgression," etc. (Ps. cvii. 17 — 19). 

III. An bxhobtation from a prophet. (Ver. 7.) 1. 77ie counsel. Action. (1) 
Vigorou*. " Be strong therefore." Courage in conoeiv ing and doing the right thing 
was the special demand of the hour. The right thing at that moment in Judah was 
to adhere to Jehovah, reform the abuses that during the previous reigns had crept 
into his worship, and exterminate the idolatrous rites that had been introduced by 
earlier kin^s. More disastrous for the country had these been than Zerah's invasion. 
Nothing m'ore required of the followers of God and soldiers of Jesus Christ in any age 
or land than an heroic determmation to resist sin and follow holiness, oppose error and 
defend truth, renounce idolatry and cleave to the worship of the Father (Deut. xxxi. 6 ; 
Josh i. 7; Ps. xxvii. 14; 1 Cor, xvL 13; 2 Tim, ii 1). (2) Persevering. "Let not 
your hands be weak." Not enough to begin well ; to continue well is indispensable. 
Weariness in well-doing a frequent phenomeuon, much needing to be guarded against 
CGaL vi 9) Steadfastness in the faith and in the maintenance of good works expected 
of Christians (1 Cor. xv. 58; Phil, iv, 1; Col. i, 23; 2 Thess. iii. 13; 2 Tim. iii. 14; 
Heb. X. 23). 2. The eticowagement. Recompense. " Your work shall be rewarded." 
(1) with inward satisfaction, as being in itself a right work (Prov. xiv. 14), This an 
invariable accompaniment of well-doing, and, apart from further consequences, ample 
remuneration. (2) With Divine approbation, as being a work God regards with favour. 



190 1 HE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHBONIOLES. [cm. xv. 1—19. 

Already expressed in the Word (Heb. xiii. 16), this will eventually be proclaimed by 
the mouth of God (Matt. xxv. 21, 23). (3) Wirb ultimate success, as being a work 
destined to triumph over every form of evil. The cause of God and truth, of Christ 
and the gospel, may be long and bitterly opposed, but ultimate victory rests with it 
(Rev. li. 15). 

LearD : 1. The superiority of the new dispensation in having God's Son as its Mes- 
•enger (Heb. i. 1, 2). 2. The equity of God's dealings with men in providence and 
in grace (1 Sam. ii. 30; Ezek. xviiL 29). 3. The miserable state of the heathen world, 
as destitute of the true knowledge of God (Eph. ii. 12 ; iv. 17, 18). 4. The value of 
affliction as a means of religious improvement (Job xxxiii. 17 — 19 ; Ezek. xx. 37 ; 
Lam. iii. 27 ; 2 Cor. iv. 17 ; Heb. xii. 11). 5. The secret of national prosperity — righteous- 
ness (Prov. xiv. 34). 6. The duty of persevering in religion (John xv. 4 ; Acts xi. 23 ; 
2 Tim. i. 14; 1 Pet. v. 9; Rev. ii. 27). 7. The certainty that faith shall not lose its 
reward (Luke vL 36; 1 Cor. iii. 14; Heb. x. 35). — W. 

Vers. 8 — 19. — Ancient envenanten. L Sebioub fbepabationb. (Vers, 8 — 11.) 
1. ITie purgation of the land from idoU, Encouraged by the words of the son of Oded 
—not Oded, as in the text — Asa, on reaching his capital, determined to convene a 
national assembly, and enter into a solemn league and covenant to carry out the work 
of reformation so auspiciously begun (ch. xiv. 2 — 5), and so manifestly owned of Jehovah 
in the splendid victory he had granted over the Cushite invader (ch. xiv. 12). Aa a 
preliminary, he " put away the abominations," t.e. the idols, " from the whole land of 
Judah and Benjamin, and out of the cities he had taken from the bill coimtry of 
Ephraira." In the same spirit acted Jacob, before going up to meet with Jehovah at 
Bethel (Gen. xxxv. 2) ; and Moses, before the interview of Israel with Jehovah at Sinai 
(Exod. xix. 14) ; Hezekiah, before he celebrated the Passover (ch. xxx. 14) ; and Josiah, 
before he renewed the covenant (ch. xxxiv. 3 — ^7). If such preparation on the part of 
Israel was needful to qualify her for an interview with Jehovah even in external cele- 
brations (Amos iv. 12), much more is a similar preparation of the heart indispensable 
on the part of souls who come before God in any act of spiritual worship (ch. xix. 3 ; 
XX. 33 ; 1 Sam. vii. 3 ; Ps. Ivii. 7 ; Luke L 17). In particular, all known sin must 
be abandoned (Isa. i. 16, 17). 2. The renewal of the altar of the Lord. The great 
brazen altar of Solomon (ch. iv. 1) had probably been defiled by idol-rites during pre- 
ceding reigns, and required reconseoration (Bertheau) ; while, after sixty years of ser- 
vice, it almost certainly stood in need of repairs (Keil). Most likely Asa's renovation 
of the altar was of both kinds — an external reparation and a religious consecration. It 
is commonly a sign that a Church or nation is in earnest in entering upon religious 
refornQation when it attends to the externals as well as to the internals of religion — 
when it corrects abuses, repairs defects, and adds improvements in the outward means 
of grace, as well as endeavours to impart to these fresh attractiveness and zeal. Indi- 
viduals begin not well who neglect to engage all their powers of body, mind, and heart 
in the work, or to seek for these a new and gracious baptism from above (Bom. xii. 1). 
3. The invitation of the people to a national assembly. Without the hearty consent 
and co-operation of the people, reforms of no kind can be effected — at little religious as 
political or social, and just as little these as those. Accordingly, all Judah and Ben- 
jamin, with such Israelites as sympathized with the new movement, were summoned to 
Jerusalem on a certain day to covenant to seek Jehovah. As early as the days of 
Behoboam, strangers from the northern kingdom had found their way into the southern 
(ch. xi. 16); Asa's victory over Zerah having been accepted as a proof that Jehovak 
was on the side of Judah's king, the number of these immigrants largely increased 
(ver. 9). What was wanted then in Judah and Israel to rally the pious is demanded 
■till — a leader, who has God upon his side, because he is on the side of God. 4. The 
gathering of the pious in Jerusalem. It showed the spirit of the people that they 
responded at once to their monarch's call. Followers that will not follow are a hindrance 
to those who would lead in reformations in either Church or state. Union is strength, 
•nd generally victory ; disunion weakness, and always defeat. 

II. Solemn tbansaotions. (Vers. 12 — 14.) 1. The presentation of the tpoils. These^ 
•even hundred oxen and seven thousand shi'ep, formed part of the plunder taken from 
Zerah's army (ch. xiv. 14, 15), and were now presented to Jehovah ; as Abraham gav« 



«■. XV. 1— 19.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHB0NICLE8. 191 

tithes to Melchizedek on returning from the slaughter of the kings (Gen. xiv. 20) ; as 
the Israelites in the wilderness after the slaughter of the Midianites levied a tribute 
unto the Lord (Numb. xxxi. 11—47) ; as Saul said he intended to sacrifice unto the 
Lord the sheep and oxen he had reserved from the spoil of the Araalekites (1 Sam. xv. 
21) ; and as victorious generals among the Bomans were accustomed to dedicate to 
Jupiter part of the spoils taken from the enemy (Adam's ' Eoman Antiquities,' p. 327). 
A» Asa's victory had been achieved solely through Divine help, this was becoming as 
well as right. Those whom God renders successful in their callings should honour 
him with the firstfruits of their increase (Prov. iii. 9). Every man as God hath pros- 
pered him, a rule of Christian giving (1 Cor. xvi. 2). 2. 2%e formatwn of a covenant. 
(1) The object— twofold, (o) "To seek the Lord God of their fathers," etc. (ver. 12) 
— ^a right thing for nations and individuals to do — yea, for all, whether they covenant 
with and swear to one another concerning it or not. To seek God, a nation's and indi- 
vidual's life (Isa. Iv. 3, 6 ; Ps. Ixix. 32 ; Amos v. 4), and the only source of true pros- 
perity for either (Ps. Ixx. 4; cxix. 2; Amos viii. 14; Lam. iii. 25). That the god a 
nation or an individual seeks is the god of his or its fathers, is no proof that that god 
is the true God ; but, being the true God, he possesses an additional claim on tha 
worship and homage of both individual and nation, from the fact that he is and has 
been their fathers' God. If God ii to be sought at all, it should be with the whole 
heart (Jer. xxix. 13). Nothing short of this is religion (Deut. xi. 13 ; xiii. 3 ; Matt. 
xxii. 37 ; Mark xii. 30, 33 ; Luke x. 27). (6) To "put to death," etc. (ver. 13). Under 
the theocracy religious toleration was impossible, for the reason that idolatry was high 
treason. " A theocratic government is a government of constraint. Freedom of con- 
science would have been an unmeaning sound under the Jewish economy " (Pressensd, 
' Early Years of the Christian Church,' vol. i. p. 36). Church and state in Judah were 
one. No such identification existed among heathen nations, though approximations 
towards it were often seen. Nor does such identification exist under the gospel. 
Hence neither Church nor state now has authority to put to death those who decline 
the religion prescribed by either. The reformed Churches of England and Scotland 
were slow in perceiving that the extermination of heretics by the sword of the civil 
magistrate, however legitimate under the Jewish theocracy, was not permissible in the 
Church of Jesus Christ. Under the gospel God alone is Lord of the conscience; and 
to each man pertains the right of choosing his own religion, his own creed, and his own 
worship, without dictaiion, liot to say coercion, from either king or parliament — being 
answerable for the choice he makes in the first place to his own conscience, and in the 
last place to God, whose creature and subject he is. This is the doctrine of religious 
equality, which should be carefully distinguished from that of religious toleration, which 
proceeds upon the erroneous assumption that Church and state possess the ri^lit, but 
decline to exercise the power of coercion, and agree to allow, what they might justly 
put down, diversity of faith and practice in religion. (2) The form — simple. " They 
aware unto the Lord;" i.e. bound themselves with an oath to carry out the twofold pur- 
pose above described. This they did with enthusiasm (ver. 14), which is always good 
in a good thing (Gal. iv. 18), and especially good in religion (Luke xiii. 24 ; John ix. 4 ; 
Eph. v. 16 ; Heb. vi. 11). (3) The scene — impressive. In more points than one this 
high transaction under Asa had a parallel in the National Covenant, which was formed 
by the Scottish people in Edinburgh on the last day of February, 1638, when in the 
churchyard of Greyfriars, in the grey dawn, a parchment was spread upon a gravestone, 
•nd one by one the nobility, gentry, burgesses, ministers of religion, and common 
people, with uplifted hand and solemn oath, afiBxed to it their names, engaging with 
one another to maintain the Presbyterian form of Church government, and, at the point 
of the sword, to exterminate the prelatical. 

IIL SiONiFioANT EBsuLTS. (Vcrs. 15—19.) 1. The Joy of tlM people. (Ver. 15.) 
This proved they had been in earnest. They exulted in the unanimity and heartiness 
with which the covenant had been made, and in the prospect thus opened np for the 
attainment of iti objects. 2. The zeal of the king. (Vers. 16—18.) (1) The deposi- 
tion of the queen-mother, Maachah, the mother of Abijah and grandmother of Asa. 
High rank, venerable age, and near relationship to Asa had given her at court and iu 
the land commanding influence, which she exercised in the interest of idolatry. Her 
removal by Asa showed him sincere in desiring to efiect a reformation (Luke xiv. 26) 



192 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xn. 1—15. 



(2) The destruction of her abominable image. This, which was made of wood, and is 
supposed by some to have been an obscene figure, pudendum, representing the produc- 
tive power of nature — which is doubtful (Bertheau and Keil) — was an object of horror 
and detestation to the Hebrews ; its destruction was another indication of the spirit by 
which Asa was actuated. The only defect in his reformation activity, was that he did 
not at the same time abolish the high places connected with the worship of Jehovah. 

(3) 'I'he introduction into the temple of the dedicated gifts of his father and of himself. 
The former, consisting of the spoils Abijah had taken in the war with Jeroboam (ch. 
xiii. 16) — silver, gold, and vessels — had been used by the conqueror either to adorn 
some heathen temple or to enrich the royal treasury, but were now surrendered by Asa 
to the house of the Lord. The latter, composed of similar materials plundernd by him- 
self in the Cushite war (oh. xiv. 14, 15), he also presented to tlieir rightful Owner, 
Jehovah. To restore the former was as much a duty as to give up the latter. " Asa, 
like a good snn, pays his father's debts and his own " (Bishop Hall). 3. The approba- 
tion of Jehovah. Intimated by the fact that for the next twenty years the land enjoyed 
rest (ver. 19). " When a man's wnys please God, he maketh even his enemies to be at 
peace with him " (Prov. xvi. 7). Were nations to please God by their ways, he would 
" make wars cease to the end of the earth " (Ps. xlvi. 9). 

Learn : 1. The stimulus good men derive from God's Word, exemplified in the effect 
produced upon Asa by Oded's prophecy (ver. 8). 2. The purifying power of true reli- 
gion on the soul — symbolized by Asa's purgation of the land (ver. 8). 3. The atti-active 
influence upon others of those who have God with them — seen in the rallying of tlie 
pious round Asa (ver. 9). 4. The supreme duty of individuals and nations — to seek 
the Lord (ver. 12). 5. The lawfulness of men covenanting with each other for such 
a purpose, but not of cfimpelling others (ver. 13). 6. The necessity in religion of 
proving the heart's sincerity by the hand's activity and liberality (vers. 11, 18). 7. The 
propriety of being thorough in all undertakings connected with religion — the want of 
this a defect in Asa (ver. 17). — W. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTEB XVL 



The contents of this chapter fall easily 
into three parts : Asa's conflict with Baasha 
(vers. 1—6; parallel,! Kings xv. 16—22); 
Hanani's rebuke of Asa, and Asa's 111 recep- 
tion of it (vers. 7 — 10); the disease, death, 
and burial of Asa (vers. 11 — 11 ; parallel, 1 
Kings XV. 23, 24). 

Ver. 1. — For the six and thirtieth year, 
lead Ux and twentieth. Bamah belonged to 
Benjamin (Josh, xviii 21, 25, 28), and lay 
between Bethel and Jerusalem, about five oi 
■ix Boman miles from each; but Keil and 
Bertheau, by some error, call it thirty mUes 
from Jerusalem, having very likely in their 
eye Bamah of Samuel, in Ephraim. The 
word signifies " lofty," and the present history 
speaks the importance of its position, and 
would infer also that Israel had regained 
Bethel, which, with other adjacent places, 
Abijah had wrested from Jeroboam (cb. 
xiii. 19). The reference of Isa. x. 28, 29, 
32 is exceedingly interesting, and bespeaks 
the fact that Bamah commanded another 
intersecting route from Ephraim. When it 
is said here that Baasha built ()?'^) Bamah, 
iba meaning is that be was beginning to 



strengthen it greatly, and fortify it The 
object of Baasha, wMcIi no doubt needed no 
stating in the facts of the day, is now stated 
by history. 

Ver. 2. — The writer of Chronicles omits 
the pedigree of this Benhadad King of Syria, 
given in the parallel " the son of Tabrimon, 
tiie son of Hezion." Benhidri is the name 
of Benhadad in the Assyrian monuments. 
The Septuagint gives " Ader," which tallies 
with it. For Damascus, we have here Dar- 
meseJc, instead of t lie more usual Vammesek 
of the parallel and Gen. xv. 2; the reth 
representing (as in Syriac) the dagesh forte 
in mem. The parallel (1 Kings xv. 18) says 
that Asa took all the silver and the gold 
left in tlie treasures, etc. ; but the reading 
" left " should very possibly (see Septuagint 
Version) be " found," the Hebrew characters 
easily permitting it. 

Ver. 3. — The alliance of the King of Syria 
was sought now by one kingdom, now by 
the other. On what occasion Abijah made 
league with the king, the history does not 
say, either here or in the parallel, nor when 
he or his son resigned it. For there is, read 
" Let there be a league between me and thee, 
as between my father and thy father ; " the 
si 101 1 cut which Asa thought to take now 
to his object was not the safe nor right one. 



OH. XVI. 1—14.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



193 



Vei. 4.— Benhadad was apparently not 
very long in making up either his mind or 
his method. The bribe that tempted him, 
drawn from " the treasures " described, well 
replenished (oh. xv. 18 ; and parallel, 1 Kings 
XV. 15), was probably large. His method 
was to create a diversion in favour of his 
new ally, by " smiting " certain picked and 
highly important cities of Israel, mostly in 
northei-n Galilee, by name ''Ijon, Dan, 
Abel-maim, and all the store-cities of Naph- 
tali." Ijon. In Naphtali, mentioned only 
now, in the parallel, and when a second time 
taken (2 Kings xv. 29) by Tiglath-Pileser. 
Dan. The colonizing of this city is given in 
Jiidg. xviii. 1, 2, 29—31 ; it was originally 
called Laish, and became the northern land- 
mark of the whole country, as in the ex- 
pression, "from Dan even to Beershcba" 
(Judg. xviii. 29 ; xx. 1). Abel-maim. Tljis 
place was situate at the foot of the Lebanon ; 
in the parallel (1 Kings xv. 20) it is called 
Abel-beth-maachah. It is again mentioned 
as attacked by Tiglatli-Pileser, who wrested 
it from Pekah (2 Kings xv. 29). In 2 Sam. 
XX. 18, 14, 15 it is called Abel by itself, but 
in the last two of these verses Beth-maaohah 
is mentioned in close connection with it. 
After this name the parallel gives also " all 
Cinneroth" (Septuagint, "all the land of 
Ciunereth "). The name is the original of 
the New Testament Gennesaret. It was a 
city (Josh. six. 35) that gave its name to 
the sea and western region of the lake, 
sometimes called so (Numb, xxxiv. 11; 
Josh. xi. 2 ; xii. 3). If there were a little 
more external evidence of it, we should in- 
cline to the opinion of Movers, that the 
"all Cinneroth" of the paiallel is the 
ni33pB-'73 ("all the store-cities") of our 
present verse. But at present we may take 
it that the two records supplement one 
another. All the store-cities of Naphtali 
(see oh. xxxii. 28 ; viii. 6 and its parallel, 
1 Kings ix. 19). 

Ver. 5. — And let his work cease. The 
parallel has not this, but follows the exact 
previous sentence with this, " and dwelt in 
Tirzah." It is the happy suggestion of one 
commentator (Professor James G. Murphy, 
'Handbook: Chronicles') that this sentence 
may betray that it had been Baasha's inten- 
tion to reside in Bamah. 

Ver. 6. — The affair seems thus to have come 
to an unbloody termination. The parallel 
(1 Kings XV. 22) is so much the more graphic 
that it contains the two additions that Asa 
"made a proclamation throughout all Jud ah," 
and one that " exempted none " from joining 
in the duty of moving all the stones and all 
the timber from Bamah, and diverting them 
to the use of building Geba and Mizpah. 
This greatly contributed to command the 
road from the north to Jerusalem. Geba. 

II. CHRONICLES. 



This was Geba of Benjamin, as clearly 
stated in the parallel. It was a position 
north of Eamah, whether opposite Miohmash 
and the modern Jeha is not certain, as some 
think this answers toGibeah of Saul (1 Sam. 
xiv. 2, 5). Mizpah (see Jer. xli. 2, 3, 9, 10). 
This Mizpah is not that of the Shefelah 
(Josh. XV. 38), but was situate about two 
hours, or a short six miles, north-west of 
Jerusalem, on the Samaria route, and is 
probably the modern Neby Samwil (see also 
2 Kings XXV. 22—26 ; Jer. xl. 6— xli. 18). 

Vers. 7, 8. — The very impressive episode 
of four verses begun by the seventh verse is 
not found in the parallel. The fact furnishes 
clear indication that our compiler was not 
indebted to the writer of Kings for material. 
And the moral aspects of the matter here 
preserved by the compiler of Chronicles 
show the paramount reasons why he would 
not miss bringing it to Ihe front for the 
returned people's better religious education. 
Presumably Hanani the seer is the father of 
that other faithful seer and prophet Jehu, 
who appeared to Baasha (1 Kings xvL 1, 7) 
and to Jehoshaphat (ch. xix. 1, 2). There- 
fore is the host of the King of Byria escaped 
out of thy hand. It is plain that, reading 
the lines only, this expression (remarkable 
considering its following close upon success- 
ful help given by Benhadad, and help un- 
accompanied, so far as we are told, by any 
infidelity or untoward circumstance), sug- 
gests option of expla^iation, and would en- 
gender the supposition that something very 
threatening was on the horizon, at any rate. 
But reading between the lines, and giving 
due weight to the significance of the illus- 
tration adduced of the combined Ethiopians 
and Iiubim (ch. xiv. 9 — 15), we may war- 
rantably judge that Hanani's inspired lan- 
guage went a cut deeper, and meant that if 
the alliance had been not broken between 
Benhadad and Baasha, both would surely 
have been taken in one net (Ps. oxxiv. 7), 
as they would have entered into the conflict 
in alliance. A decisive victory over the 
King of Syria would have been any way 
a grand day in the history of Judah ; but 
such a victory over the Kings of Syria and 
of tlie northern schismatic kingdom would 
have been more than a doubly grand day ; 
it would have been a tenfold demonstration 
of God's judgment, that " though hand join 
in hand, yet shall not the wicked go un- 
punished" (see particularly same Hebrew 
verb used of a bird escaped in Ps. oxxiy. 7). 

Ver. 9. — Then shalt have wars. Although 
this language at first seems to be intended 
for very specific application to Asa, yet as 
we do not read of individual wars occurring 
after this in his own time, it is quite within 
a just interpretation of it if we read it as 
referring to the inevitable experience of the 



194 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xvi. 1— 19. 



kingdom. Its head and king had jnst 
thrown away the opportunity of blocking 
out one ever-threatening enemy. What more 
natural consequence than that wars should 
rush in the rather as a flood, in the after- 
times 7 

Ver. 10. — A prison-house; literally, He- 
brew, the house of the JiaeriD; i.e. "of the 
twisting or distortion;" <.«. "the stocks." 
The word occurs three other times only, all 
of them in Jeremiah, viz. zx. 2, 3 ; xxix. 26. 
(For a forcible parallel, see 1 Kings xxii. 
27.) And Asa oppressed some of the people 
the same time. This may throw some ex- 
planatory, though no exculpatory, light on 
Asa's wrath and violence towards Hanani; 
for it probably marks that either some 
goodly portion of the wiser of the people 
had anticipated of their own common sense 
the matter of the message of Hanani the 
seer, or that they had not failed to follow 
it \rith some keenly sympathetic remarks. 
For our Authorized Version, "oppressed," 
read a stronger verb, as " crushed." 

Ver. 11. — This verse, with the following 
three, is repres( nted by the very summarized 
but sufficiently significant parallel of 1 Kings 
XV. 23, 24. Note that the reference work cited 
in this verse as the hook of the kings of 
Jndah and Israel, is in the paralled cited as 
" the book of the chronicles of the kings of 
Jndah." Of course, the latter citation was 
much the earlier in point of time. 

Ver. 12. — Bis disease was exceeding great. 
Perhaps a somewhat more literal rendering 
will more correctly express the emphasis 
of the original, e.g. his disease was great even 
to excess. For yet, read emphatically, cmd 
also; tlie historian purposing to say that as, 
in his fear of Baasha, he had not sought the 
Lord, but Beiihadad, so, in his excessive 
illness also, he had not sought the Lord, but 
the physicians! 

Ver. 13. — Amid the frequent uncertainties 
of the chronology, we are glad to get some 
dates fixed by the agreement of testimonies. 
JS.g. this place and the parallel state clearly 
thai Asa's reign was one that lasted to its 
forty-first year. The parallel, however (1 
Kings XV. 28), makes this date one and the 
same thing with hia "old age," while no 
manipulation of dates can make him (the 
grandson of Eehoboam and son of Abijah) 
more than about fifty. And it ia somewhat 
remarkable that, when introduced to us as 
succeeding to the throne, nothing is said of 
his tender youth (as, for instance, u said in 
the case of Josiah, 2 Kings xxii. 1 ; xxxiv. 
1 — 3). Nevertheless, the apparent promi- 
nence of Maachah awhile would tally with 
the circumstance of Asa's youth at his ac- 
cession. Another correspondence in Josiah's 
career is noticeable; for it is distinctly said 
that when he was only twelve years of age 



(ch. xxxiv. 3) "he began to purge Jodah 
and Jerusalem from the high places," eto. 
At a similarly youthful age Asa, therefore, 
may be credited with doing the like, while 
later on he took more stringent measures, 
as for instance with Maachah, the queen- 
mother. 

Ver. 14. — In his own sepnlchies ; Hebrew, 
)<inn?P ; fem. plur. of ■njs. The plural de- 
signates, of course, the range of burial com- 
partments that formed the tomb of one 
person or family. So Job ivii. 1, where 
the masa plur. is used, "h D'Tlfj. In the 
city of David (see note on ch. xit 16). In 
the bed; Hebrew, s^^'o. The use or associa- 
tions of this word (found about fifty times) 
are almost entirely, if not entirely, those of 
the bed of nightly rest, even when not at 
the time speaking of nightly rest ; and this 
is the first and only occasion that it is em- 
ployed to link the grave in kindly analogy 
with the couch of bodily repose during life- 
time. The fact might have suggested Bishop 
Ken's lines in the evening hymn — 

" Teach me to live, that I may dread 
The grave as little as my bed." 

In the present instance, however, the writer, 
whoever he was (query, was he the compiler 
of our Chronicles, or his original?), is doubt- 
less led to the analogy by considerations 
more earthly than those enshrined in Ken's 
hymn, viz. by the somewhat " vain show " 
of attractiveness and fragrance (probably 
designed partly for preservative purposes) 
with which the place was filled, and which 
were among even patriarchal indications of 
faith in a future etete. Sweet odoors; He- 
brew, D<Db'3. Of the twenty-nine times that 
this word occurs in Exodus, Kings, and 
Chronicles, Esther, Canticles, Isaiah, and 
Ezekiel, it is rendered in the Authorized 
Version " spices" twenty-four times, "sweet 
cinnamon" once, "sweet calamus" once, 
and " sweet odours " or " sweet smell " three 
times. The chief and determining refer- 
ences are those in Exod. xxv. 6; xxx. 23; 
XXXV. 8, 28. And divers kinds; Hebrew, 
wm; plur. of )t; from the root, ]J|; unustd, 
but probably one with an Arabic root, mean- 
ing " to shape ; " hence our noun, meaning 
a hind or tpeeies, used here and Fs. cxliv. 
13 (where the margin renders literally, "from 
kind to kind"), and in the Chaldee of Dan. 
iii. 5, 7, 10, 15. Prepared ; Hebrew, vnp^ ; 
solitary occurrence of pnal oonjngation "of 
the root nfyj, "to spice," i.e. to spice, season, 

or prepare oil for ointment purposes. This 
root occurs in kal future once (Exod. xxx. 33); 
in kal part, poel five times (Exod. xxx. 25, 
35 ; xxxvii. 29 ; 1 Chron. ix. 30 ; Eccles. x. 
1): and in hiph. infin. once (Ezek. zxiv. 



OH. XVI. 1—14.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



195 



10). By the apothecaries' art; Hebiew, 
nj^l/D nnpl!?3. Translate the clause, and 
cUven hinds compounded hy the compounding 
of art, which means to say spices skilfully 
treated and wrought into ointments by pro- 
fessional hands. A very great burning; 
literally, and they humed for him a burning 



great even to an exceeding extent. The burn- 
ing is not the burning of 1 Sam. xxxi. 12, 
13 (oomp. 2 Sara. xxi. 10—12 ; 1 Chron. x. 
12), but the burning of spices, indicated by 
the language of our ch. zxL 19 and Jer. 
xxxiv. 5. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 14. — The disappointing relapse of what had seemed tried worth, knowledge, 
and proved goodness. Mournful to the last degree is the impression made on us by 
what we are given to learu last of the career of King Asa. It is a reversal — not the 
reversal from ba(i to good, but of what seemed good and seemed sure, to bad. The 
humiliating lesson and fresh illustration of human caprice and weakness must be in 
like spirit and with proportionate humility noted and learned by ourselves. It is, 
indeed, a chapter of biography which brings again to our lips the reproving and stirring 
question of the apostle, " Ye did run well ; who did hinder you that ye should not obey 
the truth ? " and which reminds us also of language of far lower inspiration (Keble's 
' Christian Year : ' Eighth Sunday after Trinity) — 

" The grey-haired saint may fail at last, 
The surest guide a wanderer prove ; 
Death only binds us fast 
To the bright shore of love." 

Among all uncertainties, mournful is the certainty of human uncertainty, and neces- 
sary the prolongation of human probation to the extreme limit of life. Let us listen 
with fresh veneration to the just expression of the virtual beatitude of final perse- 
verance, as pronounced by the lips of Jesus Christ himself, " He that endureth to the 
end shall be saved." Side by side with the broad lesson of human fickleness and 
liability in the very end to fall, there seem to be peculiarities attending the present 
history which may yield something to careful notice and analysis, which are replete 
indeed with instruction, and with the fiuer of the suggestions of caution and warning. 
Thus, for instance — 

I. That Asa was wicked and tempted to defection was probably lakqelt 

DUE TO THE CL0SUNES8 OF THE PRESSURE OF APPREHENSION IN A DOUBLE SENSE. Family 

quarrels are, to a proverb, the bitterest. The foe, the competing king, the dissentient 
people, were abiding neij:hbours — nay, of one and the same house, though that a house 
divided against itself. All this, no doubt, should have had exactly the contrary effect, 
but did not. As in great stress of illness, and under great pressure of mortal appre- 
hension brought close home, men will often resort to the trial of remedies, and flee to 
medical aid they had been the first to disdain and the loudest to condemn under 
milder and less domestic circumstances, so, strange though it were, the subtle influence 
worked upon Asa, which was powerless to delude him when it was Zerah of Ethiopia, 
' and not Baasha of Israel, who was the confronting enemy. 

II. Conversely, Asa was probably deluded into supposing that the nearer 

DANGER, FROM THE NEAUER FOE AND NEIOHBO0B FOB, WAS A DANGER HE COULD BETTER 
COPE WITH BY HIS OWN UNAIDED RESOURCES, HIS OWN SUPPOSED WISDOM, AND HIS OWN 

SUFFICIENT DIPLOMACY. It is too true that the more distant enemy vve are prone to 
fear more than the enemy, who is really tenfold dangerous, because he is so near us, 
and very probably has this great and subtle consequent advantage, that he knows us 
and our weak points better than we know them or know ourselves. There is even such 
a thing as the Church having greater zeal for the heathen far off than for those worse 
heathen (and more to be pitied for themselves) who are dread corrosion and canker to 
the whole body politic at home. It means that men have greater fear of the enemy at 
a distance than of the serpent in their own bosom ! Even Christian men are uncon- 
sciously the victims of such beguilement. Distance lends enchantment sometimes ; 
distance lends large-looming apprehension sometimes. But in the matter of our enemy 
sin, it is ever one thing that constitutes our chiefest danger — its nearness ; the great 



196 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xvi. 1—14. 

ri^k of our overlooking it, because of familiarity with its countenance; of our trifling 
with it, because we underrate its power to hurt ; and of our flattering ourselyes that 
we must be a match for so near a neighbour. 

III. Asa in an evil moment falls back upon a mischibvotts memory of a 
father's eekor instead of a holt memory of a father's excellence. He 
recalls his father's league with the King of Syria to copy it, and adopt it, and furbish 
up afresh its dishonourable conditions. He relies on that king, and forgets to "rely on 
the Lord his God," who had but so lately shown him such wouderful deliverance. He 
relies on that King of Syria, and gets his work done apparently ; but it was done also but 
very partially, very slightlj', very temporarily, and at this immense penalty that " the 
host of that King of Syria would escape out of his hand;" the meaning of which 
sentence was only too plain, taught by too many an analogy. The help God gives he 
does give. The help we buy of sin, of guilty compromise, of doubtful friendship, we 
buy dear often to begin with ; but before we have done with our l)argain, we find it 
dear indeed, wastefully dear, exhaustingly dear, ruinously dear! 

IV. Asa bought his help at grievous and sacrilegious expenditure. The 
things he should have kept for God, his people, and his temple and its worship, he 
takes from them. 

V. Asa lost all command over himself. He is wroth with the faithful seer ; 
he was "in a rage" with him for "this very thing," that he was faithful; he 
imprisons him, because he cannot imprison the truth; "and oppresses some of the 
people at the same time." All went wrong with him, for all was wrong in him. 
Disease, exoeedin.; great, overtakes him; but he had lost mora? force, for even then "he 
sought not to the Lord, but to the physicians." A long life and a very long reign close 
under the cloud. These Jtad been good in him; and though he dies an unhonoured 
death, he goes to a not unhonoured burial and sepulchre; but they were what "he had 
made for himself," and the fragrance and perfume of which were " of the apothecaries' 
art"! 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — Preferable things. This cannot be counted among the estimable acts 
of Asa; we could wish that he had adopted other means for repelling the attack of 
Baasha — means more worthy of himself as a servant of Jehovah. The abstraction of 
the gold and silver from the treasury of the house of the Lord may speak to us of the 
preferableness of — 

I. Acquisition that we cannot lose. The custodians of the temple no doubt 
rejoiced when Asa " brought into the house of God the things that his father had 
defeated, and that he himself had dedicated, silver, and gold, and vessels " (ch. xv. 18). 
But it was not many years before they endured the mortification of seeing these 
valuable things carrieil out again to enrich the foreigner — possibly to be taken to one 
of his temples. No great acquisition was this. The temple at Jerusalem was more 
truly blessed by the genuine prayers and praises and sacrifices oEfered within its pre- 
cincts, albeit there was nothing left of them that the eye of man could see or his hand 
could finger. And what are our best, our real possessions ? Not the gold and silver, 
the vessels and the jewels of which the thief may rob us, or some revolution in the 
market may deprive us ; they aie the knowledge, the wisdom, the purer tastes and 
appreciations, the higher and more ennobling atfections — the treasures of the spirit, 
which "no thief can break through and steal," which are not dependent upon the 
chances of commerce, or the conflicts of armies, or the passage of time. 

II. Service that cannot be recalled. Of little use, indeed, to the temple at 
Jerusalem was the treastire which Asa first carried in and then " brought out." Of 
comparatively little service to our friends and neighbours is the temporary service we 
render them — the money which we require again soon, the favour which is to be 
" returned," the " friendship " which the first small misunderstanding will disturb and 
perhaps dissolve. But there are services which, once rendered, cannot be recalled, 

cannot be " brought out " of the treasury, under any change of mood or circumstance 

knowledge, and the power which it imparts for all the after-duty and struggle of life- 
counsel, which guided the feet through some labyrinth of difficulty and led them into 



CH. XVI. 1—14.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHEONICLES. 197 



" a large room ; " comfort, which sustained the spirit in darkest and most dangerous 
hours, delivering from despair, restoring to equanimity and hope ; influence, gently and 
graciously constraining the soul to enter "the kingdom which cannot be moved," 
within whose blessed boundariea are found present peace and immortal joy. Live to 
do good which cannot be undone ; to impart that which no mortal hand can take back 
again ; to confer that gift whieb is secure for ever. 

ni. A TEAKLESS FAITH BATHEE THAN A DUBIOUS EXPEDIENCY. It is true that 

Asa achieved a certain triumph ; his plan succeeded — for the time. He bought 
Benhadad's help with this consecrated treasure, and obliged Baasha to retire, leavmg 
some spoil behind him (vers. 4 — 6). But might he not have succeeded in another way 
and by worthier means? If he had committed his cause, his country's security, to the 
strength and faithfuluess of his God, would he not have prevailed at least as well as he 
did by taking consecrated wealth out of the temple of Jehovah? Would not he who 
delivered the vast hordes of the Ethiopians into his hands (oh. xiv. 12) have saved 
him from the designs of Baasha? (see vers. 7, 8). And would he not have prospered 
in that way, without having this act of violation on his conscience, without having 
this blot upon his record ? A fearless faith in God is better than recourse to a doubtful 
expediency. The latter very often fails to accomplish the purpose in hand ; and it 
always does some injury to the character, lowering the stamlard of behaviour, and 
leaving some blemish on the life. Take the higher road in the journey of life — the 
way of perfect uprightness, of simple, childlike trust in God. That is the path which 
leads to true success ; even if there should be present apparent defeat, it is sure to 
conduct to a glorious victory in the end. — C. 

Ver. 9. — Divine observation and interposition. Hanani the seer was evidently 
a man who was not only bold and brave enough to confront the king with a rebuke, 
but he was one who had a keen sense of thi; near presence and power of the Lord 
"before whom he stood." We may very well believe that it was the latter which 
explained the former. Let us heed his doctrine while we admire his fidelity. 

I. God's active obsebvanoe op individual men. These vigorous words (of the 
text) indicate the prophet's belief that God was observing men everywhere, was 
actively observing them " run to and fro," and was drawing distinctions between the 
life of one man and another. God's particular and individual observation has been, not 
unnaturally, objected to on the ground of our human littleness. How can we expect, 
how can we believe, that the Eternal One would concern himself with the doings or 
negligences of creatures so remote, so unimportant, so infinitesimally minute as we 
are ? Surely, it is said, such consideration is beneath him. But there are two thoughts 
which meet this objection and correct this conclusion. 1. The infinitude of God. For 
that includes the infinitely small as well as the infinitely great; it is a distinct denial 
of this attribute of God, for it is a limitation of his infinity, to maintain that there is 
one direction to which his power and action do not extend. The infinitude of God 
positively requires us to believe that he is observant of the hearts and lives of indi- 
vidual men. 2. The fatherhood of God. Granted that our human spirits are nearly 
allied to him, share his own likeness, stand in conscious relation to him ; are capable of 
loving, serving, following him; can live on earth the life he lives in heaven, are thig 
and do this in such sense and degree that we can be rightly called and considered his 
sons and daughters, — and there is no more objection to be taken. Shall not the Divine 
Father of his human family take particular notice of each one of his children ? What 
fatherhood is that which considers his own child to be unworthy of his notice ? 

II. The DISTINCTIONS HE DRAWS BETWEEN THEM. 1. He divides all men into two 
classes — the evil and the good (see Prov. xv. 3) ; between those " who fear him and 
those who fear him not ; " between those " who are righteous " and those who •' do 
evil " (see Ps. xxxiv. 15, 16). 2. He divides the good into two classes — the imperfectly 
and the perfectly devoted. There are those who seek not the Lord " with their whole 
heart," and those who do thus seek him; those whose "heart is not perfect," and 
those whose " heart is perfect " toward him. This distinction is not absolute. The 
less devoted of the servants of God have their better hours and their nobler impulses ; 
while the more devoted have their lapses and their blemishes. Asa "did that which 
was good and right in the eyes of the Lord " (ch. liv. 2) ; he and his people " sought 



198 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xvi. 1—14 

the Lord . . . with all their heart and with all their soul " (ch. xv. 12) ; yet here we 
find him erring, lacking confidence in God, and " going down " to Syria for help. But 
taking this into account, it remains true that God distinguishes clearly between those 
of his servants who are but faint-hearted and feeble in his lerTice, and those who give 
themselves to him " with their whole desire." Let there be so thorough and so com- 
plete a dedication of ourselves, of our powers and of our resources and of our time, to 
the Person and the cause of our Divine Saviour, that we shall be counted by him 
among those "whose heart is perfect toward him." We may attain to this, although 
we may have much still to learn and to acquire as his disciples (see Phil. iii. 12 — 15). 
m. HiB INTERPOSITION ON OUB BEHALF. God would certainly have interposed on 
behalf of Asa, would have " shown himself strong " in his behalf. He would, said 
Hanani, have given him a far greater success than that which he attained by his gifts 
and negotiations with Benhadad (ver. 7). God always succours his faithful ones. 
1. He may deliver them from their distress; as he had delivered Asa already, and did 
afterwards deliver Hezekiah. He may give us the victory over our enemies from 
without — over bodily ill, over opposing circumstances; he may cause us to triumph as 
"men count" triumph. 2. Or he may grant us deliverance in our distress; he may 
grant us such spiritual elevation that we shall " glory in our infirmity," shall " rejoice 
that we are counted worthy to suffer," shall bear the noble testimony of perfect con- 
tentment with the inferior position (John iii. 29) ; and thus (literally) " show himself 
strong in those whose heart is devoted to him " (Keil'a translation). — C. 

Vers. 10 — 14. — Lessons/rom last yean. We could well wish the account of the last 
dkys of Asa to have been different from what it is. Sombre clouds, casting a chill 
shadow, gathered in the evening sky. Not that there was actual defection, but there 
was an amount of infirmity that detracts from the honour which his earlier years had 
laid up for him. We cannot help feeling — 

L That age id not always as tenebable as it should be ; not even a " good 
old age ; " not even Christian old age. Having enjoyed so much of privilege, and 
having passed through so much discipline, it ought to exemplify the lessons it has had 
opportunity to learn — ^it ought to be calia, pure, steadfast, reverent, godly, pervaded 
with a Christian spirit. But it is not always thus. Men may be always learning, but 
never wise ; men may pass through a very forest of privileges and of opportunities, and 
never pluck any fruit from its trees. And if we do not gather the good which is to be 
gained as we go on our way through life, we shall sink into an old age in which wa 
have attained nothing and lost much. We must see to it that we do grow as we live ; 
that we are laying up a store of wisdom and of worth that will make old age honourable 
and beloved. It is sometimes bare and unbeautiful enough; but it may "stiU bring 
forth fruit," and be fair to see as it stands in the garden of the Lord. 

II. That one false step is yeby likely to lead to anotheb. Asa, having 
made the serious mistake of resorting to the Syrian king instead of trusting in the 
Lord, now violently resents the rebuke of the prophet of Jehovah ; and he even pro- 
ceeds to an act of positive persecution ; and, having gone thus far, he goes yet further 
by some acts of severity, probably directed against those who sympathized with the 
imprisoned prophet. Thus wrong leads to wrong, sin to sin. It is the constant course 
of things. Equivocation leads to falsehood ; impurity of thought to indelicacy of 
speech and licentiousness of action ; sternness of spirit to cruelty of conduct ; irregu- 
larity in worship to ungodliness, etc. And not only does faultiness commonly lead to 
sin in the same direction, but, as in this case, it often leads to wrong-doing in another 
direction. When the heart is led astray from God, and his will is disregarded in one 
thing, it is only too likely that that holy will wiU be defied in another thing. We may 
well shun the first wrong step, for we have no conception of the consequences it may 
entail. A wrong act, and still more a wrong course, leaves the heart exposed to the 
designs of the enemy ; it is often found to be the first of a series. 

in. That bbctitude is paetly, even laboely, a matteb op pbopobtioh. 
(Ver. 12.) Asa rightly enough consulted his physicians and leaned on their profes- 
sional skill ; he was wrong in placing too implicit and too great a reliance upon them : 
he did not remember, as he should have done, that all human means avail nothing 
without the blessing of God. He had not enough of the spirit of the psalmist in 



OH. XIV. 1—14.] T.iE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 199 

him (Pi. xxxiii. 17 — 21). To trust in God and to neglect the various sources of health 
and Btreno:th he offers us — this is a foolish fanaticism which will bear its penalty in 
suffering and weakness. To resort to human science and to trust it, forgetful of the 
truth that we can do nothing at all independently of the Divine power — this is impiety. 
True godliness is found in a wise admixture, a true proportion, of diligence and devo- 
tion, of self-reliance and self-surrender, of accepting the help of man and looking for 
the blessing of God. 

IV. That we should judob our coktehfobaries, not bt the last thing they 
BID, BUT BT ALL THAT THEY WERE. His subjects, when he died, did not remember 
against him the infirmities of his last days ; they considered what had been his 
character and his course all through his long reign, and " they made a very great 
burning for him " (ver. 14). Here they were right. Whether they be of the living 
or the departed, we should not judge our fellow men by one or two exceptional acts, 
which may be uu like them and unworthy of them ; but by the spirit of their life, by the 
principles by which they were guided throughout, by the character they built up.— C. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — A king'i {Asa's) mistake. I. When it happened. " In the six and 
thirtieth year of the reign of Asa " (ver. 1). 1. An ohvious error. Baasha ascended 
the throne of Israel in Asa's third year (1 Kings xv. 33), and died in his twenty-sixth 
(1 Kings xvi. 8). Yet it follows not that this blunder was in the original text. Most 
likely it crept in through transcription. The existence of such mistakes is not fatal to 
the claim of Scripture to be regarded as inspiied. 2. A probable solution. Different 
explanations have been given. (1) The thiity-six years of ver. 1 should be reckoned 
from the separation of the kingdoms (Usher, Jamieson) ; but against this stands the 
fact that the thiity-six years are stated to have belonged to the reign of Asa, while 
the assertion that no war occurred in Judah for thirty-five years after its commence- 
ment as a separate kingdom is incorrect (ch. xiii. 2). (2) In ch. xv. 19, instead of "thirty- 
five" should be read "five," and in ch. xvi. 1, instead of "thirty-six" should be inserted 
" six" (Vaihinger in Herzog, Thenius, Bahr). Thus the war with Zerah would be later than 
the attack of Baasha, though reported before it ; and the connection of the verses would 
be, " There was no war unto the fifth year of the reign of Asa ; but in the sixth year 
Baasha came up." This shatters itself upon the two facts that Asa's reign began with 
ten years of quiet (ch. xiv. 1), and that Zerah's invasion must have been before Baasha's 
attack (ch. xvi. 8). To be sure, as numbers are being altered generally, the "ten" of 
ch. xiv. 1 might be changed into "five;" but Hanani, in ch. xvi. 8, could hardly speak 
of the Ethiopian invasion as an historical fact if it had not then taken place. (3) The 
six and thirtieth year should be the five and twentieth (Adam Clarke). In favour of 
this may be urged that it is a fair guess. (4) The text should be " in the sixteenth 
year of the reign of Asa" (Bertheau, Keil, Ewald, Kleinert in Eiehm). The chronology 
of Asa's reign would thus run : (a) Ten years of quiet (oh. xiv. 1), in the third of which 
Baasha usurps the supreme authority in Israel (1 Kings xv. 33) ; (6) the invasion of 
Zerah (ch. xiv. 9) between the tenth and fifteenth years, probably in the fourteenth ; 
(c) the national covenant in the fifteenth year (ch. xv. 10) ; (d) in the sixteenth the 
threatening advance of Baasha (ch. xvi. 1). The statement that Judah was exempt 
from war until the thirty-fifth year of Asa (ch. xv. 19) may be harmonized with that 
in 1 Kings xv. 16, 32, that " there was war between Asa and Baasha King of Israel 
all their days," by assuming that there was latent hostility between the two kingdoms 
from the first, but no outbreak of war until Asa's thirty-fifth year (Keil) — the attack 
here recorded not having culminated in any collision between the two powers on the 
field of battle, the work of causing Baasha to withdraw having been entrusted to 
Benhadad. 

II. How IT WAS OCCASIONED. By Baasha's advance against Judah (ver. 1). 1. The 
history of Baasha. The son of Ahijah, of the house of Issacliar — not of Ahijah ttie 
prophet, who was an Ephraimite of Shiloh (1 Kings xi. 29) — Baasha appears to have 
been originally a person of obscure station, though he afterwards rose to be a captain in 
the army of Nadab, Jeroboam's son, as Zimri subsequently was in that of Elah, Baasha's 
son (1 Kings xvi. 9). Duriug the siege of Gibbethon he conspired against his master, 
smote him and usurped his throne. Not content with this, he put the whole house oi 
Jeroboam to the sword — an act of cruelty which rebounded on himself and his housp 



200 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xvi. 1—14 



(1 Kings xvi. 12). In the twelfth year of his reign he formed the plan here narrated 
for inflicting a blow upon Jiidah and Asa. 2. The character of Baasha. More than 
likely a soldier of distinguished bravery (1 Kings xvi. 5), he was little other than a 
monster of cruelty (1 Kings xv. 29) — two qualities not often allied. The true hero is 
seldom cruel ; the cruel man is seldom brave. A faithful follower of Jeroboam in the 
matter of religion, he was an ardent idolater and a persistent corrupter of the people 
(1 Kings xvi. 2). 3. The project of Baasha. To furtify Eamah, the modern Er-Bam, 
in Benjamin (Josh, xviii. 25; Judg. xix. 3), about five miles north of Jerusalem. This 
town, which properly belonged to Judah — not to Israel (Bahr, Bertheau) — but -which 
Abijah had taken from Jeroboam (ch. xiii. 19), Baasha had not previously conquered 
(EwaJd), but at that time seized. His object probably was (1) to cut off all traffic 
between the kingdoms — in fact, blockade Jerusalem — that the southern kingdom might 
be forced to capitulate (Bwald, Bahr) ; (2) to prevent alliance between Jiidah and any 
power north of Israel (Bertheau) ; and (3) to obtain a footing within the territory of 
Judah as a basis for future operations (Josephus). 

III. In what it consisted. In three things. 1. Not repairing to Jehovah for 
assistance against Baasha, as he had formerly done against Zerah (ch. xiv. 11). Perhaps 
he deemed Baasha a more manageable opponent than the Ethiopian leader had been — 
an adversary that might be cuped with successfully by his own craft, without calling in 
the battalions of Jehovah. Or, his preceding prosperity may have been his ruin, and 
this may have been the turning-point on that downward path of spiritual degeneracy 
which he pursued until he died. On any supposition it was an act of unbelief, and as 
such a sin; and, considering the success of his former application to Jehovah, an act 
of folly, and therefore a blunder as well as a sin. This he afterwards learnt from Hanani 
(ver. 9). 2. Seeking a league with Benhadad of Syria. (Ver. 2.) This Benhadad, or 
son of Ader (LXX.) — in the Assyrian inscriptions Bin-hidri, the son of Hadar, the supreme 
divinity of Damascus (Schrader, ' Die Keilinsohriften,' p. 200) — was the son of Tabrimon, 
the son of Hezion, the King of Syria (1 Kings xv. 18). Damascus, his capital — in 
Hebrew Bammesek, in Assyrian Dimaski and Dimmaska, in Arabic Dimesch-esch-Schdm, 
or shortly, esch-Scham — had been a town in the days of Abraham (Gen. xiv. 15 ; xv. 2), 
and is still one of the few towns of antiquity that have never lost their primitive 
splendour and renown. ' It has been styled " the pearl of the Orient, the beautiful as 
Eden, the fragrant Paradise, the plumage of the Paradise peacock, the coloured collar 
of the ring-dove, the necklace of beauty, the door of Caaba, the eye of the East, the 
Eden of the Moslem," with other such hyperbolical expressions (Riehm's ' Hami worter- 
buch,' art. " Damascus ;" cf. Stanley's ' Sinai and Palestine,' pp. 414, etc. ; ' Picturesque 
Palestine,' iii. 143, etc.). Its king was at this time in league with Baasha, who hoped 
with his assistance to subdue the southern kingdom. He was thus an enemy to Judah, 
as his predecessor Rezon had beeu to the united empire (1 Kings xi. 25) ; and Asa might 
have reasoned, that not much help of a genuine kind could be obtained from him, least 
of all by such a stratagem as that adopted. 3. Resorting to bribery in order to gain his 
eiid. Those who use dishonourable methods to procure any advantage generally over- 
estimate the advantage they are willing in this way to buy ; and, as a consequence, 
discover in the long run they have been miserably duped. Even had Asa not been at 
fault in the value he put upon Benhadad's alliance, the means he took to gain it were 
bad. The argument addressed to Baasha should never have been employed by Asa. 
The league of Abijah with Tabrimon should never have existed to lend countenance to 
the proposed league between Asa and Benhadad. But bad actions once done are easily 
repeated by the doers of them, and imitated by the children of those doers; while 
children find less diBSculty in copying the evil than in following the good examples of 
their parents. Then Asa, while justified in attempting to dissolve the league between 
Benhadad and Baasha, should not have resorted to bribery. "A gift destroyeth the 
heart" (Eccles. vii. 7) of him that gives as of him that receives it. Far less for such 
an unhallowed purpose should he have robbed the temple, even if it had been permissible 
to displenish the palace. But not even " the treasures of the palace " should havd been 
employed in dishonourable schemes (the secret-service money of modern governments 
fikUs under this condemnation); and much less "the treasures of the Lord's house." 
Upon the guid and silver of both Cuurch and state should be inscribed, "Holiness unto 
the Lord." 



CH. XVI. 1—14.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 201 

IV. To WHAT IT CONDUCTED. Seeming success. Wicked sell ernes often appear to 
prosper for a season (Ps. xxxvii. 1 ; xcii. 7). Three things resulted from Asa's state- 
craft. 1. Benhadad accepted the bribe. (Ver. 4.) The golden and silvern keys of 
mammon can unlock the doors of most hearts. Great grace is needed to resist the 
power of money. " Wealth maketh many friends," and " every man is a friend to him 
that giveth gifts" (Prov. xix. 4, 6). Sometimes others besides wicked persons are 
guilty of " taking gifts out of their bosom" (Prov. xvii. 23). Asa's present was too 
much for Benhadad's virtue. The King of Syria deserted his ally, the King of Israel, 
for the King of Judah, as he would by-and-by desert the King of Judah for the next 
highest bidder. Nor did he merely not assist Baasha, maintaining as it were an 
attitude of armed neutrality between the hostile powers, hut he treacherously " sent 
the captains of his armies against the cities of Israel ; and they smote Ijon and Dan, 
and Abel-maim, and all the sture-cities of Naphtali " (see Exposition). Bad as Baasha 
was, and infamous as was his project, the character and conduct of Beuhadad were 
equally reprehensible and offensive. But it is no part of wicked men's creed that they 
should change not when they swear to their own hurt (Ps. xiv. 4), or that tliey should 
keep faith with one another longer than appears for their advantage so to do. Modem 
kings and statesmen are sometimes charged with acting on similar lines in the 
making and the breaking of treaties. If the charge is true, it is not to their creHif, and 
must ultimately turn to their people's hurt. 2. Baasha desisted from hisfortificatimt*. 
He left otf building fiamah, and allowed his work to cease (ver. 5). Had Baasha been 
engaged upon a good work, upon God's work, the falling away of Benhadad would have 
mattered nothing ; but being a wicked man himself, and occupied with a wicked enter- 
prise, when the prop which supported him fell, he also was precipitated to the ground. 
When creature-arms fail the saints, the saints lean the heavier on the Almighty 
Arm ; when wicked men are deprived of that in which they trust, they have nothing 
else to trust to. 3. Asa despoiled Bamah, and turned its stones and timber to his own 
use. He built therewith Geba and Mizpah (ver. 6) ; i.e. he fortified them. Both were 
in Benjamin, tlie former two miles and a half north of Ramah, on the road to 
Michmasli ; the latter thirteen miles and a half from Kamnh, on the north road from 
Jerusalem. Thus what Baasha had collected for the injury, Asa employed in the 
defence, of Judah. So believers may legitimately use the arguments and learning of 
heretics and unbelievers to establish the truth which these si'ek to overthrow (Bossuet). 
Again, whereas Baasha intended to despoil Judah, he was himself des|>oiled by both 
Benhadad (ver. 4) and Asa (ver. 6). Mischief-makers often find their mischief return 
upon their own heads, and violent dealers see their violence descend upon their own 
pates (Ps. vii. 15, 16 ; Prov. xxvi. 27 ; Matt. vii. 2). 

Lessons. 1. The lust of acquiring the true parent of war (Jas. iv. 1, 2). 2. 
The wickedness of bribery (Prov. xvii. 23) 3. The certainty of retribution (Numb. 
xxxii. 23 ; Gal. vi. 7). 4. The baseness of treachery (Prov. xxv. 19 ; xxvii. 6 ; Ohad. 
7).-W. 

Vers. 7 — 10. — I%e king and the prophet. I. The prophet's message to the kino. 
(Vers. 7 — 9.) 1. The prophet's name, danani, "Favourable" (Gesenius); otherwise 
unknown, though conjectured to be the father of " Jehu the son of Hanani," who 
announced to Baasha the ruin of his house (1 Kings xvi. 1), and afterwards appeared 
at the court of Jehoshaphat (ch. xix. 2), having probably been obliged to flee from the 
northern kingdom on account of his ill-omened communication. (1) This was the 
second time God had sent a prophet to Asa. God usually gives to men " line upon 
line, and precept upon precept " (Isa. xxviii. 10). (2) This was a second propliet God 
had sent to Asa. God has no lack of messengers to run upon his errands. When a 
word wants speaking to the Church or to the state, he can always find the man to 
apeak it (Ps. Ixviii. 11). (3) The message God sent by Hanani was different from 
that lent by Azariah. That was a word of couusel ; this, of rebuke. God always suits 
his communications to the needs of his hearers. " Every Scripture inspired by God is 
profitable," etc. (2 Tim. iii. 16). (4) Those who serve God faithfully as his messengers 
are sure to find ample remuneration. Because of this mission well executed, Hanani 
has obtained a posthumous renown, which will carry his name throughout the world 
Vid to *lie end of time (cf. Mark xiv. 9). 2. The prophet's sermon, (1) A great 



202 THE SECOND BUOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xvl 1—14. 

opportunity lost, with the reason of it. The Syrians might have been crushed, whereai 
they had escaped, because, instead of relying on Jehovah, he, Asa, had relied upon 
Benhadad (ver. 7). Compare Elisha's language to Joash of Israel (2 Kings xiii. 19). 
Nothing commoner than for men to be blind to their own best interests ; to be neglect- 
ful of the opportunities Providence sets before them for advancing these ; and to call 
in the aid of enemies rather than of friends — of their worst enemy, the devil, rather 
than of their best friend, Jehovah — when they find themselves placed in some critical 
situation. (2) A great victory recalled, with the secret of it. The mighty host of the 
Ethiopians and the Libyans had been defeated ; their horsemen and chariots routed 
by Judah's spearmen and bowmen, and that, as Asa knew, not by their own prowess 
or by his generalship, but because, in answer to prayer, Jehovah had entered the 
field upon his side (ver. 8). It is strange how easily and quickly men forget Divine 
interpositions on their behalf, and how readily, almost how naturally, they put these 
to their own credit rather than to God's. " Time hath, my lord, a wallet on his back " 
(Shakespeare, ' Troilus and Cressida,' act iii. sc. 3). No example better to be followed 
by a Christian than that of David (Ps. ciiL 2). A good memory would often save a 
Christian from foolish blunders. (3) A great doctrine stated, with the lesson of it, 
Asa should have known that the eyes of the Lord were ever running to and fro through- 
out the earth, to show himself strong in behalf of those whose hearts were perfect 
before him, and that all he had to do was to see that his heart was perfect before God, 
and to show the same by trusting in him (ver. 9). See homily on " The eyes of the 
Lord." (4) A great sin committed, with the disastrous result of it. In turning his 
back upon Jehovah and repairing to Benhadad, he, Asa, had acted foolishly (ver. 9), 
He had not only blundered, perpetrated an error in judgment, but done what was 
inherently wicked ; and, as a consequence both of his blunder and of his sin, he " would 
have wars" — which he had in the continued hostility of the northern kingdom. 
Observe the double aspect of sin, as an act of folly and a deed of wickedness, and the 
double aspect of retribution, as at once the natural outcome or result of human folly 
and the positive infliction of a judicial sentence. 

II. The kinq's answbb to the prophet. (Ver. 10.) 1. He was angry vrith the 
prophet. Good men as well as bad may fall into danger, but in both it is sin. If Asa's 
"heart was perfect all his days," it is clear his life was not. He was "wroth with the 
seer." Anger is a work of the flesh (Gal, v, 20), the passion of a foolish heart (Eccles. 
vii. 9), and the foam of an unbridled tongue (Prov, xxv. 28 ; Hos. vii. 16). Outrageous 
in any (Prov. xxvii. 4), it is unbecoming in all, but especially in kings, and not allow- 
able in Christians (Col. iii. 8). Asa was angry with Hanani because Hanani told 
him of his fault. Even good men require large grace belore they can say, " Let the 
righteous smite me," etc. (Ps. cxli. 5). Yet the rebukes of the righteous should be 
received submissively (Lev, xix. 17) and with grateful affection (Prov. ix. 8). He who 
so welcomes them shall be honoured (Prov. xiii. 18) ; get understanding (Prov. xv. 32) ; 
exhibit prudence (Prov. xv. 5) ; and abide among the wise (Pjov. xv. 31), 2. He put 
the prophet in a prison-house ; literally, •' in a house of stocks," the " stock " being 
"an instrument of torture, by which the body was forced into an unnatural, twisted 
position, the victim, perhaps, being bent double, with the bands and feet fastened 
together" (Keil), Into some such place of confinement Jeremiah was thrust (Jer. xx, 
2; cf, xxix. 26), and Paul and Silas (Acts xvi. 24). "The king's wrath is as the 
roaring of a lion " (Prov. xix. 12). If, in Hanani's case, it did not turn out " messengers 
of death" (Prov, xvi. 14), it was because Asa was at bottom a good man, whose hand 
as well as heart were in the keeping of the Lord (Ps, Ixxvi. 10), 3. Ee oppressed those 
who took the prophet's side. These were, doubtless, the pious section of the people 
who had not approved of the Syrian alliance. It is seldom that a wicked policy can 
be entered on by kings or parliaments (at least in a Christian land) without some voice 
or voices being raised against it. Unhappilv, these have often to share obloquy and 
oppression, as Hanani's supporters did. Yet nothing ii more calamitous for a country 
than to see the best people in it persecuted by its rulers for protesting against their 
crooked ways. When a policy cannot be defended or carried through without imprison- 
ing those who are opposed to it, that policy ia wrong! 

Lessons. 1. The certainty that God sees everything that is done beneath the sun. 
2, The goodness of God in reproving wrong-doers. 3. 'The folly of leaning upon an aria 



OH. XVI. 1—14.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 203 

of flesh instead of upon God. 4. The source of all calamity among men, viz. sin. 6. 
The sign of an evil conscience — anger against aa accuser, 6. The uselessne^is of force 
M a remedy for evils of auy kind. 7. The courage required of them who would 
ehampion the cause of truth and right. — W. 

Yer. 9. — The eye» of the Lord. I. A uomentous deolabation. "The eyes of the 
Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth." The words teach the doctrines of: 
1. The Divine omniscience ; since " the eyes of the Lord " not only see to the ends of 
the earth, and " run to and fro throughout the earth," but are in every place at the 
same time. 2. The Divine vigilance ; since Ood not merely knows all that transpires 
on the earth and beneath the heavens, but, as it were, lies in wait to discover oppor- 
tunities for interposing on his people's behalf. Contrast with this exalted doctrine 
the teaching of the ' Odyssey ' (xvii. 485) : " The gods, in the likeness of strangers from 
for countries, put on all manner of shapes, and wander through the cities, beholding 
the violence and the righteousness of mea." 

II. A OHEERiNa CONSOLATION. " To show Mm Self strong on behalf of them whose 
hearts are perfect towards him." The object of the Divine interposition is not so much 
to punish and destroy the wicked, although that is indirectly implied, as it is to rescue 
and succour his people. 1. In times of danger; like that of Israel at the Bed Sea 
(Exod. xiv. 16 — 30), or that of Asa on the field of Zephathah (ch. xiv. 12), or that of 
Judah when the army of Sennacherib besieged Jerusalem (2 Kings xix. 35), or that 
of David when pursued by Saul (Ps. xviii. 17), or that of Elisha in Dothan (2 Kings 
vi. 17), or that of Daniel in Babylon (Dan. vi. 22). 2. In seasons of affliction ; such 
u befell the Israelites in Esiypt (Exod. ii. 23 — ^25), aiid the Jews in Babylon (Ezra L 
1) ; such as overtook Jacob in Hebron (Gen. xxxvii. 34 ; xiv. 28), Job in Uz (Job i., 
ii., iii., xlii.), David in Jerusalem (Fs. vi. 8), and the Hebrew children in Babylon 
(Dan. iiL 25). 3. In moments of trial ; which oftentimes come upon his people as 
they came upon Abraham (Gen. xxii. 11), Joseph (Gen. xxxviii. 12), David (1 Sam. 
xxvi. 9), and Job (ii. 9), and in which Gtod's people could hardly hope to stand without 
Divine assistance. 

IIL A SKABCHDJa APPLICATION. Have we those perfect hearts to whom this Divine 
succour is promised ? 1. This means not — Are we sinless f Noah was " perfect " (Gen. 
vi. 9), and yet " he drank of the wine, and was drunken " (Gen. ix. 21) ; Job was 
" perfect " (i. 1), and yet God charged him with offences which caused Job to say, 
" Behold, I am vile " (xl. 4) ; David's heart was " perfect " (1 Kings xi. 4), yet David 
was guilty of grievous sins (2 Sam. xi. 4) ; Asa's heart also was " perfect" (ch. xv. 17), 
and yet Asa went astray in the war with Baasha (ver. 2), In the New Testament 
the Corinthians are designated " perfect " (1 Cor. ii. 6), and yet some of them were so 
for from sinlessness that they committed very gross offences against morality (1 Cor. 
V. 1 ; vL 1). 2. ITiis means — Are we sincere in our profession of religion t Where 
dncerity is wanting, religion is impossible. Nothing more reprehensible in itself, or 
more offensive to both God and man, than hypocrisy — pretending to be a servant of 
God when one is really a slave of Satan ; to be a lover of righteousness when one is 
secretly a doer of unrighteousness. Scripture in both its parts pronounces woe against 
hypocrites (Job viii. 13 ; xv. 34 ; Matt, xxiii. 13 ; Luke xi. 44). — ^W. 

Vers. 11 — 14. — The career of Asa. 1. His life. 1. The length of his reign. Forty- 
one years. His father, whose " heart was not perfect " towards God (1 Kings xv. 3), 
reigned only three years (ch. xiii. 3). The Old Testament promised long life as a 
reward to piety (Ps. xxxiv. 12 — 14). But, even without a special promise, a religious 
life is calculated to prolong days. " Fear God, and keep his commandments," is tha 
first rule of health. 2. 2%e incidents of his reign. (1) The reformation of religion 
(ch. xiv. 3). (2) The building of fortresses (ch. xiv. 6). (3) The preparation of an 
army (ch. xiv. 8). (4) The defeat of Zerah the Ethiopian (ch. xiv. 9). (5) The for- 
mation of a grand national covenant (ch. xv. 8). (6) The making of a league with 
Benhadad (oh. xvi. 1). (7) The oppression of his people (ch. xvi. 10). 3. The cha/racter 
of his reign. (1) Peacelul. It began with ten years of quiet (oh. xiv. 1); and, with 
the two exceptions above specified, it had no more hostile invasions to repel. (2) 
Prosperous. Since the days of Solomon the kingdom had not attained to such a 



204 THE CJEUOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. ivl 1—14 

pinnacle of excellence — of material strength and religious consolidation — as it did under 
the son of Abijah. 

II. His death. 1. The date of it. In the forty-first year of his reign; most likely 
he was over sixty at the time of his decease. 2. The cause of it. Twofold. (1) Disease. 
Two years before his end he became diseased exceedingly in his feet; probably with 
gout (Clarke, Janiieson). Whatever its nature, it was fatal. Disease a sure precursor 
of death, of which every ailment should be a monitor. (2) Unbelief. Had ho 
consulted Jehovah about his malady (the Chronicler suggests), he might have been 
cured ; but, as in repelling Baasha's attack he relied more on Benhadad than on 
Jehovah, so in his illness he repaired to the physicians instead of to Jehovah. To infer 
from this that Asa sinned in consulting a doctor, and that Christians should abstain 
from calling in medical advisers when out of health, is unreasonable. Asa's error lay, 
not in consulting the physicians, but in reposing trust in them to the exclusion of the 
Lord ; and, as Paul took Luke the physician with him on his missionary journeys (Col. 
iv. 14; 2 Tim. iv. 11), it may be argued that he at least did not regard it as incon- 
sistent with religious princiijle to either give or accept medical advice. Still, what the 
doctors could not do for Asa, Jehovah could have done had he been consulted (Exod. 
x\'. lit) ; Ps. oiii. 3) ; so that unbelief was a real cause of Asa's death. Perhaps it is the 
cause of many deaths still. Without hinting that many practitioners are no better 
than those of whom the Gospels tell (Mark v. 26 ; Luke viii. 43), it is still true that 
(jhysicians cannot cure without the 'Divine blessing; and, doubtless, in cases that is 
withheld, because it is not asked either by the physician or his patient. 

III. His bueial. 1. The place of his sepulture. The city of David, where his fathers 
slept (1 Kings xv. 24), yet not in the general tomb of the kings, but in " his own 
sepulchres ; " in a tomb he had specially caused to be excavated lor himself (ver. 14). 
Joseph of Arimathsea hewed out a tomb for himself (Luke xxiii. 53). The first thing 
a Pharaoh of Egypt did on ascending the throne was to construct for himself and 
descendants a royal mausoleum (Harkness, 'Egyptian Life and History,' p. 57). 2. 
Tfie manner of his entombment. (1) His corpse was embalmed. The bed on which 
it was laid was filled with sweet odours and spices of divers kinds, prepared by the 
apothecaries' art. Strictly speaking, this was only an imitation of the Egyptian prac- 
tice (Keil, ' Archaolosie,' § 115 ; Riehm, art. " Begrabuis "). Compare the embalmments 
of Jacub (Gen. 1. 2) and of Jesus (John xix. 39, 40). (2) A very great burning was 
made for him. This burning was not of the body (A. Clarke), which, among the 
Hebrews, was conjmonly interred — the burning of the bodies of Saul and his sons 
(1 Sam. xxxi. 12) being exceptional — but of the prepared spices. Other nations 
practised similar rites ai the funerals of kings. Jehorani (ch. xxi. 19) and Jehoiakim 
(Jer. xxii. 18), on account of their wickedness, were denied such honours; Zedekiah 
was promised them (Jer. xxxiv. 5), perhaps, on account of his misfortunes. 

IV. His chabaoteb. 1. A good man. His heart was perfect (ch. xv. 7 ; 1 Kings 
XV. 14), if his life was not (ch. xvi. 10). The general tenor of his conduct was upright, 
though he erred somewhat towaids the close of his career. "It was thought a high 
eulogy on Jehoshaphat his son that he walked in all the way of his father " (Rawlinsun) ; 
while the honours paid Asa on dying showed that his countrymen esteemed him to 
have been an honourable prince. His "faults and follies" may suggest jthat no man 
is perfect, and that " in many things we all offend." 2. An ardent reformer. He 
removed the altars and the high placts of the strange gods or foreign divinities (ch. xiv. 
3), though he left standing those belonging to Jehovah (ch. xv. 17 ; 1 Kings xv. 14). 
He " commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of their fathers " (ch. xiv. 4), and bound 
them by a solemn league and covenant so to do (ch. xv. 14), though he himself, in 
old age, declined a little from his early faith (ch. xvi. 2, 12). 3. A valiant soldier. 
That with his piety he combined courage, his encounter with Zerah the Ethiopiaa 
evinced. If he was genuinely good, he was also conspcuously great. — W. 



OH. xvn. 1— 19.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



205 



EXPOSITION. 



OUAPTBE xvn. 



To the contents of this chapter, and to the 
reign of Jehoshaphat, which occupies this and 
the following three chapters, the Book of 
Kings furnishes as yet no parallel. All that 
it has to say of Jehoshaphat now is summed 
np in one sentence (1 Kings xv. 24), " And 
Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead," 
till we arrive at the ten verses of 1 Kings 
xxii. 41 — 51, with their very slender sketch 
(see also 2 Kings iii. 1 — 14). 

Ver. 1. — Jehoshaphat. In ch. xx. 31 and 
1 Kings xxii. 41, 42 we are told that Jeho- 
shaphat was now thirty-five years of age. 
He must, therefore, have been bom when Asa 
was in the sixth year of his reign, and pre- 
sumably not under sixteen years of age. His 
reign extended to twenty-five years, i.e. from 
B.o. 914 to BO. 889. The name signifies 
"whom God judges," or "pleads for." Ahab 
is now in the fourth year of his reign, and 
the symptoms he manifests (1 Kings xvi. 
30 — 33) are those that the rather urge Jeho- 
shaphat to strengthen himself, i.e. strengthen 
the defences of his kingdom on the Israel 
side. 

Ver. 2. — ^He placed forces; literally, he 
gave (Gen. i. 17) forces, or a force, or host, 
or army : ^>n (Exod. xiv. 28 ; 2 Sam. xxiv. 2). 
And set garrisons ; again literally, Ae gave 
garrisons (D'3'w) ; i.e. either the persons " set 
over," prefects or officers (1 Kings iv. 19), 
or the militai7 garrison itself "stationed" 
(1 Sam. X. 5 ; liii. 3). A village in Judah 
also had the name Nezeb (Josh. xv. 45). 
In the cities of Ephraim (see ch. xv. 8). 

Ver. 3.— The first ways of his father 
David. Although there would be no diffi- 
culty in reconciling this statement with 
history, yet probably the name David should 
not stand here. It is not in the Septuagint. 
The most natural and sufficient reference is 
to Asa. And sought not unto Baalim; 
literally, to the BacUim; i.e. to the various 
false gods of surrounding peoples (Judg. ii. 
11), Baal-berith (Judg. viii. 33 ; ix. 4, 46), 
Baal-zebnb (2 Kings i.2), Baal-peor(Numb 
xxiii. 28, etc.; xxv. 3), according to the 
places where the idolatrous worship was 
carried on. (For the preposition h, "to," 
after " sought," in this and following verse, 
see again 1 Ohron. xxii. 19.) 

Ver. 4.— After the doings of Israel. This 
expression probably marks the doings of the 
northern kingdom, as both the more typical 
throughout its whole history of the wrong, 
and also as the systematic beginning, " by a 



law," of idolatroos worship and images In 
the matter of the calves and so on. 

Ver. 5. — All Judah brought presents to 
Jehoshaphat. These presen,ts were, of course, 
voluntary gifts, though, like not a few others, 
custom may have taken off from them some- 
thing of the bloom of spontaneousness(l Sam. 
X. 27 ; 2 Sam. viii. 2 ; 1 Kings iv. 21 ; x. 25 ; 
Ps. Ixxii. 10). 

Ver. 6.— And his heart was lifted up in 
the ways of the lord. Although the verb 
naj often carries a bad sense with it, it quite 
as often carries with it a good one in the 
Old Testament, and the typical instance of the 
former (Ps. cxxxi. 1) is fully counterbalanced 
by Isa. Hi. 13. The marginal "was en- 
couraged " may be superseded with advan- 
tage by " took courage " (Isa. xl. 29 — 31). 
The groves. Superstde this incorrect render- 
ing by the Asherim ; and upon the seeming 
discrepancy, see again ch. xv. 17, and " In- 
troduction to Chronicles " there quoted. 

Ver. 7 — 9. — He sent ; Hebrew, n^'. The 
Hebrew text distinctly says, he sent to his 
princes, not, " he sent his princes." The mean- 
ing is— he sent orders to his princes to see to 
it that Judah was taught (ver. 9) the book of 
the Law of the lord (Lev. x. 11 ; Deut. iv. 9 ; 
xvii. 18), not, indeed, without their own per- 
sonal aid in whatever way able to be given, 
but systematically and with authority by the 
Levites and priests (Deut. xxxiii. 10). This 
deeper fathoming of the needs of the time, 
and of what constituted its real safety, was 
greatly to the spiritual credit of Jehoshaphat. 

The references (ch. xv. 3 ; xxxv. 2 — 4, 10 

12) are full of point. None of these princes, 
or Levites and priests, are elsewhere men- 
tioned by name. 

Ver. 10.— The moral effect of this peaceful 
war of Jelioshaphat is manifestly great. 

Ver. 11. — The presents were probably 
enough in the nature of tribute, the " fixed 
rate" of which is sometimes alluded to 
(1 Kings iv. 21 ; x. 25 ; 2 Sam, viii. 2), but it 
is doubtful whether the word n&a purports to 
say tills. The word means "bearing" or 
"carrying," and then "a burden, load, or 
weight." The expression (ch. xx. 25), "mow 
than tliey could carry away," where thii 
word is used, favours the idea that the 
meaning here is " silver of great weight." 
Probably the moral significance and his- 
torical interest, whetlier of this statement 
respecting the Philistines, or the following 
respecting the Arabians, lies in the fact that 
both of them brought, without more ado, 
their payments, and did not seek to slip out 
of their engagementa with Judah and Judah's 
king. Note, for confirmation of this view 
2 Kings iii. 4, 5. 



206 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xvii. 1— 1ft 



Ver. 12. — Castles. This rendering, better 
than " palaces " (margin), would bear improv- 
ing to the rather strunger word " fortresses," 
Hebrew, nvpi'3, found only here and in oh. 
xxvii. 4, plur. of n-jTS, connected with the 
Chaldee and later Hebrew, rrya, of Ezra 
vi. 2; Nell. i. 1; Esth. 1. 2; Dan. viii. 2. 
Cities of store (see note under ch. vili. 4 ; see 
also 1 Kings ix. 19; Bxod. i. 11). 

Ver. 13. — Mnoh business ; Hebrew, nasJiD. 
The meaning of the word is " service," 
" labour bestowed ; " and the verse reads, 
" And there was to him much labour in tlie 
cities of Judah, and men of war, mighty 
men of valour, in Jerusalem ; " i.e. 3e be- 
etoweth much pains on the cities of Judah, 
and had, etc. The word " were," Authorized 
Version italics, is incorrectly inserted. The 
former half of this verse would better con- 
stitute the end of ver. 12. Keil, however, 
maintains the rendering " substance," ** pro- 
perty," for nas^p (Exod. xxii. 7, 10). 

Ver. 14. — This verse, with the following 
four, gives ns the names of five captains, 
chiefs, princes, or military ofScera for the 
kingdom's service, with the numbers of the 
troops they severally commanded. The 
nnmbera of them (see note under 1 Ghron. 
xxiii. 11); Hebrew, crj^ps. The better 
English rendering to carry at once the signi- 
fication would be, The muster of them, etc. 
The captains . . . the chief. In both cases 
the Hebrew is the familiar word for " prince " 
(i»); in the former without article, in the 
latter with article. The numbers of this 
and following four verses are not only abso- 
lutely unreliable, but in themselves impos- 
■ible. According to the honse of their fathers ; 



i.e. the quotation is drawn from an army 
catalogue, arranged carefully by fathers' 
houses (Numb. i. 18, 22, etc.) 

Ver. 15. — The captain. So again read, the 
prince, 

Ver. 16. — Amasiah, the son of ZichrL This 
man is not titled at all. The description of 
him as one who had willingly offered himself 
unto the Lord, not elucidated by the context or 
any effective parallel, will mark sometliing 
honourable in his history. Possibly he 
comes from an unexpected quarter, and is a 
man of approved skill. Nothing further is 
known of these three men. Mtantime it 
has been snggested (Professor Dr. J. Murphy, 
of Belfast, ' Handbook to Chronicles ') that 
the first of the three was for Judah proper 
the second for that contingent of Judah 
that hailed &om Dan aud die Philistines; 
and the third for that of Simeon and the 
Arabs. 

Ver. 17. — Of Benjamin . . . armed men 
with bow and shield (see ch. xiv. 8, and 
note thereunder). 

Ver. 18. — Wliile Eliada of last verse was 
for Benjamin, Professor Dr. Murphy snp- 
poses that Tehozabad was for the annexed 
part of Ephraim. But no suppositions of tliis 
kind can avail to explain the numbers in 
the text, which is no doubt corrupt. 

Ver. 19. — These waited; Hebrew, D-ni^pn, 
plur. piel part, of niBJ. The verse states 
that this enormous fivefold army, with its 
five princes (counting, in our corrupt text, 
one million one hundred and sixty thousand), 
was tlie king's Jerusalem standing army, 
while other separate regiments or bands of 
troops were spread through all Judah, where 
they might be most needed for defence. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vera. 1 — 9. — The first chapter of Jehoshaphafg career. Although to the end Jeho- 
shaphat was neither an unfaithful king nor an unfaithful man, and certainly no 
apostate, yet the first chapter of his career reads the best. The mounting of the sun 
was fine, but clouds hung about the noonday sun, and the setting was not a sky of perfect 
western glory. The unfolding of the bud looked towards a perfect flower, but some 
blight seemed to visit it, and some worm was in the fruit. The three chief features of 
this beginning of Jehoshaphat's reign show most healthfully, as follows : — 

I. His vabied detbbmined attention and devotion to home. Policy would 
dictate it, kindness and love would urge it, in all the wide range of its analogies ; wis- 
dom would smile upon it; but duty, with solemn, dignified voice, commands it. The 
Christian of youngest earliest faith is taught to provide for his own household ; the 
apostles are to begin at Jerusalem ; the man of business belies the name and forfeits his 
character, and brings himself to the ground, if he do not follow a similar rule ; and cer- 
tainly the king and the man in authority, be the nature of his rule what it may, can 
make himself no exception. We see with satisfaction King Jehoshaphat make hii 
footing sure in this essential way. These all rehearse the principle that every man 
must rule first the domain of his own innermost kingdom, his own heart and life, where 
none may rule, nay, none can, except himself — or himself and Qod 1 

II. His legislation fob the retital or the belioious education of thi 



OH. XVII. 1 -19.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 201 

PEOFLE, ANU HIS CABRYINO OF THE SAME IKTO EFFECT. IgDOranCB 18 DO Safetj, thoUgh 

knowledge is responsibility. Mere knowledge, mental gift, mental activity, mental 
acquisition, mental store, and store of experience, even, — these are no reliable sources of 
real safety, neither guide nor refuge for the real life. For these, religious education is 
necessary. Religious education rests on religious knowledge. Religious knowledge 
rests on religious teaching and teachers, and these mean the teaching and the teachers 
of revelation. iSio the right principles of action get reached, and motive dormant or 
even unborn springs into life and action. Nor is it immaterial to observe — the very 
opposite, indeed, of immaterial — that, in so complex and multitudinous a life as that of 
a nation, it must be more than ever hopeless, that any principle can motive its life, any 
mechanism regulate it, any influence elevate and purify it, except such as work just as 
religion does, on every individual equally, on the innermost thought and feeling of 
every individual, and with no secondary force, but with sovereign authoritative com- 
mand met by willingly conceded obedience from the heart. In nothing throughout all 
his reign was Jehoshaphat so right as in restoring and paying all attention to the 
restoring of religious education. 

III. The obeat, most exoeftional, and most to be desibed habvebt beafed. 
The greatness of that harvest was seen in the fact that it was so general, so widespread. 
" All the lands round about Judah " (elsewhere we learn or may gather that this 
description embraced Israel also to a large extent) and " Philistia " and " Arabia " 
swelled it. Tliey who had silver, brought silver ; and they who had flocks, flocks. 
The exceptional character of it lay in the fact that it was so largely due to moral 
sources. Jehoshaphat had not as yet waged a war nor fought a battle. But the fame 
of him round about was as of the coming man. And it may most justly be pronounced 
a harvest that was to he desired, in that it is more pointedly described, most precisely 
described as the result of this, that it was, behind and above ail else, " the fear of the 
Lord " that " fell on all." There is no so honourable reward, title, " present," that can 
be conferred on mortal man, as that which comes to that man by virtue of " the fear 
of the Lord " falling on those around him, ami yet somehow linking him with it. It 
looks as though he had been very right himself, unusually right ; yet in nothing more 
right, nothing more happy, than in the impression which it would appear he has 
honestly and successfully given, that it is and has been as the servant and minister of 
the Lord, that he has been acting, under him, for Mm, and with the smile of his 
prospering blessing resting on him, and his seed-sowing and growing. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1, 2. — Spiritual fortification. Jehoshaphat did well to " strengthen himself 
against Israel." One that ought to be in the closest possible relationship to us but 
that is formally separated from us and that is likely to be jealous of our power is most 
to be feared by us. The avowed enemy is not so hostile as the envious rival, as the 
unfriendly "neighbour." And there was nothing of untrustfulness in this procedure of 
the king's. Had he gone to Syria as his father did (ch. xvi. 2) for help against Israel, 
he would have been open to just rebuke as Asa w«s ; but in keeping his own fortresses 
in good sound condition, in seeing that they were well manned and fortified, he was 
simply acting with that practical sagacity which is not condemned but commended of 
God (Luke xvi. 9, 10). The words suggest to us some lessons concerning the wisdom 
of spiritual fortification. 

I. The supeemb question. Are we in the enemy's country, in a strange land ; or 
are we in our own true home ? Are we in a state of spiritual bondage or dependence, 
or_ are we enjoying true spiritual liberty ? Is God our only Sovereign, and are we 
rejoicing in his gracious, benignant sway ? Are our souls right with him, and, being 
right with him, are they free from the tyranny of all other lords ? Is our spiritual 
estate one of honourable loyalty to God and of honourable freedom from all servitude 
and subjection? 

II. The next vitaii conbisebatiom. Are we taking wise measures to "strengthen 
ourselves " against our natural or probable enemies ? It is most unwise to assume that, 
becAUse it is well with us now, it must always be well with us. " Final perseverance " 



208 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xvn. 1—19. 



S8 a sacred obligation is an excellent doctrine, but not as a mere comforting assumption. 
(1) The exhortations of the Divine Word (Eom. xi. 20 ; 1 Cor. ix. 27 ; x. 12 ; Kev. iii. 
2, 11) ; (2) the numerous well-attested facts we have read and those we have wit- 
nessed ; (3) the weakness of which we are conBCious ; — all these considerations urge Ui 
to consider what we should do to " strengthen ourselves," what steps we should take 
that the neighbouring enemy may not encroach, that the estate which God has given 
us to guard may be held inviolate. Of what kind shall be our — 

III. Spiritual fortification. How shall we " place forces in our fenced cities," 
•nd " set garrisons in the land " ? We shall do this : 1. By forming wise habits of 
devotion. (1) Of public and also (and more particularly) of private devotion ; (2) such 
habits as will encourage the greatest possible measure of spontaneous and spiritual 
communion ; (3) such habits as will secure the twofold communication — God speaking 
to us and our speaking to him. 2, By entering on a course of sacred usifulness. 
Nothing is so likely to keep the flame of piety alight on the altar of our hearts, to pre- 
serve our own moral and spiritual integrity, as doing, regularly and methodically, some 
real service to other souls. 3. Maintaining a right attitude of soul. The attitude of 
humility, and therefore of conscious dependence on God ; the attitude of wariness and 
watchfulness against the first uprising of evil against us or within us; the attitude 
of thoughtfulness ; the disposition to let our mind go toward those things which are 
highest and worthiest, toward the truth of God, toward the grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. With such " fenced cities " as these in the soul, we shall be strong against the 
enemy whom we have most to fear. — 0, 

Vers. 3 — 6. — The wise choice and the happy course. We have before us here the 
king who made the wise choice, and who consequently ran through a very happy 
oourse. In him we have an example ; in it a promise for ourselves. 

I. The wise choice, which is an example to us. Jehoshaphat: 1. Preferred 
the true God to the false deities; he " sought to the Lord God of his father," and he 
" sought not unto Baalim." Moreover, he set before him, as that which he should copy : 
2. The best part of the best man's life. Not the life of the less perfect Abijah or Eeho- 
boam, or even Solomon, but David ; and of his life, not the latter part, which was more 
luxurious and less pure, but " the first ways of his father David," which were less 
luxurious and more pure than the last. Herein he showed an excellent judgment. 
He could not have done a wiser thing, as he certainly could not have done anything 
more solemnly and stringently binding upon him, than resolve to cleave to the " God 
of his fathers " — the God who had called both king and kingdom into existence, to 
whom he and his people owed all that they were and had. There were certain fascina- 
tions connected with the worship of Baalim appealing to their lower nature ; but what 
were these to the weighty and overwhelming considerations that bound him to Jehovah ? 
And he could not have done better than choose for his exemplar the devout and faithful 
David ; and, choosing him, to select the earlier and worthier part of his very checkered 
snd somewhat uneven life. Before us is a similar choice, and we must make up our 
mind what we will decide upon. (1) We have to choose what God we will serve ; 
whether the Lord God of our fathers, whether the heavenly Father, the Divine Saviour 
and Friend of our souls, or whether this passing world with its lower interests, its 
fading honours, its transient joys. (2) We have to determine in whose steps we will 
follow ; whether those of the ambitious, or of the pleasure-seeking, or of the aimless man, 
or those of the reverent and earnest man ; and again, if we choose the last, whether we 
will direct our eye to those elements in his character and to those portions of his life 
which are not the second-best, but the noblest and worthiest of all. 

II. The happy coubsb, which is a promise foe us. Jehoshaphat had all that a 
king could well wish for. 1. A sense of God's favouring presence (ver. 3). 2. A sense 
of growing security throughout his kingdom (ver. 5). 3. The testimony of his people'* 
•ttachment to his person (ver. 5). 4- Honour as well as abundance (ver. 5). 5. 
Elation of heart, great and continuous gladness in the service of Jehovah (ver. 6). 6. 
The expenditure of his power in further cleansing usefulness (ver. 6). What rewards 
of the king's fidelity were due to his royal position we, of course, cannot look for. But 
if we make the wiser choice we may reckon upon a life of true and real blessednegs. 
To UB there wQl be secured (1) all needful temporal good (Ps. xxxvii. 25 ; ixxiv. 22; 



CH. XVII. 1—19.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 208 

Matt. vi. 33 ; 1 Tim. iv. 8) ; (2) the conscious and abiding presence of God (John xiv. 
23 ; IV. 4 ; Eev. iii. 20) ; (3) the peace which, not as the world gives, Christ give« 
to his own, and the joy which no man taketh from ^XB ', (4) the spiritual conditions of 
holy usefulness, the means and opportunity of exerting a pure and elevating inSuence 
on many hearts, and thus of uplifting and ennobliug many lives ; (6) the hope that 
maketh not ashamed. — C. 

Vers. 7 — 9. — A strong lecause instructed people. Jehoshaphat had not been long on 
the throne before he took a step admirably adapted to benefit and, indeed, to bless the 
nation. Better than " strengthening himself against Israel " by increasing his garrisoni 
(vers. 1, 2) was the enlightenment of " all the cities of Judah," the teaching of " the 
people " (ver. 9) from " the book of the Law of the Lord." 

I. Stbength in inbtbuction. It is well for a land to have iti strong, unassailable 
fortresses, its well-garrisoned towns, its frontier of steep mountain or of precipitous 
rock. But the strength of a nation does not reside in such defences as these; it lies in 
the intelligence, the vigour, the courage, the patriotism, of its people. All material 
munitions will fail to keep out the enemy when " the people "are corrupt and enfeebled. 
Without any remarkable fortifications constructed by human art and labour, a free, 
brave, godly nation will be respected and preserved. And such a nation will be only ' 
found where there is knowledge and consequent intelligence. You cannot build any- 
thing durable on ignorance. Ignorance means folly, indulgence in the lower pleasures, 
feebleness, decline. " Knowledge is power " in more ways than one. 

II. Insteuction in sacred TB0TH. Power needs to be rightly guided ; misguided, 
it is the source of greatest evil. Everything depends on the way in which intelligence 
is directed. Genius, working towards an evil end, is a force that is simply terrible. 
The world can sufier no sadder infliction than a man or a community possessed of the 
power of highly cultivated intelligence, but unregulated by righteous principles, aban- 
doning itself to unworthy impulses. Therefore was it of the first importance that those 
who went " throughout all the cities of Judah " should " teach the people " from " the 
book of the Law of the Lord." Thence they would gain those directing truths, those 
commanding principles which would lead in the ways of holiness and heavenly wisdom. 
Therefore is it of the first importance, here and eveiywhere, that throughout all our 
cities and all our towns and villages we should not only have " the schoolmaster 
abroad," but have the Christian teacher also, busily, earnestly, faithfully making known 
the will of God, the truth and grace of Jesus Christ, basing all character on sound 
morality, and basing all morals on their only sound foundation. Christian truth. 

III. Saobed truth bdpplibd in ETaBY OPEN WAT. Jehoshaphat did not think it 
enough to leave things to be done by existing institutions. Like a wise and an earnest 
man, he cast about for additional methods, he looked in all directions for competent 
men to efiect his pious purpose. And he called out : 1. The man who brought the 
weight of his social position — the prince (ver. 7). 2. The man who carried the infiuence 
of his sacred office — the priest (ver. 8). 3. The man who contributed the strength of 
special training — the Levite (ver. 8). Thus wisely and eflfectively are we to work. In 
our country there is : (1) Scope for much Christian instruction throughout the land. 
There are the young coming up to be taught ; there are the neglected and spiritually 
ignorant multitudes crowded in our great cities ; there are uninstructed numbers need- 
ing to be taught the way of life, scattered through the rural districts of the land. 
There is ample room yet for the work of the teacher. (2) Ample teaching material 
from which to draw. Those who can contribute social rank, or intellectual power, or 
special religious training, or exceptional spiritual fervour, or even the ordinary know- 
ledge and common zeal of the members of our Christian Churches. There is available 
on every hand a very large measure of capacity for religious instruction ; and this the 
Christian Church should, like the King of Judah, enlist on behalf of the country. 
Then may we look for (3) the most excellent results; for a country covered with 
Christian teachers, and saturated with heavenly truth, will be a nation walking ia the 
fear of God and resting under his smile. — C. 

Ver. 16. — Willing service. When it is said of Amasiah that he "willingly offered 
himself unto the Lord," we have a thought conveyed to lu respecting the character of 

n. OHBONIOLXB. y 



210 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xvu. 1—19. 

a Hebrew general's life, and we have a form of words strikingly suggestive of the true 
nature of all sacred service. We look at both. 

L The ohabacter of Amasiah'b sebyice. By the phrase here employed it was 
probably meant that he entered upon his work as a captain of Jehoshaphat'a army in a 
spirit of religious devotedness. We need not be surprised at that. The idea of tha 
essential wrongness of war is modem, is Christian. It would not occur to the mind, 
and would not therefore trouble the conscience, of any man living in that age. ' There 
would be no reason, in his mind, why he should not give himself up to the soldier'i 
profession, and go through all military duties of every kind in the spirit of self-surrender 
to the service of God. And whatever we may think on this subject, we should cer- 
tainly conclude, and act upon the conviction, that, in determining our course of life, we 
should seek and find that to which we can give ourselves with religi>>us earnestness. 
There is no reason why any profession should not be a vocation ; that to which a man 
feels himself called of God ; that in which he may be continually serving God and 
honouring his Name ; that in which he will make every effort to illustrate the essential 
graces which Jesus Christ has commended to us, both by his words and by his 
example. 

II. An essential feature op all acceptable service. It must surely be 
recorded in the " book of life " concerning every heir of heaven, that he " offered himself 
willingly unto the Lord." For what other service than that is worthy of acceptance ? 

1. The submission and surrender of our will is the act of entrance upon the life which 
is Divine. It is not knowledge, it is not feeling, it is not compulsory action, or 
action wrought for recompense, that constitutes true childhood ; all of these may exist, 
and yet there may remain estrangement from God. But however slight be the know- 
ledge, and though emotion be but small, and before any deeds of service have become 
possible, if a man bows his will to the will of God and resolves to surrender himself to 
tho service of his Saviour, then he has entered the kingdom ; he is one of the redeemed 
of the Lord ; his feet are found in the path of life eternal ; he has only to go on in the 
way in which he is walking. 2. Our daily service is excellent and acceptable in pro- 
portion to its cheerful willingness. To do the right thing with indeed the consent of 
our will, but only with a reluctant and struggling acquiescence, places the servant at 
one end of the scale. To do the right thing with alacrity, with cheerfulness, with 
earnestness of spirit, with an animating eagerness and abounding joy, places the servant 
at the other end of the scale of Divine acceptablencss, commendation, and reward. 
" God loves the cheerful giver ; " not only the giver of his money,' but of his time, of his 
strength, of his intellectual resources, of all the forces of his soul, of all the opportuni- 
ties of his life. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — The accession o/Jehoshaphat. I. The date of his coronation. 1. The 
thirty-fifth year of his age. He was thus born in the sixth year of Asa's reign (ch. xvi. 
14), during the ten years of quiet. His mother was Azubah, the daughter of Shilhi 
(1 Kings xxii. 42). A man of mature years when he ascended the throne, he was bettei 
qualified to bear the load of responsibility his father's decease had, in God's providence, 
cast upon him. 2. The fourth year of Ahab King of Israel (1 Kings xxii. 41). If 
Judah was fortunate in getting such a sovereign as Jehoshaphat, Jeshoshaphat was 
iin ortunate in having such a neighbour as Ahab (1 Kings xvi. 30 — 33), Man is always 
mui e or less influenced by his surroundings, and especially by his neighbours. These, 
when good, are a blessing ; when evil, a curse. In the latter case, if he cannot improve 
them, they will deteriorate him (ch. xviii, 1). 

II. The renown of his throne. The throne: 1. Of a prosperous kingdom. 
Judah, if small, was valiant and religious. Under the preceding reign it had achieved 
brilliant feats in battle, and advanced consilerably on the path of relif^ious reform. 

2. Of a good father. With all his imperfections, Asa was one of the best of Judah's 
kings, and it was no slight honour that Jehoshaphat should have descended from and 
suaieeded such a parent. Noblesse oblige : it entailed on Jehoshaphat the duty of walk- 
ing in bis father's footsteps as man and king. 3. Of a famous ancestor. The throne he 
ascended had come down from David, the second king of united Israel, in direct and 
unbroken succession, whereas the throne of Israel had thrice changed dynasties and 
always for the worse (1 Kings xv. 27 ; xvi. 10, 22). i.Ofa great God. The throne 



OH. XVII. 1—19.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 211 

JehouhapLst obtained was Jehovah's, and Jehoshaphat was merely hia viceroy and 
tepresentative. 

III. The pkudenob of his bulb. 1. He considered Israel a» an entmy. This was 
wise. If Baasba had been hostilely disposed towards Judah all the days of bis father 
Asa, Ahab was not likely to be more peacefully inclined. Cautious men should under- 
stand the situations in which they are placed. No good can come from mistaking 
enemies for friends. 2. He strengthened himself against Israel. He planted garrisons 
thoughout Judah and in the cities of Mount Epbraim his father had captured from 
Baasha (ch. xv. 8), and located forces in all the fenced cities of Judali. "The prudent 
man foreseeth the evil, and hideth himself; the simple pass on, and are punished" 
(Prov. xxii. 3 ; xxvii. 12). " The prudent man looketh well to his going " (Prov. xiv. 
15), especially when Ahabs are abroad. 

IV. The qbeatness of his ally. Asa had sought a league with Benhadad of 
Syria (ch. xvi. 2). Jehoshaphat preferred a league with Jehovah (ch. xvii. 3). A n ally : 

1. All-powerful, as his father Asa once believed (oh. xiv. 11), as David had ofti n sung 
(Ps. Ixvi. 3; Ixxvi. 6, 7 ; Ixxxix. 8), as Moses haii Ion,' ago taught (Deut. vii. 21), as 
Miriam had chanted on the sea-ahore (Exod. xv. 3), and as Jehovah himself had once 
reminded Abraham (Gen. xviii. 14). 2. Omniscient, as Hanani the seer had on a 
memorable occasion told his father (ch. xvi. 9), and as he perhaps remembered, having 
been then a boy of ten years of age ; an ally who could assist in every strait for which his 
aid was wanted (Prov. xv. 3) — yea, who could detect straits and emergencies in which his 
aid would be wanted before the individual himself should see them, and who would 
be forward with reinforcements even before their need was discerned. 3. Unchanging. 
Benhadad broke his league with Baasha (ch. xvi. 4), as doubtless he would have done 
with Asa had more powerful inducements been offered him by Baasha or another. When 
Jehovah covenants with his people, he changes not (1 Sam. xv. 29 ; Ps. cxi. 5 ; Isa. liv. 
10 ; Jer. xxxiii. 20, 21 ; Mai. iii. 6). 4. Oraeums. Benhadad required to be bribed. 
Jehovah grants his friendship and aid free, stipulating only that they whose ally he 
becomes shall be true to him (ch. xv. 2). Motley, somewhere in his ' Dutch Eepublio,' 
says that wheu "William of Orange was advised to seek the hefp of European sove- 
reigns in his struggle with Philip of Spain, he replied that he had formed a league 
with the King of kings. 

Y. The quality of his belision. 1. Personail. Jehoshaphat as a man, not merely 
as a monarch, was pious. He, and not only his temple officials, sought Jehovah. 
Religion nothing, if not personal. Kings as well as subjects are under law to God. 

2. Practical. Jehoshapnat's piety was not limited to state proclamations, or ofBcial 
acts of homage to Jehovah in the temple, but extended to the domain of his own indi- 
vidual walk. 3. Ancestral. It had been the religion of his father Asa and of his 
renowned ancestor David in their best days, of Asa before he took the first false step in 
leaving Jehovah for Benhadad, of David before and after he sinned in connection with 
Bathsheba. 4. Scriptural. It was the worship of Jehovah as prescribed by the Law 
of Moses, and not the service of idols as practised by the northern kingdom ; in particular 
not the adoration of golden calves like those at Dan and Bethel (1 Kings xii. 28). 
Scripture the only directory of worship for the New Testament Church., 5. Reformat 
tory. Not content with abstaining from idolatrous worshif, Jehoshaphat abandoned 
the position of neutrality and compromise his father had occupied (ch. xv. 17); he"took 
away the high places and groves out of Judah." Neutrality in religion always ui 
impossibility (Josh. xxiv. 15), is less a possibility now than ever (Matt. xii. 30). 

VI. The beward of his piety. 1. Jehovah established the hinglom in his hand. 
Jehovah had done so to David (2 Sam. v. 12) and to Solomon (1 Kings ii. 46), accord- 
ing to his promise (2 Sam. vii. 12, 13 ; 1 Kings ix. 5). In continuation of that promise, 
he now confirms the government of Judah in the hands of their descendant. The only 
real King-maker and Throne-establisher is God (Prov. viii. 15 ; Ps. ii. 6 ; Ixi. 6 ; Hos. xiii. 
11). No monarch can keep his crown when God wishes to uncrown him ; no throne 
can be upset until God grants permission to throw it down. 2. His subjects did him 
homage ty presenting gifts. (Ver. 5.) Hardly taxes, but free-will offerings over and 
above, in expression of loyalty and good will, as appears to have been customary on the 
accession of a king (1 Sam. x, 27). It augurs well for a reign when it begins with God's 
t'.essiug and the people's favour. ' No ruler's title is complete, wanting either of these 



212 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xvii. 1— 1», 

msIb. 3. He had riches and honour in abundance. This accorded with the promise 
given to the good mar (Ps. cxii. 1 — 3). God never fails to honour them who honour 
him (1 Sam. ii. 30), or to enrich, if not with material yet with spiritual treasures, luch 
as serve him with fidelity and fear (Prov. iii. 16 ; xxii. 4). See this illustrated in the 
lives of David (1 Chron. xxix. 28), Solomon (1 Kings x. 24, 25, 27 ; ch. ix. 23, 24), 
and Hezekiah (ch. xxxii. 7). 

VII. The happiness of his heart. This was " lifted up in the ways of the Lord " 
(ver. 6), not with pride, but: 1. With inward satis/action. True religion diffuses such a 
feeling through the heart (Ps. cxix. 165 ; Prov. iii. 17 ; Isa. xxxii. 17 ; xlviii. 18). 2. 
With earnest resolution. The elevation of spirit he experienced impelled him to labour 
for the reformation of his country and the improvement of his people. Sincere piety 
ever seeks to extend itself. Genuine goodness always aims at doing good to others. 
Christ commands his followers to do good and communicate (Matt. x. 8). 

Learn : 1. The responsibility of high station. 2. The duty of earnestness in religion. 
8. The profit of true piety. 4. The joy of godliness. — W. 

Vers. 7 — 9. — An old Education Act. L Its promulgation. 1. J9y whom » Jeho- 
Bhaphat, the son of Asa and King of Judah. Kings and parliaments should care for the 
education of the people. No better means of promoting social order. 2. When f In 
the third year of his reign. Jehoshaphat postponed not a work so excellent, but assigned 
it a precedence, answering to its importauce. Of greater consequence was it for the 
prosperity of his dominions and the peace of his reign that his subjects should be 
instructed, than that his armies should be drilled or his garrisons strengthened. 3. 
For what end f The religious improvement of the people. Under the Old Testament 
economy that formed part of the duty of the Hebrew state, because state and Church 
were then one. Under the New Testament economy, when state and Church are not 
coextensive, the obligation to provide religious education for both old and young rests 
exclvi ively upon the Church ; the furtherance of secular instruction being the depart- 
ment that properly, belongs to the state. If, however, the state is not required to 
directly furnish teaching in religion, it is not at liberty to hinder the Chtu-ch, but is 
bound to afford her free scope for discharging the special work committed to her care. 

II. Its CONSTITUTION. 1. Three orders of teachers. (1) Laymen of high rank — princes, 
of whom the names were Ben-hail, Obadiah, Zechariah, Nethaneel, and Michaiah, but 
of whom nothing more is known. If they were " princes " in the sense of being related 
to the royal family, then to none could the work be more fittingly assigned ; if heads of 
families or fathers' houses, the propriety of appointing them was still more evident ; 
if governors of districts, it was not dimmed. (2) Levites, nine in number — Shemaiah, 
Nethaniah, Zebadiah, Asahel, Shemiiamoth, Jehonathan, Adonijah, Tobijah, and Tob- 
adonijah, all now equally unknown. (3) Priests, two in number — Elishama and Jeho- 
ram. 2. Three kinds of instruction. This at least probable from the appointing of 
three classes of teachers. (1) Civil law, and the constitution of the kingdom, were pre- 
sumably taught by the laymen. (2) Ritual law, and what pertained to the worship 
of the temple, by the Levites. (3) Moral law, with the nature and obligation of religion, 
by the priests. " Thus the nation became thoroughly instructed in their duty to God, 
to the king, and to each other " (Adam Clarke). 

IIL Its opebation. It was put in force: 1. Immediately. Good resolutions 
cannot be too soon carried out, or good schemes too quickly set on foot. Quite as 
many noble projects are ruined by procrastination as by undue haste. 2. Universally. 
The teaching deputies went through the land, visited the cities and villages, and left 
no part unblessed by their labours. 3. Earnestly. They taught the people ; not simply 
opened schools, and read dry and uninteresting lectures on civil, ecclesiastical, and 
religious history, but saw that the people understood and practised what was taught. 

Learn : 1. The true glory of a king — to care for the welfare of his subjects. 2. The 
value of secular, but especially of religious, instruction. 3. The best spring of prosperity 
for a people — knowledge of the Law of the Lord. 4. The true function of a teacher — ^to 
cause the people to understand. 5. The ultimate end of education— obedience. — W. 

Vers. 10 — 19. — The greatness of J thoshaphat. I. Jehoshaphat's nsiqhboubs. 1. 
Afraid of his greatness. As on the cities round Jacob and his sons when they fled 



<JH. xvin. 1— 34.] THE SECOND BOOK OF TFE CHRONICLES. 



21t 



from Sheohem (Gen. xxxv. 5), the terror of Jehovah was on Jehoshaphat's neighbours. 
Regarding Jehoshaphat as under the protection of Heaven, they hesitated to try con-, 
elusions with him on the field of war. 2. Solicitous of his favour. This some sought 
by means of gifts. The Philistines brought presents and silver of tribute, or " silver a 
burden," i,e. a great quantity (Bertheaoi, Keil) ; the Arabians offered flocks — 7700 
he-goats, and 7700 rams. 

II. Jehoshaphat's buildings. 1. Castles, or palaces. Oriental kings commonly 
attested their magnificence by temple and palace building ; e.g. Solomon (ch. viii. 1, 
etc.). 2. Store-cities. Arsenals or magazines for supplying the garrisons. In them 
Jehoshaphat had much property (Keil). 

III. Jehoshaphat's wabrioes. 1, Those who served in Jerusalem. (1) Their 
battalions, five — three belonging to Judah, two to Benjamin. (2) Their captains. Of 
Judah's divisions, Adnah the chief, Jehohanan, and Amasiali the son of Zichri, " who 
had willingly given or offered himself to the Lord," perhaps in the performance of some 
•mighty deed. Of Benjamin, " Eliada a mighty man of valour," and Jehozabad. (3) 
Their numbers. Of Judah, under Adnah, 300,000 ; under Jehohanan, 280,000 ; under 
Amasiah, 200,000; in all, 780,000 men. Of Benjamin, 200,000 with Eliada, and 
180,000 with Jehozabad ; in all, 380,000. For the kingdom 1,160,000, upwards of one 
million and a half of able-bodied soldiers — a huge incubus for so small a kingdom. (4) 
Their duties. They waited on the king, i.e. were disposable forces at his command, 
ready to take the field when he should give the word. 2. Those who served in Judah. 
The officers and companies distributed throughout the different garrisons in the land. 

Leain : 1. The influence of true religion even on the wicked. 2. The superior glory 
of good character, as compared with great condition. 3. The dignity implied in being 
• soldier of Jesus Christ. — W. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTEB XVIII. 



This chapter, from its second verse, finds 
its parallel in 1 Kings xxii. '2, — 35. It opens 
with dangerous symptoms, recording in one 
sentence the event that was to bear ill fruit, 
if not till " years " afterward (ver. 2), of 
Jehoshaphat "joining affinity with Ahab." 
His son Jehoram married Athaliah, 
daughter of Ahab and Jezebel (ch. xxi. 6). 
The further steps by which Jehoshaphat 
became entangled with Ahab are graphi- 
cally described. He forms an alliance with 
faim in the war with Bamoth-Gilead (vers. 
I — 3) ; he urges Ahab to consult " a prophet 
of the Lord " (vers. 4 — 12). Aliab unwil- 
lingly consents, and receives Micaiah's 
answer (vers. 13 — ^27); and finally the 
chapter tells iis how Ahab went up to battle, 
and in battle received liis mortal wound 
(vers. 28—84). 

Ver. 1 — The purport of the verse is to let 
OB into the secret that the riches and honour 
in abundance of Jehoshaphat were, in fact, 
tlie snare by which he was led to entangle 
himself with one who, probably only on that 
account, was willing to be entangled by 
affinity with him (ch. xxi. 6 ; xxii. 2 — 4 ; 
8 Kings viii. 25 — 29). It is not hard to see 



how they would both lead him, if not always 
out of big and patronizing thouglits, to seek 
and also lay him open to be sought. When 
this verse says Jehoshaphat joined aflSnity, 
etc., it means that he had done so, to wit, 
not fewer than nine years before, in pro- 
moting or allowing, whichever it was, the 
marriage of his son Jehoram with Ahab's 
and Jezebel's daughter Athaliah. For the 
issue of this marriage, Ahaziah, took the 
throne at the age of twenty-tivo years, thir- 
teen years hence from this seventeenth year 
of his grandfather Jehosiiaphat'a reign, the 
year of Ahab's death. But as we are told 
that Ahaziah was the youngest son of Jeho- 
ram and Athaliah (for explanation of which 
see ch. xxi. 17), the "joining affinity" must 
have been something earlier than nine years, 
and very probably came yet nearer the pros- 
perity of the earlier j'ears of Jehoshaphat's 
reign, with which would agree well the key- 
note touched again significantly here from 
our ch. xvii. 5. Comp. 2 Kings viii. 17, 26 ; 
ch. xxi. 20 ; xxii. 2 (which needs the correc* 
tlon of ttcenty-tvo to/orty-two). Although 
it is certain that the act of Jehoshaphat whs 
wrong in principle, disastrous in practice 
(oh. xix. 2, 3), and threatened fatal conse- 
quences to himself (oh. xviii. 31, 32), yet it 
is not impossible to suppose his motives 
were for the most part good, and he mat 
naturally have thought that the sunshine of 
his own peace and abundance might be the 
set time to win influence in an4 over Israel, 



214 



THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xvin. 1— 34. 



lathei than strengthen Israel in its ungodly 
independence. On the other hand, nothing 
coald justify Jehoshaphat risking guoli in- 
^maoy of relutionship with such a family, 
heedless of consequences, looking towards 
idolatry, which he should have known were 
overwhelmingly probable, 

Yer. 2. — After certain yean he went 
down. In lien of the italic type "o«rtotn " 
here, the English idiom, " years after," would 
•ptly reproduce the facts of the case. This 
journey to Samaria to see Ahab was made 
in the seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat's 
leign (1 Kings zxii. 51 ; comp. ch. xz. 35 
and 2 Kings iii. 1). What were the precise 
antecedent circumstances of this visit of 
Jehoshaphat to Ahab it is interesting to 
turmise — whether it were the fruit of an 
invitation direct from A)iab, who had his 
own designs, or whether it were for diplo- 
matic reasons, that worked in the mind of 
Jehoshaphat as well as of Ahab, in view of 
Syria. It is evident that Ahab promptly 
determined to improve this conference of 
kings. Fersnaded him ; i.e. he took steps to 
induce him. This is the uniform significa- 
tion of the word here used in the eighteen 
times of its occurrence, and mostly in doubt- 
ful, or worse than doubtful, matter. The 
form is the hiph. of rw, in which conjugation 
only the verb occurs. The Keviaed Version 
renders "moved." The visiting and co- 
operating of Jehoshapljat and Ahab made a 
novel departure in the history of the rended 
kingdoms of Judah and Israel, and continued 
till the time of Jehu. Bamoth-Gllead. This 
important city of Gad (Josh. xx. 8 ; xxL 88), 
in Palestine beyond Jordan, comes into 
question as one not surrendered to the king- 
dom of Israel in good faith, according to 
the promise of Benhadad (1 Kings xx. 34 ; 
comp. 1, 4, 7, 11, 20, 30, 33), Benhadad's 
father having taken it from Omri, father of 
Ahab. For "all the might that he showed," 
and presumably in co iflicts with Syria, 
Omri was evidently a heavy loser. Bamoth- 
Oilead means " the heights of Gilead." 

Ver. 3. — I am as thou, etc. The same 
unqualified kind of language was used by 
Jehoshaphat on another occasion (2 Kings 
iii. 7), two years later, when Johoram, son 
of the deceased Ahab, also asked his help 
against Moab. Whi thiT on the one oooasion 
or the other, it is quite possible that Jeho- 
shaphat thought he was serving common 
interests, and the cau o of liis own kingilom, 
as well as of Israel ; n. \ ertheless " Jel.u the 
•on of Hanaiii the seer " ignores the supposed 
justification (ch. xix. 2) 

Ver. 4. — The wording of this verse is 
identical with that of tlje parallel (1 Kings 
xxii. 5). Jehoshaphat, if even not quite 
conscious of it, is throning some sop to his 
conscience in essaying tu become, auiJ posing 



as, the godly counsellor of " the ungodly" 
(ch. xix. 2). At any rate, his counsel i» 
right, even to the point of urging to-daj , 
and significantly deprecating procrastination. 
It is not, however, so clear that he was, in 
the first instance, as decided in respect of 
tlie necessity of inquiring the will of the 
Lord at the mouth of a true prophet, in dis- 
tinction from a prophet merely of Israel, 
though they should be " fonr hundred " in 
number I Compnre the following two verses, 
however, which show as though lie was 
holding himself quite prepared and on the 
look-out for the t-xpected occasion of having 
to rein Ahab up t 

Ver. 5. — These fonr hundred prophets, a* 
Keil justly notes, were not prophets of Ashe- 
rah, nor of Baal, but strictly of Israel. i.e. of 
the images of the calf (I Kings xiL 26 — SS), 
Their word speedily showed itself n<:t the 
word of the Lord, but the word that wai 
made up to order of the king, and to suit 
his known wish at any time. 

Ver. 6. — The Bevised Version well ar- 
ranges the words of this verse, "Is there 
not here besides a prophet of the Lord?" 
The conscience of Ahab successfully made 
a coward of him, that he took so quietly 
this pronounceil slight put on his kingdom's 
prophets (prophetas vitulorum) by his 'brother- 
king JeohshaphatI 

Ver. 7. — The same is Hiceiah, This tme 
prophet .of the Lord is known only here in 
recorded history, but it is evident be was 
otherwise well known to his generation 
and to Ahab (ver. 25). The outspokennesa 
of Ahab and tlie sustained courtesy of Jeho- 
shaphat are alike agreeable to notice in thia 
verse. 

Ver. 9. — ^The contents of this and the fol- 
lowing two verses narrate either what had 
already taken place, or the continuation of 
the scene that had not come to its end, but 
had been interrupted in order to carry out 
fully the urgerit exhortation of Jehoshaphat 
" to-day," 80 that Ahab sent at once there 
and then a messenger for Micaiah. Any 
way, the unreal prophets have their fuU 
opportunity and their say at least twice 
over, as also Micaiah below (vers. 14, 16, 
18—22, 27). A void place ; t.e. a level floor; 
Revised Version, an open place. The Hebrew 
word designates often just a "threshing- 
floor," I'l-i ; but quite possibly here, a recoj?- 
nized court at the gate of the city, used for 
judgment, is intended. 

A'er. 10. — Zedekiah (named son of Che- 
naanah to distinguish him from some now 
unknown contemporary, or, perhaps, because 
the father was in some way distinguished) 
was one of those who knew the truth, nor 
feared to put it on his lips at the very time 
that his life did not incorporate it (Dent, 
xxxiii. 17). For other particulars of him. 



JH. xvni. 1— 34.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 



215 



bonowed from the doubtfulness of Josephus, 
see Smith's 'Bible Dictionary,' iii. 1836. 
Had made him horns of iron. It would 
seem ee though Zedekiah had made these 
" horns of iron " at some previous time, or, 
perhaps, now simulated Bome very rough 
presentation of horns of an impromptu kind. 
The horns were the symbol of power, and 
the iron of a power invincible. 

\er. 12. — "This verse bespeaks very clearly 
the rotten condition of Church and state, 
prophets and king and " officers " (ver. 8). 

Ver. 14.— This first reply of Mioaiah, 
given in the latter half of the verse, does 
not stand for untruth or deceit, but for very 
thinly veiled, very thinly disguised, very 
keen taunt and reproof. It has been well 
described as the ironical echo of the lan- 
guage of the unreal prophets. Micaiah 
Begins by answering a fool according to his 
folly, i.e. according to his own heart's desiie. 
He had just come from some place of im- 
prisonment or punishment (ver. >25). And 
he 80 spoke or so looked that the king 
should know he had not spoken his Iftst 
word in answer to ttie inquiry addressed to 
him. 

Ver. 16. — The brief parable smote the 
very heart of Ahab (Numb, xxvii. 17) ; and 
Ahab felt it, like " the sentence of death " 
in him, in a way all different, indeed, from 
that in which an apostle of many a century 
afterward felt it. 

Ver. 17. — Ahab'i language in this verse 
shows that, though he had adjured Micaiah, 
he did not wish to seem to believe that be 
could speak anything but his own temper. 

Ver. 19. — Who shall entice, etc. ? Hebrew 
piel future nn;;. This and the following 
three verses must have told, maniliBstly did 
tell, with fearful force of faithful preaching, 
upon the unreal propliets and the wicked 
king. How it was that their contents did not 
avail with Jehoshaphat to throw full energy 
again into his conscience, and to enable him to 
break at once with Ahab and his expedition, 
is inexplicable (ami the more as it was his 
own pressing suggestion that the true pro- 
phet should be summoned), except as another 
illustration of the fearful difficulty that lies 
so often to human weakness, in the way of 
retracing a false step. Both these visions 
(vers. 16, 18—22) well illustrate how God 
revealed his truth, will, and specific mes- 
sages to his true prophets in vision. The 
vision of the throne, grand in all the majesty 
of its simplicity, of the psalmists (ix., xi., 
xlv., ciii.), of Isaiah (vi. 1 — 5), of Ezekiel 
(i. 26), of Daniel (vii. 9), of Stephen (Acts 
vii. 56), of St. John (Eev. iv. 2), is part of 
heaven's own stamp of authentication o( the 
Bible. 

Ver. 22. — The vision culminating as re- 
g^irUs its practical object in this verse is 



Micaiah's bold ex;ilai..^tion of how it comes 
to pass that he has to bear the brunt of 
Ahab's " hate," on account of the uniformly 
unfavourable character of his answers to 
him, instead of four hundred other men 
shilling it with him. He declares, on the 
authority of his rapt vision, that it is because 
they are possessed by a lying spirit (Bom. L 
25, 28 ; 1 Thess. ii. 12). And, like the true 
prophet of all time, he declares it at all 
hazards and at all cost. 

Ver. 23. — Which way went the Spirit of 
the Lord from me to speak onto thee } Tliis 
question of Zedekiah, and Micaiah's answer 
to him in the following verse, are both 
obscure and of doubtful interpretation, but 
their drift not at all so. Keil and Bertheau 
correctly say, — in that Zedekiah used the 
force and the language that he did, it is not 
a bad sign that he was under a spirit's in- 
fluence, but in that it was physical force 
which he used in a moral snbject, this was a 
conclusive sign of the character of the spirit 
that he was amenable to. Among many 
possible suggestions as to the exact meaning 
of the question, "Which way," etc.? it is 
possible that a sceptical taunt best explains 
Zedekiah's words, and that he meant that he 
did not believe the Spirit of the Lord went 
any way to Micaiah. He will not yield to a 
doubt or to a suspicion thrown upon it that 
the Spirit had been with himself, and be will 
fain throw great doubt, whether he had pro- 
ceeded from him to Micaiah ! 

Ver. 24. — So also, probably, this verse 
would purport to tell us beforehand dis- 
tinctly what is not told after the issue of 
the battle and Ahab's death, that Zedekiah 
and his co-prophets did what they could, 
however vainly, to hide and to elude the 
vengeance of Jezubel (1 Kings xx. 30 ; xxii 
25; 2 Kings ix. 2). 

Ver. 25. — Carry him back. The last of 
these three words tells, of course, its own 
tale, of what had already been the treatment 
accorded to Micaiah. Amon the governor 
. . . Joash the king's son. This latter person 
is found only here and in the parallel, and 
the designation given him probably does not 
intend a personal relationship to the king, 
but an official; so see again eh. xxviii. 7; 
and note the conjunction again of the 
governor of the house, in the next clause. 
The Vulgate translates the Hebrew for "the 
king's," as though it were a proper name, 
"Amelech." See also Smith's 'Bible Dic- 
tionary,' under the name "Maaseiah" 17. 
Nor is Amon the governor known elsewhere 
except in the parallel (1 Kings xxii. 26), but 
these designations, as through some chinks, 
throw a little scanty light into the subject 
of the internal administration at this time of 
the kingdom of Israel In this kingdom 
snb-ie'inent to the separatinn, deoontraliwi- 



216 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xviii. 1— 34. 



tion seems to have been carried to a further 
point than in Judah, and considering its 
greater extent, its far inferior metropolitan 
roioe, its double place of worship and saori- 
flce, these largely idolatrous, and in all this 
the nndoubted degraded authority of its 
central government, this is very explainable. 
It is true that in both kingdoms history 
speaks equally of such offices and ofiScers 
as were distinctly military or looked that 
way, but it can scarcely be without a reason 
that for the numerous allusions in Israel 
n Kings xvi. 8—10; xviii. 3; xx. 7; xxi. 
7—13; 2 Kings i. 8—17; iii. 6 ; x. 5) to 
councils of elders (well known before the 
disruption), and governors of palaces, of 
cities, of houses, and of provinces, there is 
scarcely one in the records of Judah. Here 
possibly enough the executive would be 
more vigorous, more compact, and more 
direct and close in its action from head- 
quarters, while in both divisions of what 
should have been the one kingdom, royalty 
was by profession constitutional, and in its^ 
devolution hereditary. 

Ver. 26. — Only the slightest differences 
are noticeable between this verse and the 
parallel, this latter using the sign of the 
objective case (which in this instance would 
probably lend some contemptuousness of 
expression), and using the word "come" 
instead of return. 

Ver. 27. — The courage and fidelity of 
Micaiah, in not deserting either his prophet- 
message or his prophet-Master, are admir- 
able, and for his determined appeal to all 
the people, which was made in the very face 
of the king or kings, see again Micali i. 2. 

Ver. 28. — It must remain doubtful which 
of the kings carried with him the uneasier 
heart. What Jehoshaphat might have 
gained in less element of personal and 
physical fear, he by rights i-hould have lost 
in sensitiveness of conscience. 

Ver. 29. — Ahab does not seem disposed to 
lose anything again for want of aski ng, and 
even vouchsafing apparently (but it is ex- 
cteilingly likely that this arises iiom our 
failing to appreciate exactly the force of the 
Hebrew forms in the text) to use the tone 
of directing, to his brother-king of the 
better part and kingdom. It must be pre- 
sumed that there was something to relieve 
A hub's language of the barefaced disregard 
for the safety of Jehosliaphat and regard for 
his own, which lie on the surface nf the 
words he uses. Quite possibly, for instance, 
both knew that Ahab was to. be the mark of 
the shooters. Also Ahab's disguise may 
have meant a heavy price to pay to his pride, 
while Jehoshaphat's dignity was saved in- 
tact. So, too, Ahab may have merely pur- 
ported to say, " You can, without any special 
risk, wear your royal apparel , but I," etc 



Ver. 80.— Our had commanded stands 
rendered in the parallel not so explicitly 
" commanded," but in both cases the Hebrew 
text is the same (TjJf). Therefore, if the 
place of vers. 29, 30 were inverted, what 
reads like the cool suggestion of Ahab in 
ver. 29 would seem more tolerable. Mean, 
time, Benhadad's command argues the 
intensity of his resentment towards Ahab, 
and not less ungrateful forgetfulness for 
the ultimate consideration that Ahab had 
allowed to him (1 Kings xx. 31—34). 

Ver. 31. — Comparing this and following 
verse minutely with the parallel (1 Kings 
xxii. 32, 33), the exact correspondence of the 
latter of ench pair of verses only the more 
clearly points the significance belongingto the 
two clauses of C>xeign matter interposed so 
characteristically by the writer of Chronicles 
for his own unvarying special objects, viz. 
the Lord helped him ; and God moved them. 
What the cry of Jehoshaphat was remains 
uncertain ; whether a cry to his own body- 
guard and soldiers, or a cry, to those who 
were beginning "to compass him about as 
bees," to let them know at any rate that he 
was not the king they sought, or whether 
most improbably, a cry to the Lord is meant. 
The cry fulfilled its purpose, and if Jehosha- 
phat had a sneaking love for Ahab (see the 
significant "love them," etc., of tfehu in 
second verse of next chapter), he evidently 
had not any idea of needlessly dying for 
him. The happy distinction of perceiving 
in next verse, as compared with seeing in 
this verse, is not warranted by the Hebrew 
ttxt (in both cases mSTS), though it is by 
the gist of the connection and English 
idiom. 

Ver. 33. — At a venture ; Hebrew, ian? ; 
i.e. "in his innocence." The root is the 
familiar root expressive of uprightness, 
perfectness, simplicity, and the meaning 
here is that the shooter was innocent of what 
a distinguished deed he was doing, of the 
personality of the man at whom he aimed 
(for it is not necessary to suppose his shot 
was quite at random), and of the skill that 
gave the arrow to reach its ultimate destiny. 
Between the joints of the harness ; literally, 
between the joints and the harness, i.e. that 
part called the breastplate. The an ow went 
through, or by the s.de of one of the actual 
articidations of tlie armour-mail worn. 
Ahab's direction to the chariot-driver at the 
spur of the first wounded moment to turn 
and carry him out of the host, was evidently 
qualified, when he found that the wound 
was not immediately fatal. As the heat of 
the battle grew, and victory did not at once 
turn one way or the other, he was the more 
anxious to give the moral support of his 
presence to the last to his army, and, unable 
to stand by himself, he was supported by his 



CH. XVIII, 1—34.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 



217 



own orders (so our Tendering is not incon- 
sistent with that in the parallel " was stayed" 
(1 Kings xxii. 35) in the chariot till he 
died in the evening. Although the spirit 
of Ahab, and his fidelity to his own army, 
kingdom, and self, cannot but appear to 
advantage in these last incidents of bis un- 
worthy life, yet it is probable that they find 
their record here for the sake of giving clear 
statement to the fact, tliat in the chariot his 
life-blood collected according to the saying 
of the parallel (ver. 35 compared with 
ver. 38). Note, therefore, particularly the 
truncated history of the writer of Chronicles 
in this instance. Ho, no doubt, consciously 
omitted, and with a purpose, his own usual 
purpose ; but light is lost, and the cross light 
tends rather to misleading, except for tliat 
only correct user of Scripture, which teaches 



us to compare one Scripture with another, 
and balance one part against another — a 
thing easy to do in matters of fact, but too 
often forgotten in the weightier matter of 
doctrine. Here our eighteenth chapter 
closes, less the mention of the proclamation 
for the self-disliaudiug of Ahab's army (ver. 
36 of the parallel chapter) which should 
fulfil the prophecy of our ver. 16, and less 
any mention of Ahab's burial, of the wash- 
ing of his chariot in the pool of Samaria, of 
the dogs licking up of the blood there, and 
of his ivory house, etc. (vers. 37 — 40 of the 
parallel chapter). All of which omittings 
accord well with the one clear ecclesiastical 
and religious intent of the Chronicles, in 
place of the pursuit of matters of general 
anrl merely graphic historic interest, however 
charged with instruction they too might be. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 34. — The second chapter in Jehoshaphafs career. This chapter opens with 
the statement of a fact that portends no good — the " affinity " which Jehoshaphat 
"joined with Ahab," the King of Israel. This came to pass in the incident of the 
marriage of Jehoram, son of Jehoshaphat, with Athaliah, daughter of Ahab. Bight 
years, or a little more, and it seems to bear no evil fruit; but, if so, it was only that 
it was taking its time to form and ripen, and now too surely is found. Clusters of 
lessons in this chapter gather round the names of— 

I. Jehoshaphat. They now, unfortunately, all depend from that one false position 
in which he had involved himself and his family with Ahab and his family. 1. Jeho- 
shaphat has become undoubtedly the leading man, and is proportionately exposed to the 
dangers inherent in, inseparably inherent in, being courted — courted by attentions, by 
flattery, by luxurious entertainment, by being appealed to for his opinion on great 
questions, and tacitly treated as arbiter in high questions of state. 2. He must repay 
these, if possible, in somewhat similar coin, and must use la/rge language, speak after 
the manner of an entangling generosity (ver. 3), and, before he knows what he means, 
commit himself to something dangerously near a promise. 3. After this promise, 
instead of before it, he admonishes the man who is in iaot a rival king to inquire " the 
word of the Lord," and has to wince under the notorious humiliation of listening to 
the report of four hundred men, well known for false prophets I 4. He has to save, if 
not his credit, the bare necessities of the truth, by asking for a true prophet, " a prophet 
of the Lord," without, as it would appear, one word of blank and flat denunciation of 
AhaVs troop of prophets, and with only the mildest deirecation (ver. 7) of Ahab's 
unqualified assertion that he "hates" the true man, and with utter ignoring and 
neglect of the favourable opportunity of asking how it may be supposed to have come 
to pass that the true man " never has prophesied good, but always evil unto " Ahab. 
Yes, but the inconvenience was that he was a guest in his house, and a guest sumptu- 
ously entertained and most del'erentially treated. 5. He has a long sitting's humilia- 
tion, when, clothed in his royal robes, he sat, throne by throne, with Ahab, to see " the 
prophet of the Lord," Mioaiah ; to hear his parables, every word of which he knew to 
be truth ; to witness the horror of that true prophet being " smitten on the cheek " of 
the false, and the royal honour of the Lord God proportionately disparaged ; to observe 
the meek forbearance of Micaiah in his reply ; and, to crown all, his sentence and 
relegation to a bread-and-water imprisonment by Ahab. It ought to have been a long 
day of torture for the king of the true line of David! 6. Lastly, though it is impos- 
sible to doubt that he was in posses.sion of the true state of the whole case, Jehoshaphat 
has to go on to the end. He does the thing that is wrong (ch. xix. 2); he seems, at last, 
to be obeying Ahab rather than to lead him — going into battle and, at his suggestion^ 
clothed for a target for the archers — till the undignified cry to be spared is wrung from' 



218 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xvra. 1— 34. 

his lips, because he wonld have it known he is Jebosbaphat, and not Abab ! All this 
was dangerously close steering for the conscience ; it brought upon bim the distinct 
reproof and very forcibly expressed condemnation of the seer Hanani, so soon as ever 
he reached Jerusalem ; and all was occasioned by his being dragged on, step by step, 
in a wrong course from the position, originally a false one, in which he had placed 
himself. 

II. Ahab. Things are very near their end for Ahah The view is that of a man 
using up to the best advantage the last of his wits, which he bad of long time trusted 
to his disadvantage, which long time had led him wrong, and were now rapidly going 
to lead bim to the fatal end. We notice : 1. How he prepared the way by lavisn 
entertainment of the King of Judah and his retinue, in order to utilize the opportunity 
to persuade him, apparently, to pass his word " to go up to Ramoth-Grilead," but cer- 
tainly to pass an opinion favourable to doing so. 2. How immediately be acceded to 
the proposal of Jehosbaphat that the Lord should be inquired of, but as immediately 
repaired to and summoned " his " own " prophets " (ver. 21). 3. How the force of 
circumstances extracted from bim a faithful statement of the true state of bis feelings 
towards the true prophet (ver. 7). 4. How the "officer," or " messenger," sent to 
bring Micaiah quickly, did his endeavour, no doubt at the instigation of Ahab, to 
pervert (vers. 12, 13) the testimony which Micaiah should give, but vainly. 5. How 
certainly he detected the consequent sarcasm, the veiled compliance of Micaiah (vers. 
14, 15), and the rather drew out more fully all the thing as it was from Micaiah, but 
as he did not want to have it, or to have it uttered I 6. How the wicked action of one 
of his false prophets suited him exactly (vers. 23 — 25), and bridged the way both to 
satisfy his own resentment and to put a fair face on the position in the presence of 
Jebosbaphat. He was, perhaps, trembling all the while lest Jehosbaphat, hearing and 
seeing all, should have summoned up the moral courage to have done just the thing 
which he ought to have done, and withdrawn altogether from the enterprise, or from 
all association with Ahab in it! 7. Lastly, how Ahab entered the battle-field, ill at 
ease, dishonowring himself by disguising himself, and with too sure a presage of what 
was in store for bim ; and the prophecy of Elijah found its fulfilment (1 Kings xxi. 19). 

III. The false pbophets. These, wherever fotmd, are the prophets who seek to 
please man ; who would divine, a task only too easy, what man wishes them to say. 
In this case they are emphatically called, on the highest authority (vers. 21, 22), 
AhaVs prophets, not those of the Lord. Unfaithlulness in the professed teaching of 
religion never does anything better than lets through those who accept it. The anger 
and intemperateness of that one of the false propheis who had been most demonstrative, 
most dramatic (vers. 10, 23), are much to be noticed — noticed as marking, as measuring 
the personal feeling and, in a word, the very temper which should be most utterly 
absent from the true messenger of God, of his truth, and his will. 

IV. The one blameless, beautiful, and even typical figure of the tbuk 
PROPHET. He was already, it appears, a marked man, and, had it been possible, 
marked down by King Ahab. We notice : 1. When all pressure was put on him, and 
he knew very well what it meant, that he asserted the inviolability of his duty — abso- 
lute fidelity to his instructions 1 2. We must notice the deep knowledge imparted to 
him of human nature ; how to touch it at its root ; how to gain effectively its ear under 
the most favourable circumstances ; bow, in the presence of such, even to enlarge its 
own opportunity for exposition of the truth (vers. 14 — 22). The parable, as we may 
call it, of the sheep on the mountains without a shepherd, and the vision of thu council 
of heaven, or in heaven, which had been vouchsafed to Micaiah, — what tales they tell 
to all those who now are listening to him I One against not fewer than four hundred 
and two ! The plamness, the point, the forcibleness, and the fearlessness of his utter- 
ance are all the perfection of the true prophet. For us, too, this passage most instruc- 
tively illustrates the method, or one of the methods, by which prophet and seer of old 
law and then announced the real revelations of heaven to earth. 3. But the perfec- 
tion of the true prophet is yet more intrinsically present in the forbearinsness, the 
patient suifering, the not returning railing for railing, "the fellowship of sufferings" 
with the One Prophet; as Micaiah was "smitten on the cheek," as he was "thrust 
into prison," as he was " fed with the bread and water of affliction," as he uttered no 
provoking word nor murmured, because of the consequences to himself, of his faithful 



OH. X nil. 1—34.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 219 

•inistry. The day that was fateful and fatal to the wicked king Ahab, who now filled 
up the measure of his iniquity ; that was dismay, confusion, exposure, to four hundred 
false prophets ; that, alas 1 tarnished even the history and character of Jehoshaphat — wai . 
the day in which the blameless Micaiah " shone forth as the uun in the firmament of 
heaven." 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORa 

Ver. 1. — Temporal advancement and spiritual decline. Writing the biography of 
Jehoshaphat from a purely religious standpoint, another conjunction than the one used 
might well have been employed. It might well be written, " Now Jehoshaphat had 
riches and honour in abundance, but joined affinity with Abab." For the latter clause 
affirms that on which we can by no means congratulate the king. Yet such is the 
common course of things ; such is the bent of the human mind and the way that 
circumstances usually take, that the simple connective "and" is perhaps the more 
natural of the two. This close association deliberately entered upon between the 
servant of Jehovah and the devotee of Baal is human enough. The man who has 
become strong, according to all earthly measurements, seeks to become stronger still, 
not considering what care he is taking or is neglecting of his deeper and his higher 
interests. We look at — 

L The commonness op this cottbsb. How true it is that " much wants more ; " 
that the exchequer never seems full enough to the man who is amassing wealth, 
nor the rank high enough to him who is pursuing honour, nor the authority great 
enough to him who is striving after power! Men eat of earthly food and are the 
hungrier for their feasting. They have "abundance of riches and honour," but they 
will not be satisfied without that fascinating alliance; they must "join affinity with 
Ahab." Let no man imagine that when he has reached a certain height of wurldly 
advancement he will be satisfied and will crave nothing more. He will most certainly 
find that, when he reaches that desired point, he will long to stand on the height that 
will be still beyond him. And the evil of it is that this thirst for more worldly good 
is something which so often displaces a nobler longing, a craving for more of goodness 
and of fellowship with-Gkid. It even ^{Gects and iigures the spirit to such a degree 
that it positively lessens that better lons;ing, until it is reduced to almost nothing. 

II. The grave unwisdom op it. What did Jehoshaphat gain by this alliance with 
the house of Ahab ? A measurable, momentary gratification. What did he lose by 
it? An immeasurable, permanent good. The mistake he then made was one the 
effects of which stretched far, very far forwards, and atfected for evil many hundreds of 
households beside his own (ch. xxi. 4). What do we gain by adding something more 
to our material prosperity — another thousand pounds to our fortune; another honour 
to our titles; another position to our acquirement? Something truly, but something 
the worth of which is quite measurable; possibly very small, as an increase to our 
life-happiness. But if we are neglecting our higher interests, if we are allowing those 
sacred obligations to be relaxed, if we are departing from God, what do we lose? 
Who shall estimate the value of the favour and friendship of Jesus Christ, of the 
integrity of our Christian character, of the excellency and blessedness of holy useful- 
ness, of that brighter and broader sphere which would have been ours, if we had not 
let earthly and human interests weigh down and press out the higher and the heavenly 
ones? 

III. Its othiiT. As God multiplies his gifts to us, of whatever kind those gifts may 
be, we ought to be thereby more closely attached to him and to be more heartily 
devoted to his service. When we permit increase of substance or added honour to 
lead us away from him, we are as guilty as we are unwise ; our sin is as sad as our 
folly.— C. 

Vers. 2, S. — Spiritual unwariness. When Jehoshaphat came into contact with 
Ahab, he encountered a man who was more than his match in respect of policy. 
Indeed, he may be said to have fallen readily into the trap which his neighbour kid 
for him. Ahab received him as his guest with ostentatious hospitality ; and when 
Jehoshaphat was in a grateful and perhaps elated mood, he proposed a combination 



220 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xvm. 1—34. 

in which they were to share the risks and losses, but not to divide the gains. To this 
ths Ring of jiidah unwisely consented. The "oflfensive alliance " was a mistake on his 
part. Simple straightforwardness needs to be flanked with some wariness or natural 
sagacity, otherwise it may lead us into compromising and even ruinous situations. 
In the conduct of our life, it is of very great importance that we should not show 
unwariuess in — 

L The formation of otrB friendships. Jehoshaphat did an unwise thing in form- 
ing a friendship with Ahab; intimacy with such a man could not possibly end in hii 
own elevation. We should not " love them that hate the Lord " (see homily on ch. 
xix. 2). In nothing is it more needful to show uariness and wisdom than in the choice 
of our friends ; a mistake here means bitter disappointment, unimaginable misery, and, 
in all likelihood, spiritual deterioration if not positive ruin. Be slow to bind this bond 
of friendship, which may, indeed, be a link to every good thing that blesses us, but 
which may be a fetter that chains us to every bad thing that curses and degrades us. 

II. The encountering of social perils. Whether or not Jehoshaphat suffered 
from the blandishments and allurements of the court where Jezebel was queen, we do 
not know. Certainly he ought to have thought twice before he exposed himself and 
his attendants to that serious peril. How much of social peril can we meet and master ? 
That is a question which every man must answer for himself. But it is clear that a 
very large number of human souls have overestimated their capacity for resistance. 
The degenerating influences of a society which is not Christian, but worldly, or vicious, 
are a power which we must only encounter with the utmost circumspection. We may 
take counsel here of Ahab himself (1 Kings xx. 11). Men go airily and easily to the 
contest with those social forces, and they come out of the conflict worsted and wounded, 
perhaps even unto death. Be wary here, for you stand in a " slippery place." 

III. TpB UNDERTAKINQ OP OUR ACHIEVEMENTS. Very readily, to all appearance, 
Jehoshaphat acceded to Ahab's proposal (ver. 2). But it was one involving himself, 
his family, his princes, and his people in great hazards. Syria was a power not at all 
to be despised, and, except the Lord appeared on their behalf, they would most likely 
be defeated. And what reason had Jehoshaphat to conclude that he would have the 
arm of Jehovah on his side when he was going hand-in-hand with such a man as 
Ahab? It was a very doubtful procedure; and the haste with which it was agreed 
upon showed no sugacity at all. Before we adopt our neighboui's proposal we should 
weigh well all its probable and, so far as we can tell, its possible consequences; and 
not those which affect ourselves only, but those also which affect our kindred and con- 
nections. We may go " with a light heart " into an enterprise that means nothing 
less than disaster. Before undertaking anything of importance, there should be (1) 
careful consideration, looking at the subject from all points of view ; (2) consultation 
with the wise and good ; (3) prayer for Divine guidance. 

IV. The regulation of our Christian life. Some men leave the retention of 
their spiritual integrity almost wholly to their good impulses. But this id a rash and 
perilous course. It is, indeed, the foulish and often fatal absence of all method. He 
who has the wariness which is wisdom, will adopt and maintain carefully regulated 
habits of devotion and of self-culture. — C. 

Ver. 4. — Inquiring of the Lord. We are not at all surprised that Jehoshaphat did not 
wish to risk the chances of a great battle without "inquiring at the word of the Lord." 
For it was with him as it should be with us — 

I. A wise and holy habit to seek a knowledge of God's mind, and the supreme 
advantage of his direction. Not, indeed, that he invariably asked in this admirable 
spirit. If we may judge from the silence of Scripture, he had hurried into this ques- 
tionable partnership without any such reverent solicitude (see preceding homily). 
Nevertheless, as a devout servant of Jehovah, he was accustomed to consult the Divine 
will ; and it was, no doubt, a strong feeling that he must not depart from this good 
habit on so great an occasion that prompted him to ask of Ahab what that king would 
most willingly have dispensed with. It should be our constant custom, our fixed 
habit of life, to inquire of God concerning everything we propose to ourselves to do ; 
and more particularly respecting the greater events of life on which large issues hang. 
For who are we that we should lean unto or upon "our own understanding"? How 



m. xvm. 1—34.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 221 

few of all possible considerations can we take into our mind I How impossible for us to 
give the proper weigbt to those wbich are the more grave and serious ! How short a 
way can we look into the future, and how unable we are to foretell what other factors, 
now out of sight, will come into play I How continually our greatest sagacity must 
prove to be but childish simplicity in the sight of him who sees everything at a glance ! 
How wise, therefore, to form the habit of continually inquiring of Gorl, of seeking Divine 
guidance at every stage and even at every step of our human lif ^ ! 

II. Thk rake peivilege for which we may not look. Jelicshaphat wished to know, 
not only whether God was willing for him to go up to the bauic, but also that lio 
would return victorious. He believed that he might gain, not only the instruction, 
but the information he desired. Now, it is not at all certain that God never gives his 
people intimation of coming events in our own time ; the evidence is rather the other 
way. But we may not look for Divine predictions as the ordinary and regular thing. 
Certainty concerning the event would probably have an unfavourable effect on the duty 
and the struggle he/ore the event. It is, on the whole, best for us not to know what 
the issue will be; best for us to act as if the result were hanging on our own fidelity. 
The " long result " we do know, and rejoice to foresee : it nerves us for action ; it 
sustains us in misfortune and temporary defeat. But as to the immediate issue we are 
best left in uncertainty. 

III. The promise we mat plead, and the hope wb may cherish. (Ps. xxx. 10 ; 
cxxi. ; Prov. iii. 6 ; Isa. Iviii. 11 ; Matt. vii. 7 — 11 ; Heb. xiii. 6.) If we are walking 
in the fear of God, and are his children reconciled to him in Jesus Christ, then we 
may continually ask and confidently expect (1) his guidance at the outset, and (2) his 
help all through the work we have undertaken, the duty we are discharging, the burden 
we are bearing. Eeverently, intelligently, obediently, God "will be inquired of" by 
those who love and serve him. — C. 

Vers. 6 — 27. — Speaking for Qod. We may take Micaiah as the type of the true 
prophet, I.e. of the man who speaks for Qod; he is not merely the man who has a 
rision of the future — that is the smaller part of his function ; he is the one who is 
charged with a Divine message, and who faithfully delivers it, however it may be 
received. Thus regarding him, we learn that the spokesman for God must be — 

I. Unconceenbd about numbers. There may be "four hundred men" on one side 
(ver. 5), and only one on the other ; or see 1 Kings xviii. 19. The prophet of the 
Lord may be in a most honourable but most decisive minority, but he must not 
consider that. " Truth cannot be put to the vote " and carried by a majority. Many 
a time it has been overwhelmingly outnumbered, and yet ultimately triumphant. We 
must not count heads when we undertake to speak for the Eternal. " A man with 
truth on his side can never be in a smaller minority than Almighty God and himself." 

II. Inaccessible to human blandishments. The messenger that summoned 
Micaiah and attended him to the king seems to have employed his opportunity in 
trying to persuade the prophet to give a pleasant and courtly answer (ver. 12). He 
did not succeed. Many times have men sought to tamper with the ministers of the 
truth ; sometimes they have succeeded. But when they have done so, there has been 
a lamentable failure. " We seek not yours, but you ; " " If I pleased men I should not 
be the servant of Christ." These are the sentiments and this is the spirit of the true 
prophet. No human whisper in the ear as he goes before his audience will make him 
change one word or tone in the message he delivers from his Master. 

III. Fearless op human authority. Micaiah had caused Jehoshaphat to " hate " 
him (ver. 7) ; and once again he drew upon him the king's resentment. There were 
two kings now present, arrayed in royal apparel and seated on thrones (ver. 9) ; there 
was much in the position to constrain a deliverance that would answer to their known 
wishes ; but Micaiah was unmoved by fear. He acted as honourably and as heroically 
•s if he had witnessed the example and heard the exhortation of the Lord himself 
(Luke xii. 4, 5). To be condemned of man is a small thing when we are commended 
and honoured of God. We can afford to incur the hatred even of kings when we rest 
in the loving favour of our heavenly Father. 

lY. Unmoved by ill treatment. Micaiah responded to Zedekiah in a spirit that 
showed no shade of submission or withdrawal (ver. 23) ; and when the vexed and 



222 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xviii. 1—34. 

passionate king ordered him to be imprisoned and fed with the bread and water of 
a£3iction, he still manifested a fearless spirit, totally unmoved by the ill usane ho was 
receiving (ver. 27). The minister of Christ, who is (or should be) the successor of the 
Hebrew prophet, will not use the language or cherish the spirit of retaliation, but he 
will be utterly undisturbed in his aim and in his purpose by any unjust or unkind 
treatment he may receive. Nothing of this kind will move him from his resolve, will 
turn him from his high and noble task. Acting under the inspiration of God, and 
conscious that he is " partaking of the afflictions of Christ," the " bread and water of 
affliction " will be sweet to his taste. In that day he wUl " rejoice and be exceeding 
glad " (Matt. V. 10—12). 

V. Wholly attentive to the Divine voice. "Even what my God saith, that 
will I speak" (ver. 13). So spoke the faithful witness. One greater far than he 
described himself as " a Man that hath told you the truth, which I have heard of God " 
(John viii. 40). What has God said to us that we can tell our brethren ? What do we 
learn of Christ and in his service ? What do we read in his Word, by a careful, reverent, 
and intelligent study of it ? What sacred lessons have we gleaned, as his holy providence 
has led and his Divine discipline has taught and trained us ? This, nothing else and 
nothing less, will we carry to the minds of men, to redeem them from sin, to succour 
them in sorrow, to prepare them for the burden and battle of life, to make them ready 
for the time of judgment and the long day of eternity. — C. 

Vers. 28 — 34. — The true lesson of human ignorance. What are the true lessons that 
we gather from this interestiug episode ? There may be suggested — 

I. Two thoughts which ABE SPECIOUS BUT FALSE. Somc men would probably 
infer from similar facts happening In the range of their own observation : 1. That the 
issue of events is in the hands of an irreversible fate. Ahab (they would argue) was 
bound to fall that day ; do what he might, dis;i;uise himself as he pleased, take what- 
ever precaution he could, his death was decreed and was simply unavoidable. But this 
is not the wise, nor is it the right, way of regarding it. Had he been as brave as 
Jehoshaphat (see ver. 29), he certainly would not have fallen in the way he did ; had 
he been as true to Jehovah as the King of Judah was, and as he might and should have 
been, he would not have " gone up to Ramoth-Gilead " at all, for he would have been 
dissuaded by the prophet of the Lord, and he would not have fallen at all. His death 
that day, as well as that way, was due to his own course and to his own choice. Our 
destiny is not in the hands of some inexorable necessity ; it resides in our own character ; 
it is the work of our own will. 2. That many things, if not most things, are decided 
not by choice, but by chance. Tiie death of Ahab (they would say) was the result of 
"a bow drawn at a venture." And it is this chance-work that has a very large share 
in the determination of our whole earthly history. But chance, in the sense of positive 
lawlessness, does not exit^t. Everything happened here according to law. The soldier 
drew his bow according to his instruction, aiming at the enemy, though not at any 
one whom he recognized in particular; the arrow went on its career according to the 
laws of motion, and did its work on Ahab's person in accordance with all the laws of 
physics. There was no violation of law in the smaller.t degree, though something 
happened which no man could have calculated and predicted. If we succeeil, it will be 
by using the laws of health, of prosperity, etc. ; if we fail, it will be in consequence of 
our disregarding these laws, w^iich are laws of God. Chance will neither make nor 
mar us. 

II. Two THOUGHTS WHICH ABU BOTH TBUE AND SERVICEABLE. 1. That We do not 

know what harm we do liy onr most casual siruives. We "draw a bow at a venture," 
we "send an arrow throujih the air;" it is only a sentence, it is a very simple deed, 
WD think ; but it hits and wounds a sensitive human heart ; it may even slay a soul. 
It may cause such grief as we would im no account have inflicted if we could have 
foreseen it; it may lead to the first declension of a valuable human life, and may end 
in such spiritual disaster as it would grieve us indeed to originate. 2. That we cannot 
tell what good we do by our simplest efforts. Little did the Syrian soldier suppose 
that by that shot of his arrow he was to serve his royal master as he did. It is a most 
cheering and insjiiring thought that we cannot tell what kind or measure of good we 
are effecting by our everyday service of our Lord. A kindly smile, a gracious reoogni- 



OH. xvm. 1-54.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 22» 

tion, an enconraging word, a neighbourly kindness, a warning utterance, the taking of 
"a class," the giving of "an address," the conduct of "a service," perhaps under the 
Bumblest roof, or to the most unjiromising audience, may prove to be a most valuable 
contribution to the cause of Jesus Christ, to the service of mankind. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 3. — 77ie false sfeps of a good king. I. As unpobtunatb aixianob. 
Jehoshaphat joins affinity witti Ahab (ver. 1). This refers to the marriage of Jehoram 
his son with Athaliah, Ahab's daughter (ch. xxi. 6), eight or nine years before. The 
date may be approximately determined tiius. Athaliah's son ascended the throne of 
J udah at the age of twenty-two (2 Kings viii. 26), not forty-two (ch. xxii. 2). But 
Jehoram his fatlier reigned eight years (ch. xxi. 5; 2 Kings viii. 17). Hence the 
fourteen years leading back to Ahaziah's birth must have been the last fourteen of the 
reign of Jehoshaphat. Since, then, Jehoshaphat reigned twenty-five years (1 Kinga 
xxii. 42), Ahaziah's birth must have happened in the eleventh year of Jehoshaphat's 
and the fifteenth of Ahab's reign (1 Kings xxii. 41). But Ahab leigneil twenty-two 
years (2 Kings xvi. 29). Hence the interval between Ahaziah's birth and Ahab's 
death must have been at least seven years. The wedding, therefore, of Jehoram and 
Athaliah may be set down eight or nine years prior to Jehoshaphat's visit- to Samaria, 
The alliance that wedding represented was the first wrong step Jehoshaphat took. It 
was : 1. Unnecessary. (1) Not required by the safety of the state. The army that, 
with no ally but God (ch. xiv. 12), had defeated Zerah's million of soldiers, could hardly 
stand in need of succour from the son of Omri. In league with Jehovah (ch. xvii. 3), 
Jehoshaphat should have reckoned himself dispensed from the necessity of seeking 
other confederate (Eom. viii. 31 ; 1 John iv. 4). (2) Not demanded by the glory of his 
crown. His diadem had descended from David; Ahab's was of recent date. Omri had 
been an upstart (1 Kings xvi. 16) ; David a prince legitimate, a sovereign created by 
special act of Jehovah himself. Then he (Jehoshaphat) had " riches and honour in 
abundance," second only to those of Solomon, both of which were tokens of Divine 
approbation (Ps. oxii. 3). Besides, he possessed a good name (ch. xvii. 3), which is 
better than great riches (Prov. xxii. 1) or precious ointment (Eocles. vii. 1). 2. 
Dangerous. (1) To his own religious character, which could not be improved thereby. 
"Evil communications corrupt good manners" (1 Cor. xv. 33). Few can touch pitch 
and not be defiled. Considering Ahab's infdmous character (1 Kings xvi. 29 — 33), 
Jehoshaphat should have reasoned that the wider they stood apart the better for him 
(Prov. xiii. 20), and should have remembered David's prayer (Ps. xxviii. 3), as well 
as acted on David's resolution (Ps. ci. 4). (2) To his son's piety (if that son had any), 
which would not likely be increased thereby. Nothing more ruinous to a young man 
for both time and eternity than an irreligious wife (Prov. xii. 4) ; nothing more helpful 
than a woman that fears the Lord (Prov. ^xxi. 11, 12). Whatever Jehoram was in 
youth — and his upbringing may be assumed to have been godly — when he reached 
the throne he was truculent and debased, a murderer and an idolater, both of the 
worst type. This appalling deterioration the writer of the Kings and the Chronicles 
ascribe to Athaliah's influence (ch. xxi. 6; 2 Kings viii. 18). (3) To the best interests 
of his kingdom, which were not likely to be furthered thereby. On the contrary, these 
were grievously hindered. Judah declined till, in respect of idolatry, she stood at a 
level almost as low as that of Israel (ch. xxi. 13). 3. Sinful. A daughter from the 
house of Omri no fitting mate for a sou of Jehoshaphat. The offspring of a Jezebel 
and an Ahab a good man should not have taken to his bosom (2 Cor. vi. 14 — 16). 

II. An ill-advised joornbt. Jehoshaphat pays a visit to Ahab (ver. 2). The 
second wrong step of Judah's king : 1. Not demanded hy duty. Nuthing in his 
relations to Ahab nr in the obligations resting upon him with reference to Ahab called 
for his journey to Siimaria. Jehoshaphat in this case ran without being sent, always 
perilous for a good man. 2. Not prompted hy self-interest. Jehoshaphat's true interest 
lay in keeping as far apart as possible fnim the house of Omri (Prov. iv. 14). Had 
Ahab been a pious sovereign, Jehoshai hat might have profited by his society ; being 
the opposite, Ahab could not aiivance Jehoshaphat's religion (Prov. xiii. 20). 3. Not 
required by courtesy. Had Jehoshaphat been invited to Samaria, he might have found 
it difficult to decline without offending his royal brother. But Jehoshaphat travelled 
northwards of his own motion. Considering who Ahab was, it would have evidenced 



224 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xvui. 1— 84. 

more prudence had Jehosbaphat stayed at home. To say the least, it was hazardous 
to fraternize with such a son of Belial as the King of Israel (2 Sam. xxiii. 6, 7). , 

III. Ah unholt confedebact. Jehoshaphat makes a league with Ahab (ver. 3). 

1. At what timet After enjoying Ahab's hospitality, which was sumptuous. The 
pleasures of the table have a tendency to lay one open to temptation ; indulged in to 
excess, they lead to other sins (2 Tim. iii. 4 ; 1 Pet. ii. 11). Gluttony and drunkenness 
go commonly together (Deut. xxi. 20 ; Prov. xxiii. 21 ; Matt. xxiv. 49) ; and all 
experience shows that when wine is in wit is out. Besides, it requires courage to 
accept a neighbour's hospitality — to eat his dinner anr! drink his wines — and deny his 
request. (N.B. — Beware of dining with those whose characters cannot be trusted!) 2. 
On whose persuasion f Ahab's. The King of Israel doubtless reasoned he had • 
double claim on Jehoshaphat, to whose son he had given a wife, and to whose self be 
had furnished a splendid entertainment. It is dangerous for good men to accept 
favours at the hands of the wicked. Jehoshaphat should have remembered David's 
prayer (Ps. oxli. 4). 3. For what object i To recover Bamoth-Giiead upon the 
northern frontier of Israel — a town which belonged to Israel (Deut. iv. 43 ; Josh. xxi. 
38), and had been captured by Benhadad's father, not in the war with Baasha (ch. xvi. 
4 ; 1 Kings xv. 20), who was not Ahab's father, but in a subsequent unrecorded struggle 
with Omri who was. Benhadad had promised to restore it (1 Kings xx. 34), but had 
neglected or refused to do so. Accordingly, Ahab may have argued that his plea for 
the projected campaign was good, as the monuments appear to show he had ground for 
thinking the time opportune, Shalmaneser II. of Assyria having shortly before, in the 
battle of Karkar, defeated the Syrian king (Sayce, ' Fresh Light,' etc., p. 121). Still it 
was not clear that this expedition, though justified by political and military considera- 
tions, was approved by God, and Jehoshaphat would have been excused had he viewed 
with suspicion any enterprise that had Ahab for its author. 4. In what terms t " I am 
as thou a/rt," etc. (ver. 3). The magniloquence of this utterance was probably due to 
the time when and the place where it was given forth. Had Jehoshaphat not been 
dining with Ahab, he would most likely have consulted Jehovah before committing 
himself and his battalions in so pompous and foolhardy a fashion. Yet it may have 
proceeded from a constitutional pomposity of manner with which the southern king 
was afflicted (cf. 2 Kings iii. 7), as were ancient sovereigns generally ; compare the 
treaty of the Grand Duke of Kheta with Barneses II. of Egypt, " Behold, I am at one 
in heart with Eamessu-Meriamen, the great ruler of Egypt " (' Records,' etc., iv. 29). 
The world has travelled far since the days when kings could send their peoples to war 
without asking their opinion, simply to gratify revenge or slake ambition. Amongst 
civilized nations subjects cannot now be plunged into hostilities by their rulers without 
their own consent. 

Learn : 1. The danger of mixed marriages. 2. The perils of the table (Prov. xxiii. 

2, 6, 20). 3. The slipperiness of evil paths— one sin leads to another. 4. The propriety 
of wisely selecting companions (Prov. xxviii. 7, 19). 5. The folly of being confederata 
with wicked men. 6. The wisdom of consulting God before engaging in a doubtful 
•nterprise. — W. 

Vers. 4 — 8. — A council of war: Jehoshaphat and Ahab among the prophets. I. 
Jehoshaphat's proposal. To inquire at the Lord (ver. 4). A proposal: 1. Oood. 
Commanded by God (Prov. iii. 5, 6), recommended by the pious (Gen. xxv. 22 ; 1 Sam. 
xxiii. 2, 4; 1 Chron. xxi. 30), approved by experience as indi^peusable for safety 
(Jer. X. 23), and one that can seldom be neglected without loss (Zcph. i. 6), and even 
hurt (1 Chron. x. 14). 2. New. At least in Israel, where the custom had been to 
say, ' Inquire of liaal ' (Hall). As such, it probably appeared to Ahab unnecessary, as 
to ungodly men generally religion ami its forms mostly do; though to Ahab it should 
likewise haife served as a rebuke, reminding him of his apostasy from Jehovah and 
inviting him to return. " A word fitly spoken," etc. (Prov. xxv. 11). 3. Untimely. 
It should have been made not after but before the conclusion of the treaty, and was 
now too late. It is not clear that God will direct those whose minds are fixed befon 
<b«y consult him. 4. Insincere. Jehoshaphat's suggestion not that of an honest man 
who desired guidance from Heaven, but of one who half suspected he had entered on a 
doubtful course, from which, however, he did not care to withdraw, but for which he 



OH. xvm. 1— 34,] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 225 

wished Divine permission, if not approbation. Cf. Balaam with th« mesBengers of 
Balak (M umb. xxii. 7, 8). 

II. Ahab's consultation. (Ver. 5.) 1. The oracle inquired at, (1) Seemingly 
safe. The advisers were " prophets," whose calling was to pronounce upon cases of 
conscience, and deliver authoritative utterances concerning Heaven's will (Exod. vli. 1 ; 
Deut. xviii. 22; Ezek. xiv. 7). The recognized media of communication between 
Jehovah the theocratic King and his subjects; they were likewise four hundred in 
number, and had not Solomon said, " In the multitude of counsellors there is safety " ? 
(Prov. xi. 14 ; xv. 22 ; xxiv. 6). (2) Beally doubtful. " These four hundred privy 
councillors were prophets, not of Jehovah, but of the calves introduced by Jeroboam, 
who gave themselves out, indeed, as prophets of Jehovah worshipped under the symbol 
of the calves," but who "came forward of their own accord without a Divine call, and 
were, if not in the pay, at least in the service of the idolatrous king" (Keil). (3) 
Wholly misleading. Not being in the secret of Jehovah (Ps. xxv. 14), Ahab's 
prophets could not reveal Jehovah's mind. Merely calling their answer, or believing 
it to be, Jehovah's would not make it so. Men have been known to dignify as 
"revelations" and "visions" from God what was purely the product of their own 
imaginations or the whisperings of lying spirits. (4) Perfectly useless. Since Ahab's 
prophets could not tell the mind of Jehovah, they were not the advisers Jehoshaphat 
wanted. Their answer would shed bo light upon the problem that perplexed him. 
2. The question proposed. (1) Wrongly expressed. Instead of asking, " Shall we 
go to Eamoth-Gilead to battle, or shall we forbear ? " Ahab should have said, " Have 
we done right in deciding to go to Eamoth-Gilead? or have we done wrong?" When 
men consult God they should state the case submitted to his judgment with accuracy. 
Perhaps, however, so far as Ahab was concerned, the statement was correct enough, 
as it cannot be supposed the rightness or wrongness of the contemplated expedition 
would much trouble him. That Jehoshaphat did not check his royal brother looked 
suspicious. (2) Insincerely moved. Ahab did not want to know the mind of Jehovah 
upon the subject; Jehoshaphat secretly wished that mind to accord with his own 
inclinations. With both the Eamoth campaign was a foregone conclusion. Under such 
circumstances to have asked Jehovah at all was hypocrisy and insult. Compare the 
conduct of the Jewish remnant who pretended to consult God through Jeremiah about 
going into Egypt (Jer. xlii. 20). 3. The answer retwned. (1) What the two kings 
wanted : " Go up to Ramoth-Gilead." To Jehoshaphat's uneasy conscience this ought 
to have given relief, though it did not. (2) What Jehovah intended: that Ahab 
should at Eamoth receive his death-stroke. (3) What the prophets invented : they 
derived it from their own deceived imaginations. 4. The reason given. (1) A fiction, 
framed by the speakers to please their royal patron. (2) A falsehood, since it was not 
the Divine purpose at this time to permit the recovery of Ramoth-Gilead. 

III. Jehoshaphat's question. (Ver. 6.) 1. Dictated hy suspicion. The King of 
Judah was not satisfied with the answer of the prophets ; which was not wonderful, 
considering : (1) Whose prophets they were — Ahab's : " Like master like man." (2) What 
sort of prophets they were: "of the calves," not "of Jehovah." Men usually become 
like the deities they worship; so do prophets. (3) What inducements they had to 
return such an answer to Ahab's interrogation. Ahab being their master, by whose 
favour they lived, their interest clearly was to please Ahab. (4) What reason he had to 
suspect their deliverance — it was too like the response he himself desired. 2. Prompted 
hy caution. Jehoshaphat would not act precipitatelv. If possible, he would have 
Jehovah's mind upon the matter. He would imitate David, and urge Ahab to inquire 
at Jehovah again (1 Sam. xxiii. 4). Good men should ponder the paths of their feet 
(Prov. iv. 26), remembering that he who hasteth with his feet sinneth (Prov. xix. 2), 
and that the prudent man looketh well to his going (Prov. xiv. 15). 

IV. Ahab's answer. (Ver. 7.) 1. Promptly given. To Jehoshaphat's inquiry, 
" Is there not here a prophet of Jehovah besides?" etc. (ver. 6), Ahab responded there 
was one. Ahab probably at the moment did not know where Elijah was, or was afraid 
of the Tishbite. Most likely he mentioned Micaiah because he expected either that 
Jehoshaphat, hearing Micaiah was in jail, would never dream of proposing he should 
be called, or that Micaiah, though summoned, would not have courage to speak in 
presence of two kings and four hundred prophets. In both expectations Ahab mis* 

II. OHBONIOLES. q 



22fi THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICIiBS. [oh. xvin. 1-^. 

calculated and outwitted himself, as wicked men usually do. 2. Instantly qualified. 
The prophet's name was Micaiah, the son of Imlah — conjectured, without historical 
foundation, to have been the disguised prophet who had announced to Ahab his doom 
for iiermitting Beohadad to escape (1 Kings xx. 38), and by the rabbis to have been 
either he or the unnamed prophet mentioned earlier (1 Kings xx. 13, 22, 28). That 
Ahab disliked him was a point in his favour, it being a dubious commendation to be 
liked by a bad man. Moreover, the ground of Ahab's displeasure was an additional 
certificate to Micaiah, though a heavy condemnation of Ahab. Unless Micaiah had 
been a true prophet he would not so invariably have spoken evil of Ahab ; that he did 
so was unmistakable evidence that Ahab was a bad man (Isa. iii. 11; xlviiL 22). 
Then Micaiah at the moment was in prison, which Ahab probably imagined would end 
the matter. But it did not, Jehnshaphat perliaps remembei-ing that good men were 
often imprisoned unjustly (Gren. xxxix. 20), and that Micaiah's incarceration, like 
Hanani's (oh. xvi. 10), might be to his credit rather than the opposite. 

V. Jehoshaphat's kemonstranoe. (Ver. 7.) The speech of Ahab told of: 1. A 
</reat vrrong to Micaiah. Ahab would have sinned in hating Micaiah even had Micaiah 
been an offender (Lev. xix. 17 ) ; much more when Micaiah was innocent and Ahab's anger 
was without a cause (Ps. xxxv. 19 ; Matt. v. 22) ; most of all when Micaiah was a prophet 
of Jehovah (Ps. cv. 15), who had only spoken the words Jehovah put into his mouth 
(Jer. i. 7 ; vii. 27). 2. A greater wrong to Jehovah. Just because Micaiah's words were 
not his own so much as Jehovah's, a reflection on Micaiah was a virtual reflection on 
Jehovah. When Ahab charged Micaiah with always speaking evil concerning him, 
he practically charged Jehovah with being malignant towards him. But if Micaiah 
prophesied calamity for Ahab that was conditional on Ahab's disobedience, and would 
have been averted by repentance and reformation (Ezek. xxxiii. 14)) ; if Jehovah put 
minatory language into his prophet's mouth j — this was out of love to Ahab, to turn 
him from his evil ways. 

VI. Ahab's submission. (Ver. 8.) An officer (or eunuch) was hastily despatched to 
fetch Micaiah from his cell. The haste may have indicated : 1. Aliab's sense of the 
importance of the question under consideration ; and certainly nothing can be of greater 
moment for any than to understand what the will of the Lord is. Only this can be 
ascertained by none but renewed hearts (Bom. xii. 2). More likely, however, it marked : 
2. Ahab's sense of his own importance, which could brook no delay in the execution of 
his royal commands. An earthly king's business, even when insignificant, is commonly 
supposed to require haste (1 Sam. xxi. 8); how much more the business of the King of 
kings (John ix. 4; Bom. xii. 11)! The haste may even have been due to: 3. AhaVi 
inward irritation with Jehoshaphat, to whom he had submitted, possibly not with the 
best grace. It requires a large amount of magnanimity to enable even good men to 
accept the rebukes and yield to the persuasions of others. 

Learn : 1. The propriety and wisdom of consulting God in everything (Prov. iii. 6; 
Phil. iv. 6 ; Jas. i. 5). 2. The unlikelihood of learning God's mind from the world's 
prophets or teachers (John iii. 31). 3. The certainty that God's faithful servants will 
not be liked by their contemporaries, and that in exact proportion to their faith- 
fulness (John vii. 7 ; xv. 19). 4. The danger of playing fast and loose with con- 
science. — ^W. 

Vers. 9 — 27. — Micaiah, the son of Imla — an Old Testament hero, I. The coukagb 
HE DI8PLATED. (Vers. 9 — 13.) He delivered Jehovah's message under circumstances 
that might and probably would have intimidated him had he not been a hero. 1. Befort 
two kings to whrnn that message was unacceptable. The scene was calculated to steal 
away Micaiah's fortitude, could anything have done so. In an open space or threshing- 
floor, at the entering in of the gate of Samaria, Ahab and Jehoshaphat, arrayed in royal 
robes, sat each upon his throne. Immediately encircling them were the four hundred 
prophets ; while each king was attended by his army (Josephus, ' Ant,,' viii. 16. 3). 
Ordinarily, " there's such a divinity doth hedge a king," that Micaiah might have been 
excused had he trembled when ushered into the presence of two such royal personages, 
decked out with the trappings of lofty station, waited on by bowing courtiers, and 
escorted by battalions of warriors ; much more when one of them was Ahab, whose 
disphasure he had already felt, and the might of whose arm he had lately experienced; 



OH. XVIII. 1—34.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 227 

most of all when he knew or suspected that his words could not be acceptable to th« 
kingly auditors on whose ears they were about to fall. Yet Micaiah flinched not 
Composed as if he stood before peasants, he told out the message Jehovah put into his 
lips. Compare the attitudes of Hanani before Asa (ch. xvi. 7), of Elijah before Ahab 
{1 Kings xviii. 18; xxi. 20), of Daniel before Belshazzar (Dan. v. 13), of John the 
Baptist before Herod (Matt. xiv. 4), of Paul before Felix and Agrippa (Acts xxiv. 25 ; 
xxvi. 28), of Polycarp before Antoninus, of Luther before the Diet of Worms, of John 
Knox before the court of Mary. 2. In the presence of fow liv/ndred false propheti 
whom that message opposed. Had numbers been a test of truin, ihen was Micaiah wrong, 
since he stood alone against the united body of the Israelitish prophets. Their answer 
to Ahab's question was unanimous. Without one dissenting voice they had assured him 
Jehovah would reward his efforts with victory. Kamoth-Qilead would be delivered 
into his hand, and the power of Syria crushed. Zedekiah, one of these prophets, play- 
ing the clown on the occasion, putting iron horns on his head and butting like an ox, 
added, " Thus saith the Lord, With these horns thou shalt push Syria until they be 
consumed ; " while all his brother-prophets, applauding his performance, lu-ged the king 
to " go up to Eamoth-Gilead, and prosper," Micaiah, however, knew that all that was 
false, and in spite of appearing singular, non-complaisant, obstinate, perverse, would not 
cry, " Amen ! " would not shape his words either to please the king or accord with the 
fashion of the hour. It mattered nothing to Micaiah that he stood alone — his feet were 
planted on the rock of truth ; or that men might regard him as " odd," " punctilious," 
" over-scrupulous," provided he was right. Compare Elijah on Mount Carmel before 
the four hundred and fifty prophets of Baal, with tlie four hundred prophets of the grove 
(1 Kings xviii. 19). 3. Thovgh he knew that message would not improve his ovm pros- 
pects. On the way from prison to the king's presence he had obtained a hint from his 
conductor what kind of "oracle" would best suit — would most gratify the king and 
recompense himself. All the state-prophets had observed in what quarter the wind 
sat, and had prophesied accordingly. They discerned what their royal master wanted, 
and why should they who ate his bread decline to gratify his whims ? Witb one consent 
had they declared " good " to Ahab. If he, Micaiah, cunsulted for " good " to himself 
he would act upon that hint ; taking his cue from the " prophets," he would let his 
word be as theirs. But Micaiah was too honest to play the knave. Micaiah under- 
stood not the art of studying self. Micaiah knew his duty was to speak the word given 
him by God, without regarding consequences to any, least of all to himself. And he 
did it! 

II. The ORACLE he delivered. (Vers, 14 — 22.) 1. A seeming permission. Micaiah 
answered Ahab in the words of the false prophets (ver. 14), in irony (Keil, Bertheau), or 
in reproof of Ahab's hypocrisy (Bahr). Either Micaiah meant the opposite of what he 
said — that the advice Ahab had received was worthless ; or he intended to be under- 
stood as declining to give other oracle than that already spoken by the prophets, which 
was the one Ahab wanted. But in any case Ahab suspected Micaiah's sincerity. 2. 
A symbolic warning. Adjured to speak the truth, he related to the king a vision he 
had seen — " all Israel scattered upon the mountains as sheep without a shepherd ; " and 
a voice he had heard — " These have no master; let them return every man to his house 
in peace." Whether the words of Moses (Numb, xxvii. 17) were in Micaiah's mind 
when he described his vision or not, the import of the vision and the voice was as 
patent to Ahab as to him. Ahab was to fall at Bamoth-Gilead ; Israel to become like 
a flock without a shepherd ; the campaign to end in failure and shame. 3. A serious 
txplanation. Accused by Ahab of speaking from a spirit of malignant hatred towards 
him, Micaiah depicted another vision, which let the king see the real deceivers were his 
own prophets, not he, Micaiah. The vision, most likely received some time before and 
not then only for the first time, consisted of a dramatic representation of the Divine 
government, in which were set forth the following truths : (1) That God works by 
means of secondary agents. The prophet saw Jehovah, as Isaiah (vi. 1) afterwards 
beheld him, seated upon his throne, with all the host of heaven, standing on his right 
hand and on his left. The host of heaven was the innumerable company of angels of 
which David sang (Ps. Ixviii. 17), two battalions of which met Jacob at Miihanaim 
(Gen. xxxii. 2), and many regiments of which protected Elisha and his servant at 
Dothan (2 Kings vi. 17). Their designation "host" indicated their number and 



228 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xvm. 1— 34. 

Older ; their position, " on his right hand and on his left," marked their submission 
•nd readiness to execute Jehovah's will (Ps. ciiL 20, 21). (2) That agencies of evil 
equally with those of good are under the Divine controL Though God is not and 
cannot be the author of sin, he may yet, through the wicked actions ol' his creatures, 
accomplish bis designs. His purpose was that Ahab should fall at Bamoth-Gilead ; be 
effected that purpose by suffering Ahab to be misled by his false prophets, and these to 
be deceived by a lying spirit. Neither could the prophets have spoken to Ahab, nor 
the lying spirit whispered to the prophets, without the Divine permission. This truth 
Micaiah dramatically portrayed by representing Jehovah as taking counsel with his 
angels, and asking, " Who shall entice Ahab King of Israel, that he may go up and fall 
at Bamoth-Qilead ? " (3) That God does not always hinder from being deceived those 
■who wish to be deceived. Ahab and his prophets desired to believe Jehovah in favour 
of the campaign, and Jehovah allowed them to be persuaded by the lying spirit that 
he was. Having wilfully turned their backs upon Jehovah and become worshippers 
of idols, Jehovah now left them to reap the fruit of their folly — gave them up to strong 
delusion to believe a lie (Isa. Izvi. 4 ; 2 Thess. ii. 11). " Not by any sudden stroke of 
vengeance, but by the very network of evil counsel which he has woven for himself, is 
the King of Israel to be led to his ruin " (Stanley, ' Jewish Church,' p. 316). (4) That 
God, in permitting the wicked to be the victims of their own evil machinations, only 
exercises upon them righteous retribution. " It is just that one sin should be punished 
by another " (Bishop Hall). This principle universally operative in Providence. 4. A 
solemn dentmieation. Without further parley, or veiling of his thoughts in meta- 
phorical speech, he declares that the king had been imposed upon by his prophets, 
and that Jehovah had spoken evil against him. There are times when God's messengers 
must deliver God's messages to their hearers with utmost plainness and directness of 
■peech. 

III. The recompense hb reoeivbd. (Vers. 23 — 27.) 1. InsuU/rom the prophets, 
through their leader Zedekiah, the son of Chenaanah. (1) What it was. A blow from 
the fist, and a stroke from the tongue — the first hard to bear, the second harder ; the 
first a common resort of cowards, the second of persons overcome in argument. For 
Zedekiah to smite Micaiah on the cheek, as afterwards the soldiers smote Jesus in 
Pilate's prsetorium (Matt. xxvi. 27), and later the bystanders Paul in the council 
chamber at Ananias's command (Acts xxiii. 2), was " intolerably insolent — much more 
to do so in the presence of two kings." " The act was unbeseeming the persou, more 
the presence; prophets may reprove, they may not smite" (Hall). It was, besides, 
painfully like a confession that Zedekiah was conscious of having been found out. (2) 
Why it was. To gratify his thirst for revenge. It was easier to do so in this way than 
by attempting to disprove the truth of Micaiah's oracle. Any fool can exercise bis fist; 
it takes a wise man to use his tongue with effect. Zedekiah probably imagined he did so 
when he mockingly inquired, " Which way went the Spirit of the Lord from me to speak 
unto thee?" That in so saying he claimed to be as much under the Spirit of Jehovah 
as Micaiah, may be true ; that Micaiah understood him to be talking lightly seems 
apparent from the reply returned him : " Thou shalt see on that day when thou shalt 
go into an inner chamber to hide thyself." The event would decide which of the two 
predictions was correct. When the people rose up against the prophets who had mis- 
led their king, Zedekiah, as he fled for safety to some inner chamber, or from chamber 
to chamber, would understand how to answer his own jest. 2. Punishment from the 
king. Micaiah was remanded back to his confinement in the city jail. Amon the 
governor of the city, and Joash the king's son — not necessarily a son of Ahab, but a 
prince of the blood — as commandants of the prison, were instructed to thrust him back 
mto his old cell, and " feed him with bread of affliction and water of affliction ; " in 
modem phrase, to subject him to imprisonment with hard labour, until Ahab should 
return in peace (ver. 26). It was severe upon Micaiah, yet he retracted not. Without 
a murmur at his hard fate, he cheerfully returned to his cell, only calling the people to 
observe that if Ahab returned home from the war in peace, he was not a true prophet 
(ver. 27). 

Leam : 1, The nobility of true courage. 2. The certainty that good men will suffer 
for their goodness. 3. The reality of an overruling Providence. 4. The infallibilitT 
oi God's Word.— W. 



«H. xvm. 1— 34.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONIOLBS. 32$ 

Vers. 28 — 34. — The battle of Bamoth — wn M-fated expedition. I. Ahab'b dibouise. 
(Ver. 29.) 1. Artfully contrived. Apprehensive of the truth of Micaiah's prediction, 
Ahab agreed with Jehoshapbat to lay aside his royal robes and go into battle in the 
garb of a common soldier, perhaps (though not so said) concealing bis well-known 
features behind a vizor, while he (Jehoshapbat), who had no occasion to dread an evil 
issue from the campaign, should array himself as usual in regal apparel — not in Ahab's 
robe» (Josephus), but in his own. In this way Ahab may have reckoned on a double 
chance of safety. On the one hand, his disguise would assist him to elude the notice 
of.the enemy ; on the other bandi Jehoshaphat's kingly clothing would probably cause 
him to be mistaken for Ahab. 2. Wickedly designed. In so far as Ahab's contrivance 
was prompted by a desire of self-preservation it was legitimate, though scarcely valorous, 
and palpably selfish, considering that he did not suggest the like expedient to Jehosha- 
pbat, but rather recommended the contrary. The King of Israel's artifice, however, 
had not its origin in any praiseworthy motive. Whether he hoped that Jehoshapbat 
might fall, while he escaped and seized upon the southern kingdom (Schulz), cannot be 
known, and is probably " too low and unworthy " a scheme " even for a character lo 
bad as Ahab" (Keil); it is certain he aimed at falsifying Micaiah's prediction by 
evading his threatened doom. This, indeed, he might have done by foregoing the 
Ramot£ campaign, to which he was not called by Jehovah; but to attempt by such a 
flimsy or even any device to elude Divine vengeance while defying the Divine will, wag 
a fearful aggravation of his or^nal offence. 3. Completely ineffectual. " Ahab's fate 
found him without his robes " (Josephus), while Jehoshapbat, who seemed to be in the 
greater peril of the two, escaped unhurt. So God commonly confounds the counsels 
of the crafty, and defeats the designs of deceitful workers. 

II. Benhadad's oedee. (Ver. 30.) 1. Tfte meaning of it. In commanding the 
captains of his chariots, thirty-two in number (1 Kings xxil. 31), to fight neither with 
small nor great, but only with the King of Israel, the King of Syria meant that against 
Ahab they should direct their principal and, as far as practicable, exclusive attack. 
This they would be able to do, seeing that Ahab, according to custom, would appear 
upon the field in his royal robes. That ancient monarchs followed this practice appears 
from the monuments of Egypt — the heroic poem of Pentaur representing Bamses II. 
as fighting in person at the head of his warriors and charioteers against the Kbita and 
saying, " The diadem of the royal snake adorned my head. It spat fire and glowing 
flame in the face of my enemies " (Brugsch, ' Egypt under the Pharaohs,' ii. 63). 2. 
The motive of it. (1) Perhaps clemency, as knowing that the shortest way to end the 
war was to secure the capture or destruction of Ahab, armies commonly being dis- 
heartened when they lose their leaders. (2) More probably revenge, as never having 
been able to forget, and far less forgive, the disgrace of bis own capture by Ahab in a 
previous campaign of his against Ahab. If it was so, it was a poor return for the mer- 
ciful consideration and mild treatment then shown to him by Ahab (1 Kings xx. 30 — 
34). But in ordinary life least kindness is often received from those from whom one 
might expect the most. 

III. Jehoshaphat's deliverance. (Ver. 31.) 1. His imminent peril. Mistaking 
him for the King of Israel, the Syrian charioteers surrounded him. This natural, 
and had Jehoshapbat been smitten the blame would have been his own. He who runs 
into danger unbidden need hardly expect to come out of it in safety. Moreover, just as 
certainly as he who walketh with wise men shall be wise, the companion of fools shall 
be destroyed (Prov. xiii. 20) ; if he is not, the praise is due not to himself but to God 
(Ps. cxv. 1). 2. Bis sudden outcry. That this "cry " was a prayer, the Chronicler is 
thought by some to indicate ; this, however, is not absolutely certain. The Chronicler 
says not Jehovah helped Jehoshapbat because (cf. xix. 3), but only when he cried, and 
Jehovah might have helped him without being appealed to by a formal supplication. 
Considering where Jehoshapbat was, it is as likely as not that he did not address 
Jehovah in prayer ; but remembering who and what Jehoshapbat was, a descendant of 
David and a follower of Jehovah, it is certain his " outcry " would sound in Jehovah's 
ears as an appeal for help. 3. His mysterious rescue. Scarcely had he " cried " when 
the Syrian charioteers turned aside and left him unmolested. If the •' cry " was a 
" prayer," Jehoshapbat must have looked upon his unexpected escape as an answer to 
his supplication ; if only a " shout " or signal of distress, he must still have regarded 



230 



THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xix. 1—11. 



the extraordinary behaviour of the Syrians as little short of a providential miracle — as 
a merciful interposition of Jehovah on his behalf, as indeed it was. Jehovah helped 
Jehoshaphat; moved the charioteers and warriors to turn aside, not by any supernatural 
influence upon them, but by so ordering the succession of events, that they understood 
Jehoshaphat's cry and recognized his features in time to let them see he was not the 
object of their pursuit. 

IV. Jehovah's arrow. (Ver. 33.) 1. Whence it flew. From the bow of an un- 
known warrior, most likely an obscure common soldier, who shot either aimlessly into 
the ranks of the Israelitish army, or with deliberate aim, but at no one he knew, at the 
first man that came into his field of vision. Either explanation satisfies the phraseology — 
" a certain man drew a bow at a venture." That the man's name was Naaman (Josephus) 
is a groundless tradition. 2. Whither it sped. To the person of Ahab. All events are 
under God's control. He directeth the flights of arrows as of fowls, the careers of 
javelins as the courses of stars, according to the counsel of his will. Nothing happens 
by accident. In a world governed by infinite wisdom and power chance is impossihle. 
The Syrian archer drew his bow at a venture ; not bo did Jehovah draw his. The 
Syrian sharpshooter knew not at whom he aimed ; Jehovah understood well who was 
his target. " Every bullet has its billet," not because the gunner but because God 
directs its path through the air. Not a sparrow can fall to the ground without our 
heavenly Father's permission (Matt. x. 29), nor shaft can hit till he pleases. 3. T» 
what it led. To the death of Ahab. It smote him " between the joints of the harness ; " 
rather between the lower armour and the breastplate (Revised Version), between the 
corselet and the tunic (Luther), between the joints and the harness (Keil). It found 
the spot where the parts of Ahab's armour fitted least closely, and there it entered the 
lower region of his body. Had it penetrated as far as did the arrow with which Jehu 
shot Jehoram(l Kings ix. 24), it must have proved instantaneously fatal. That it did 
not seems a natural inference from the fact that he was able to remain upon the field. 

Learn: 1. The lolly of attempting to outwit God. 2. The certainty that no disguise 
can hide a wicked man from God. 3. The impossibility of evading death when the 
appointed hour has come. 4. The clemency of God to his erring people. 5. The 
reality of God's interference with the affxirs of time. — W. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XIX. 



The matter of this chapter is preserved 
for ns by the writer of Chronicles alone, 
and is of much significance. After glancing 
at the moment's outward " peace " (ver. 1), 
which Jehoshaphat had on his return to 
Jerusalem, the nariative, leaving in deep 
oblivion all he must have tliought and felt 
and may have spoken of the end of his 
brother-king, and of his own late private 
intimacy and public alliance with him, tells 
how he was reined up by Jehu, the son of 
Hanani the seer (vers. 2, 3) ; and thereupon 
how he wisely revisited his kingdom, as it 
were through its length and breadth, 
sought to "bring them back to the Lord 
God of their fathers," remodelling and re- 
filling the various offices of the judges, 
priests, and Levi tea (vers, i — 11), and 
earnestly exhorted them. 

Ver. 1. — In peace. Compare the use of 
the phrase in vers. 16 and 26, 27 of last 



chapter. The only peace in which it could 
be reasonably supposed Jehosljaphat re- 
turned to hid house and the metropolis was 
that of freedom from war, and of present 
" assurance of his life." 

Ver. 2. — And Jehu the son of Sanani the 
seer went out to meet him. For Hanani, the 
faithful father of a faithful son, see ch. xvi. 
7 — 10, where we read that he " came to Asa 
King of Judah," etc. Also for Jehu, see 
1 Kings xvi. 1-4, where we read of liis 
oommi^sion at the word of the Lord to re- 
buke Baasiia the King of Israel, at a date 
upwards of thirty years before tlie present; 
and see ch. xx. 34, which would lead us to 
infer, though not with certainty, that he 
outlived Jehoshaphat. The book called by 
his name, however, was not necessarily 
finished by him. It is evident that neither 
the word of the Lord nor the messengers 
and propliets of the Lord were bound by 
the orthodox limits of the divided kingdom. 
The powerful character and tlie moral force 
of the true prophet is again seen (comp. 
ch. XV. 1 — 8) in the way in which he was 
wont to go (mt to meet the evil-doer, thrugh 
he were a king. We are accustom id to sf-t 



cH. SIX. 1—11.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 



231 



the whole of this down to tlie account of the 
special inspiration of the prophet of old ; yet 
tliat was but typical of the intrinsic force 
that truth faithfully spoken should wield 
in its own right in later times. Beligion is 
ettdblished in the nation and people that 
know and do this, by the accredited teachers 
of it, viz. the plain rebuke of the wrong. 
Shonldest thou . . . love them that hate the 
Lord] Strong suspicion must attend upon 
Jehoshapliat, that he had been not a little 
misled by answering to some personal fas- 
cination in Ahab. The prophet's rebuke is 
not that Jehoshaphat helped both Israel and 
therein Judah also against a common fcie, 
but that he helped the ungodly, etc. There- 
fore wrath upon thee, etc. The significance 
of this sentence was probably not merely 
retrospective, glancing at the fact that Je- 
hoshaphat returned to Jerusalem minua the 
victory for which he had bid, but was pro- 
bably an intimation of troubles that should 
ripen, were already ripening for Jehoshaphat, 
in the coming invasion of his own kingdom 
(ch. XX. 1—3). 

Ver. 3. — Nevertheless ; Hebrew, "jps ; one 
of the few particles that were affirmative in 
the earlier Hebrew (Gen. xlii. 21), but ad- 
versative in the later (oh. i. 4 ; Dan. x. 7, 
21). It may be well rendered, " on the other 
hand." The expres-ion liere recalls the less 
favoTjrable "notwithstanding" of Rev. ii. 20. 
There are good things t'ooud in thee (see ch. 
xvii. 1 — 9). 

Ver. 4 — From Beersheba to Mount Ephraim. 
The length of the good land is not to be 
quoted, as of old, the undivided " Dan to 
Beersheba," but Beersheba to Mount Ephraim 
(ch.xiii. 16 — 19). Jehoshaphat makes another 
conscientious and vigorous endeavour to re- 
form his own kingdom, to keep it steadfast 
in the worship of God, and free from idolatry. 
It is to be noticed that he does not turn away 
his ear from the rebuke which had been 
given him, but turns his heart to it. As it 
does not appear that he broke with Israel 
and Israel's kings (ch. xx. 35, 37 ; 2 Kings 
iii. 7, 14, 24), it is possible, especially in 
view of ver. 37 in our ch. xx., that the 
severity of the Divine rebuke was under- 
stood to apply to the occasions which found 
Jehoshaphat in alliance with a king notably 
bad, and for some supposed chance of ad- 
vantage to himself. This last element of 
consideration will difference sufficiently the 
two cases just cited, to wit, the case in 
which Jehoshaphat joined himself with Aza- 
riah, and is sternly "prophesied against," 
and that in which he helped Jehoram, and 
through Elisha's intervention gained him 
the day. 

Ver. 5. — Judges . . . fenced cities. Je- 
hosliaphat proceeds from direct religious 
reforms to tliat which is -jf importance only 



second in the life of a nation— reform in 
the matter of civil administration of justice. 
The skeleton here given of what should b« 
the character of a jurlge, and why, har- 
monizes well with the uniform stress laid in 
Scripture upon "justice and judgment." It 
is hard indeed to see, rather impossible, 
upon what foundation a sure structure of 
civil growth and stability can be laid, ex- 
cept on that of positive religion. Note the 
positions and the succinct arguments of vera. 
6, 7 ; and how unequivocally they are based 
upon faith in a personal God, and upon his 
revealed character. It can scarcely be that 
this was the first time of judges being set in 
the cities of Judah, but possibly the meaning 
intended to be conveyed with emphasis is, 
that now, looking well round his kingdom, 
lie took care that all the cities sliould ha 
properly provided with the necessary judges, 
while of late some had been, and some had 
not. and s"me, though they had been officered 
with judges, had found them not what 
judges ought to be. The immense majority 
of the "six thousand" Levite "officers and 
judges" of David's regulation (1 Ohron. 
xxiii. 4; xxxvi. 29) bad, with their supe- 
riors, kings and prophets, gone astray. With 
our present passage may be compared Deut. 
xvi. 18 — 20, wliere the original enactment 
of judges and officers is narrated. Fenced 
cities. Hebrew for "fenced," rtisa; kal 
passive part. plur. The word occurs twenty- 
six times from the Book of Numbers to the 
Book of the Prophet Zeoliariah, and is ren- 
dered in the Authorized Version "ienced" 
or"defenced" twenty-two times, " walled " 
twice, " strong " once, and "mighty" once. 
The " gates " of the original Institution in 
Deuteronomy are now (probably still the 
gates ot^ fenced cities. 

Vers. 6, 7.— The statement of the Divine 
principles laid down in these verses for the 
foundations of the " kingdom of heaven " on 
earth, and the doing of God's " will on earth, 
even as it is in heaven," stretch from Moses 
and Job (Lev. xix. 15; Deut. i. 17; x. 17; 
xvi. 19; Job xxxiv. 19) to SS. Paul and 
Peter (Acts x. 34 ; Eom. ii. 11 ; 1 Pet. i. 17> 

Ver. 8.— This and the following three 
verses close the immediate subject by stating 
with some emphasis the reform in the metro- 
polis itself, of the " supreme tribunal," as it 
has been called (Exod. xviii. 19, 20, 26; 
Deut. x\ii. 9, 10, 12), composed of levites, 
priests, and chief of the fathers of Israel ; 
i.e. probably heads of the whole family that 
went by the same name. Of course every 
father was head of his own family, but only 
one (such as in modern times by primogeni- 
ture the eldest son) the representative head 
of the entire family, and under this ex- 
pression is no doubt naturally set forth only 
those families that were of some relative 



232 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xix. 1— IL 



consideration or distinction. 7or the judg- 
ment of tbe Lord, and for oontroversies. 
Considering the plainer distinction in the 
language of ver. 11, there can be no doubt 
thiit the words, "for the judgment of the 
Lord," do not intend simply to describe 
godly judgment, but point to dues payable 
to the Lord in some religious aspect : "Bender 
to Ciesar . . . and to God the things that 
are God's" (Matt. xxii. 21; Mark xii. 17; 
Luke IX. 25); while the words, "and for 
controversies," point to the mutual strife! 
of the people. When they returned ; He- 
brew, "oniJ they returned." It has been 
proposed to remove this clause so as to 
begin the next verse with it (and go the 
Kevised Version shows as a clause by 
itself, " And they returned to Jerusalem "), 
and, to make this fit the better, the word 
did in the first line of the verse is changed 
into "had." It is, however, possible to 
render the clause, " And they dwelt in Jeru- 
lalem," which would make a far more co- 



herent sense, and would mark the permanence 
and stationarineas of this chief court. 

Ver. 10. — Come ... of your brethren . . . 
in their cities. These words confirm our 
foregoing note, and point to the appeal cha- 
racter of the Jerusalem court. Note also 
the clear connection of the verse with Deut. 
xvii. 8, 10, 11; Exod. xxi. 12—27. Law 
. . . commandment, statutes . . . judgments. 
It might sometimes need to be shown how 
the particular commandment flowed from 
main and essential law ; and the written 
statute is easily distinguishable from those 
judgments, which were more like "judge- 
made " law. Ye shall not trespass ; Revised 
Version, more correctly, ye shall not be guilty. 

Ver. 11. — ^Amariah. Probably the Ama- 
riah of 1 Chron. vii. 11. To the priest 
plainly the sacred causes Eire entrusted. 
Zebadiah is not known elsewhere. Officers 
(see Exod. v. 10). The Lord shall be witli 
the good (see ch. xv. 3, 4). 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 11. — The third chapter in Jehoshaphat's career. In this chapter, regarded for 

the time in the light of a third chapter in the biography of Jehoshaphat, we are enabled 
to gauge, not altogether unsatisfactorily, his character as respects the measure of right 
and wrong in it, and of good and evil in himself. And we are reminded that — 

I. Thbke is such a thing, most undbniablt, as the peace op present safety, 

■WITHOUT THAT WHICH PLOWS FROM CONSISTENT RECTITUDE, UNFALTERING INTEGRITY, 
THE INNER APPROVAL OF CONSCIENCE, AND THE CONVICTION OP God's OWN APPROVAL. 

II. There was one redeeming feature in the conduct op Jehoshaphat, 

A slender TRIBUTARY THAT MAY COUNT FOR SOMETHING IN THE WHOLE SCENE, VIZ. 
THE ABSENCE OF ALL PRETENCE OF SELF-DEFENCE, op EXCUSE, OF EXTENUATION OF 

WHAT WAS WRONG, AND EVEN OF REPLY. We do not hear of penitence, of confession, 
or of repentance in so many words, but this last we certainly do argue from the fresh 
devotion of Jehoshaphat to the right, and to the religious teaching of his people ; and 
the former two we may infer in turn from this. 

III. There is the surely still continuing stream, flowing calm, full, deep, 
op that "mercy with God" which sustains and feeds "the fear" op hik 
IN place of destroying it. There are, perhaps, few greater or more striking con- 
trasts between Divine and human methods than that herein to be noted. If hope is 
wrecked, practically all in any man's life and character is too certainly wrecked also. 
The threats, denunciations, immediate and peremptory proceedings of men towards 
offending fellow-men, even in the clearest cases of wrong possible, work too often either 
callousness or recklessness. But God's forbearing methods, his pitying compassion, 
his patient long-suffering, and sweet disposition of " mercy enduring for ever," preserve 
and just save the continuity of (what is sometimes a very brittle thread) human hope. 
How much of human life, of reason itself, and of encouragement to moral reformation, 
depends on this one feature of the Divine administration, this one grand attribute of God I 

IV. There is a steady, consistent preserving of the principles op justiob 
and of moral government on the part of God. The guilty is not treated as the 
innocent — " therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord " (ver. 2) — or as though 
innocent. Sometimes there is one solution of the crucial diflSoulty involved in this, 
sometimes another. Sometimes the penalty, whatever it may be, is paid, suflering 
endured, and punishment gone through ; sometimes the " way of escape " is found, 
and under the pressingness of the case is Axsivaoilj provided for the guilty, but under 
safeguards which both indicate and sufficiently ^Mararaiee the moral aspects necessary. 



SH, XIX. 1—11.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 233 

V. Geibvous faults and sins of the servants of God abb indeed gbievoub 
blots on their escutcheon; but so fak from shutting up theib woek fob 
God, and shutting out hope prom themselves, they mat be made, by wabnino 
and eepentasce, the very date of a new depaeturb of eedoubled devotion. 
It was manifestly so with Jehoshaphat (vers. 4 — 11). Except on some such suggestion 
as is offered above, we must remain in much uncertainty as to why there is no word 
recorded of the working of the inner thoughts of Jehoshaphat, cither as he went 
wrong, or as he was restored to the ways of righteousness. Very different measure 
is given us in the disclosures of Scripture in other instances, such as that of David 
and a host besides. But instead of most painful uncertainty (as in the history, 
for instance, of Solomon and many another man) as to the facts succeeding a fall, the 
case of Jehoshaphat, is not less clear than that of St. Peter, though in matter so different. 
Jehoshaphat's tears, self-upbraidings, confession, and vows are not told. It would have 
been interesting to know them, and our curiosity is no doubt stimulated by the taci- 
turnity and remarkable reticence of the historian respecting them. But what is most 
to the point it communicated in Scripture's own best way. The king lett off to do 
evil ; did not repeat it ; learned to do well " again " (ver. 4) himself; with redoubled 
energy urged the same on the people (vers. 6, 7, 9, 11) ; and kept a good record, aa 
may be seen in the next and last chapter of his life, to that life's end. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. 2. — Friendship with man and faithfulness to Ood. The Apostle John fleeing 
from the baths because he saw the enemy of Christ entering, is a familiar picture. 
But how far are we to carry such unwillingness to be associated with the ungodly or 
the unbelieving ? Jehoshaphat is here strongly rebuked for his intimacy with Ahab 
and the help he had been giving that wicked monarch. Let us consider — 

I. How FAB ouE PREBDOM EXTENDS. It surely exteuds to : 1. The interchange of 
common coiu:tesies. " Be courteous " is a maxim that will apply to every one. 
" Civility brings no conclusions," and may be shown to all people, without implying 
any sanction of their heresies or immoralities. 2. Fidelity in service and equity in 
negotiation. It was once thought right to take advantage of a man if he were a Jew 
or an infidel. But unrighteousness can never be anything but hateful to God and 
injurious to man, and justice and fair-dealing can never be otherwise than commend- 
able. Moreover, the Christian servant or slave was urged by the apostle to show 
a right spirit " not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward " (1 Pet. ii. 18). 
3. Succour to those who are in need. Pity for those who are in distress, and the 
helping hand stretched out to those that are " ready to perish," can never be contrary 
to the mind and the will of Jesus Christ. 4. Alliance for the promotion of a good 
common end. Here it mfiy be objected that this would justify Jehoshaphat in his 
" offensive alliance " with Ahab, as they were seeking the lawful common object of 
crippling Syria. But it must be remembered that by helping to sustain the kingdom 
of Israel Jehoshaphat was perpetuating the division between the twelve tribes, the 
dismemberment of the country ; and he was sustaining a power which was recreant to 
its high mission, and was positively and seriously hostile to sacred truth, to the 
kingdom of God. We may lawfully associate with ungodly men as fellow-citizens 
who are united in such rightful objects as saving life, as promoting health, as providing 
food, as extending trade and commerce. In so doing we are not in any way com- 
promising principle or sustaining wrong ; we are not " helping the ungodly " or " loving 
them that hate the Lord." 

II. Where the line of prohibition is drawn. We have clearly no right to ally 
ourselves with sinful men when by so doing : 1. We advance the cause of unrighteous- 
ness or ungodliness. Better sacrifice anything we have at heart, better leave our 
personal preferences or our temporal interests entirely disregarded, than do that which 
will give an impetus to the cause of infidelity or immorality. In such a case we 
should certainly draw down God's displeasure ; we need no prophet to say to us, 
•' Therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord." 2. When we show ourselves 
indifferent to the honour of our Divine Saviour. Jehoshaphat's ostentatious companion- 



«34 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xix. 1— 11. 

•hip with such an enemy of God as Ahab amounted to a tacit intimation that he could, 
when he wished to do so, be forgetful whose servant he was ; he laid by that considera- 
tion to serve his momentary purpose. There may be some one who is a very pro- 
nounced enemy of Jesus Christ who seeks our friendship. To be very intimate with 
him is to put a slight upon our attachment to our Lord ; it is to put him in the second 
place. Then fidelity to Christ will keep us at home ; will lead us to seek other inti- 
macies, to find our friendships with those who do not "hate the Lord." 3. Wlien we 
expose our own character to serious risk. For one who is of a weaker mind and will to 
be associated intimately and for any length of time with an enemy of the Lord, can 
have but one result. It must issue in spiritual degeneracy ; it may, indeed, end in 
spiritual ruin. Let those who contemplate the formation of a lifelong friendship 
beware how they trust their souls to any one who can be called " ungodly," how they 
" love them that hate the Lord." A sensitive, yielding spirit had better be " drowned 
in the midst of the sea" than be immersed in an atmosphere of worldliness or of 
unbelief, where all true piety and all living faith are daily being weakened and are 
constantly withering away.— -0. 

Ver. 4. — A royal mission vihich is a heavenly one. Of the many things said in favour 
of Jehoshaphat, perhaps nothing is more highly commendatory than tliis, that " he 
went out again through the people . . . and brought them back unto the Lord God of 
their fathers." He could not have doue anything worthier of himself, or more likely to 
result in permanent good to the penple over whom he reigned. 

I. The royal mission. Possibly, as Matthew Henry suggests, the tie which 
bound the people to Jehovah had been somewhat relaxed by their observance of the 
familiarity between their sovereign and the idolatrous court at Jezreel ; if this were so, 
Jehoshaphat, after Jehu's rebuke (ver. 2), would feel constrained to do everything in 
his power to strengthen the attachment of his subjects to the living God. But what- 
ever may have prompted him, he did well to (1) interest himsilf personally in this 
vital subject ; (2) to take vigorous practical measures to effect his purpose ; and (3) to 
go through his self-appointed task with the energy and the thoroughness which com- 
mand success. He " brought back," etc. It was a royal mission that reflected great 
honour on the later years of his reign. 

II. The heavenly mission of which it may be said to be a hint, Jesus Christ 
" came to seek and to save that which was lost." He saw mankind separated by a sad 
spiritual distance from the heavenly Father, from the living God ; he laid upon himself 
the holy and heavenly task of " bringing him back unto the Lord." For this noblest, 
Divinest purpose he (1) stooped to creaturedom, to our poor humanity, to poverty, to 
utmost humilintion; (2) "endured amazing loss," pain, sorrow, spiritual agony; 
(3) died upon the cross. By so doing he (o) made the way open for man's return ; 
(6) provided the spiritual force which is lifting a degraded nature to heights of holiness 
and wisdom. In this heavenly mission is he now engaged, bringing back to God the 
race that has left his side and lost his likeness and forfeited his favour. 

III. A MISSION WORTHY OP ALL IMITATION. This deliberate action of leading men 
back to God was royal ; it is heavenly, Divine ; it may be common to every Ghristian 
man. 1. Around us are those who have left the God of their fathers. It may be that 
they are of those who have been long estranged and have determinately refused to hear 
his fatherly invitation to return ; or it may be that they have sought and found recon- 
ciliation with him and have wandered into half-hearted service, or into indifference, or 
into some positive transgression. 2. These are within our knowledge and our reach. 
They may be beneath the roof under which we dwell, or worshippers in the sanctuary 
where we bend the knee in prayer, or nominal workers in the field where we are 
labouring ; or they may be where we shall find them if we seek them, as Jehoshaphat 
found the objects of his royal care as he " went out through the people from Beorsheba 
to Mount Ephraim." But they are where we can find them, and can lay the kind, 
arresting hand of holy love upon them. 3. To such we can render an inestimable 
service. We can bring to bear upon them a gracious, winning influence. We can 
make an earnest, brotherly appeal to them. We can urge them to return to the Lord 
God of their fathers on every ground ; on the ground (1) that he, their Father and their 
Friend, is grieved with their obduracy or their defection, and is longing for their return ; 



CH. XIX. 1—11. J THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 235 

(2) that they are remaining where their life is a long disobedience, a continued sin and 
wrong ; (3) that their return will issue in a peace and a joy, in a spiritual blessedness, 
the depth and duration of which they cannot irieasure or imagine ; (4) that if they do 
thus return they will give boundless satisfaction to the fathers whose God they have 
foitiaken or neglected, to all those human friends and kindred whose love is true and 
deep, who will welcome them with fullest joy to the fold of Christ, to the kingdom of 
heaven. — C. 

Vers. 6 — 9. — Ennobling the earthly, or making sacred the secular. Jehoshaphat made 
his reign over Judah a continuous act of Divine service. For while that reign was not 
without blemish and mistake, the king was evidently ruling " in the fear of the Lord," 
»nd was trying to bring his people into willing and loyal subjection to their Divine 
Sovereign. In taking the measure he now took he acted with great intelligence. For 
nothing would be so likely to lead the people to discontentment and rebellion against 
the existing order as a sense of prevailing injustice, of wrongs unredressed, of rights 
that could not be realized ; nothing, on the other hand, was so fitted to infuse a spirit 
of loyalty to the administration and to Jehovah himself as a well-regulated system of 
justice, extending over the whole land. The piety which Jehoshaphat was thus illus- 
trating he exemplified in detail by giving the instructions he delivered to the judges 
(vers. 6, 7, 9, 10). In these he showed that the ordinary act of judgment in secular 
matters might and should be made a true and sacred service rendered unto God, an act 
of piety. For he charged them to do everything in their courts, as we should do 
everything in our homes and in our houses of business — 

I. Unto the Lord. They were to do all " in the fear of the Lord " (ver. 9) ; they 
were to judge " not for man, but for the Lord " (ver. 6). This is an anticipation of the 
instruction given by Paul in his letter to the Church at Colosse, where he bids the 
slaves serve their masters " not with eye-service, as men-pleasers ; but in singleness of 
heart, fearing God ; " whatsoever they do, doing it " heartily, as to the Lord, and not 
unto men " (Col. iii. 22, 23). There is nothing in which we are engaged, of the humblest 
kind and in the lowliest sphere, which we may not do and which we should not do 
" for the Lord " or " unto the Lord," by acting " faithfully and with a perfect heart," 
in such wise as we are assured he will approve, and with the distinct view of pleasing 
and honouring him ; thus doing we " make drudgery Divine," as George Herbert 
tells us, 

II. With his felt peesenob and his Divine aid. The Lord " is with you in the 
judgment" (ver. 6); " the Lord shall hevith the good" (ver. 11). If we can but feel 
that God is "with us," that our Divine Master is by our side, with his sympathizing 
and sustaining presence, then we are satisfied, then we are strong. The position we 
occupy may be very humble, the situation may be a lonely or a perilous one, the 
opponents may be numerous and their opposition may be severe, the duties may be 
very onerous; but Christ is with us, his smile is upon us, his arm is working with us 
and for us, his reward is in his hand ; we will go happily and cheerily on our way. 

III. In his own way. " For there is no iniquity with the Lord our God," etc 
(ver. 7). They were to judge even as God himself did, in the same spirit and on the 
same principles ; as impartially, as righteously, as he did. And our Lord calls upon us 
to elevate our earthly life, to make every part of it sacred and noble, by introducing 
into everything the spirit and the principles which are Divine. " Be ye perfect," he 
says, "even as your Father in heaven is perfect;" "Be ye holy, for I am holy;" 
" As I have loved you, that ye also love one another ; " " Follow thou me." It ig, 
indeed, a very excellent and positively invaluable enlargement and ennoblement of thi« 
human life that every hour and every act of it may be spent and wrought as God la 
spendinf! his eternity and is ruling in his Divine domain. The very same principles of 
purity, righteousness, and equity, the very same spirit of unselfishness and love, of 
gentleuess and considerateness, which he displays in his government of the universe, 
we may bo manifesting in the lowliest paths in which we walk Irom day to day. At 
he is, so may we be. His life we may be living. There need be nothing mean or 
small about us, for we may be everywhere and in everything " the children of our 
Father who is in heaven " (Matt. v. 45). In every walk of life we may be closely 
following Christ. — C. 



236 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHEONICLES. [oh. xix. 1— 11. 

Vers. 1 — 3. — The sovereign and the seer. I. Undeseeved mbbot to thb bovbebioit. 
(Ver. 1.) 1. Jehoshaphat returns from Ramoth-Oilead. Having gone thither without 
the Divine sanction — indeed, against the Divine will — he might have heen left there 
and not permitted to return. But God preserves the going out and coming in of his 
people (Ps. cxxi. 8), even when they walk not in his ways. 2. Jehoshaphat returns to 
Jerusalem. Having left his capital and kingdom on an errand to which he was not 
called, he might have found both taken from him and barred against him on his return. 
But Jehovah, always better to his people than they deserve, bad watched over both 
while Jehoshaphat was absent. 3. Jehoshaphat retwrns to his house in peace. Very 
different might his home-coming have been (Isa. lix. 8) ; not alive and in safety, as 
Micaiah had predicted (ch. xviii. 20), but as Ahab was brought to Samaria, dead ; shot 
by an arrow from a Syrian bow like the King of Israel, or smitten by the Syrian 
charioteers as himself nearly was, and certainly would have been had Jehovah not 
interposed. But, again, Grod is faithful to his covenant, even when his people are not 
faithful to their duty (Ps. cxi. 5 ; 2 Tim. ii. 13 ; Heb. x. 23). 

II. Deseeved EEB0KB FROM THE BBEB. (Vers. 2, 3.) 1. A severe reprimand. 
Charged by Hanani's son Jehu ivith a twofold offence: (1) Helping the ungodly. 
Aiding the wicked in their necessities or enterprises, when these are not sinful, never 
was a crime against Jehovah in Old Testament times (Lev. xix. 18, 34 ; Deut. xxii. 1 ; 
Job xxii. 29 ; Zech. vii. 9), and is not prohibited but commanded in the gospel (Rom. 
xiii. 9 ; Gal. v. 14 ; Jas. ii. 8) ; but then, as now, sympathizing with them in their 
wicked thoughts, joining with them in their wicked ways, and assisting them in their 
wicked projects, is interdicted to all who profess to be followers of God and of Christ 
(Ps. i. 1 ; xxiv. 4; cxli. 4; Eom. xiii. 12 ; Eph. v. 11 ; 2 Tim. ii. 19, 21, 22 j 1 Pet. 
IL 11, 12). (2) Loving them that hate God. This also permissible in the sense in 
which God himself and Christ loved and still loves sinners, pitying their misery, com- 
passionating their frailty, grieving over their iniquity, and seeking their recovery and 
salvation. But in the sense of extending alfection and confidence, sympathy and 
support, to such as are private and public enemies of God, despisers of his religion, 
deserters from his worship, violators of his commandments, oppressors of his people, 
opptnents of his cause, is a stretch of charity which neither then was nor now is allow- 
able. Bather among Hebrew saints to hate Jehovah's enemies was accounted the 
supreme virtue (Ps. cxxxix. 21, 22). If Christian saints may not hate the persons, 
they are still enjoined to hate the works and ways of the Lord's enemies (2 Cor. xiL 
21 : Eph. iv. 26 ; Phil. iii. 18). (On Hanani, see ch. xvi. 7.) 2. An alarming sentence. 
" Wrath from before Jehovah " should come upon Jehoshaphat certainly and speedily. 
This was inevitable, since Jehovah, as a jealous God (Exod. xx. 5 ; Deut. iv. 24), could 
by no means allow such declension to pass without some manifestation of displeasure. 
Besides, Jehovah, by covenant engagement with David, had expressly bound himself 
to chastise with rods any defection on the part of David's successors (2 Sam. vii. 14; 
Ps. cxxxix. 30). In the same way, though God, for Christ's sake, forgives the trans- 
gressions of believers, so that they shall not come into ultimate condemnation, he 
does not in every instance exempt them from suffering on account of their offences, 
but rather, as a rule, causes them, when they go astray, to feel such inward rebukes 
upon their consciences, and such outward inflictions upon their persons or estates, as 
to make them sensible of his holy anger, if not against their souls, against their sins 
(Acts xiv. 22 ; Eom. v. 3 ; 1 Cor. xi. 32 ; Heb. xii. 11). Already at Eamoth-Gilead 
Jehoshaphat had experienced a foretaste of Jehovah's wrath (ch. xviii. 31). Additional 
evidence thereof was soon to follow, in a Moabitish invasion (ch. xx. 1, etc.). 3. A 
merciful mitigation. While condemning the king's sins, Jehu did not forget to make 
candid acknowledgment of the king's virtues. To praise another for good qualities is 
not so easy as to blame another for bad ones. In others, faults are more readily dis- 
cerned than favourable points ; in ourselves, the latter more quickly than the former. 
Happily, the great Heart-searcher, while noting his people's shortcomings, overlooks 
not their well-doings. If Jehoshaphat's conduct in contracting alliance with Ahab was 
denounced, his behaviour in removing the groves from his land and preparing his heart 
to seek Jehovah was not forgotten. So of Christians, " God is not unrighteous to 
forget their work and labour of love" (Heb. vi. 10), even though obliged to correct them 
for doing wrong (Heb. xii. 10) ; while Christ, sending his messages to the Churches io 



OH. nx. 1—11.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 237 

Asia, with one exception never omits to notice in each case excellences worthy of 
commendation (Bev. iii., iv.). 

Lebsoks. 1. Gratitude for mercy. 2. Submission to rebuke. 3. Repentance for 
dn. 4. Watchfulness in duty. 5. Charity in judging others. — ^W. 

Vers. 4—11. — A royal reformer. I. As old wobk besumed. The reformation of 
religion (ver. 4). 1. IJie reformer. Jehoshaphat^ Whether the work was done by 
special plenipotentiaries, as in the former instance (ch. xvii. 7, 8), or by the king in 
person, or, as is most probable, by both, the mainspring of this movement, as of the former, 
was Jehoshaphat; and for a soyereign of Judah it was certainly much more becoming 
occupation than feasting with Ahab or fighting with Benhadad. Such as are kings and 
priests unto Ood should study to walk worthy of their name and vocation (Eph. iv. 1 ; 
PhiL 1. 27), and, for them, furthering the interests of religion amongst themselves and 
others, at home and abroad, is nobler employment (1 Cor. xv. 68 ; Gal. vi. 9 ; Titus 
iii. 1 ; 3 John 8) than revelling and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, strife 
and jealousy (Rom. xiii. 14), after the example of the world. 2. T?ie reformed. The 
people from Beersheba to Moimt Ephraim. The king's efforts, though doubtless begin- 
ning at, were not limited to Jerusalem, but extended through the whole country from 
its southern to its northern limit. So Christ commanded his apostles, though beginning 
at Jerusalem (Luke xxiv. 47), to go into all the world and preach the gospel unto every 
creatiure (Mark xvi. 15). 3. The reformation. A return to the worship of Jehovah, 
the God of their fathers. This work, auspiciously begun some time before (ch. xvii. 
3 — 9), but interrupted by the Bamoth-Gilead expedition, was now resumed by the 
humbled, presumably also enlightened and repentant, monarch. A good work in itself, 
it was likewise a right work, since he and his people were pledged by covenant to 
worship Jehovah (ch. xv. 12) ; a necessary work, if the kingdom was to be established 
and prosper ; and a work which should neither be interrupted nor delayed, but com- 
pleted with convenient speed. 

n. A NEW WOEK BEGUN. The establishment of courts of justice in the land (vers. 
6 — 11). 1. Provincial courts. (1) The seats of the judges. The fortified cities 
throughout the land, because these were " the central points for the trafSc of the dis- 
tricts in which they were situated" (Bertheau). (2) The work of the judges. To 
administer justice, not for man, but for Jehovah, i.e. to dispense not merely what man 
might reckon equity, but what was truly such in God's sight — oases submitted to them 
to decide, not at man's dictation, or in compliance with man's wishes, but "in the 
name and according to the will of the Lord " (Keil). (3) The duty of the judges. To 
act conscientiously, as in Jehovah's sight, having the fear of Jehovah and the dread of 
offending him constantly upon their spirits (Exod. xviii. 21 ; 2 Sam. xxiii. 3), espe- 
cially shunning injustice and corruption, remembering that with Jehovah is no respect 
of persons or taking of bribes (Deut. x. 17 s Job viii. 3 ; xxxiv. 19; Eph. vi. 9; 1 Pet. 
L 17). (4) The Keeper of the judges. Jehovah. As the judgment they should give 
should be practically his judgment (Prov. xxix. 26), it must be beyond suspicion, 
commend itself to all who heard it as righteous (Ps. cxxix. 137), and be accepted by 
them to whom it was delivered as final (Rom. iii. 4; ix. 14; Rev. xvi. 5; xix. 2). 
Hence, if they entered on their duties in a right spirit, Jehovah would be with them 
to guide theqii in forming, speaking, and maintaining their judgments (Fs. xxv. 9 ; 
zlvi. 5; Prov. iL8; iii. 6). 2. Afupremetriburuil. (1) Its locality. Jerusalem, the 
capital of the country, the proper seat of such a court. (2) Its object. For the judg- 
ment of the Lord and for controversies (ver. 8), or for "all matters of Jehovah," and 
" for all the king's matters " (ver. 11) ; i.e. for the hearing of appeals, and the settlement 
of disputes referred to it from the lower courts concerning religious or ecclesiastical 
affairs, as e.g. causes depending on decisions " between law and commandment, statutes 
and judgments," or on the interpretation and application of the laws of Moses ; and, 
again, for similar verdicts in purely civil cases, as e.g. cases of murder and manslaughter, 
of consanguinity and inheritance, etc., all of which may be included in the phrase 
"between blood and blood." (3) Its constitution. Three orders of members — Levites, 
priests, heads of fathers' houses. Its courts two — an ecclesiastical, or religious, and 
a civil. Its presidents two — in the ecclesiastical court, Amariah the high priest, 
" described in 1 Chron. v. 37 as the fifth high priest from Zadok, the contemporary of 



238 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xx. 1—37. 



David" (Bertheau), though this is doubtful (Keil); in the civil court, Zebadiah the 
■on of Isbmael, the prince of the house of Judah, ».«. the tribal prince of Judah. Ita 
assistants and servants, the Levites, i.e. such of them as had not been elected judges. 
(4) Its working. When a cause came before the judges, these were to warn the liti- 
gants not to trespass against Jehovah (which would practically be the same thing as 
putting them on oath to tell the truth), lest by sinning against Jehovah they should 
bring wrath upon themselves and their brethren ; whilst the judges were themselves to 
dispense judgment in the fear of the Lord, or reverentially, faithfully, with a perfect 
heart or sincerely, and courageously — four qualities indispensable for an ideal judge — 
in which case the Lord would be with them to uphold their verdicts. 

Learn : 1. The precedence that belongs to religion even in a commonwealth. 
Jehoshaphat cuts down idol-groves before he erects courts of law. 2. No administra- 
tion of justice can be trusted that is not based on religion and the fear of God. 3. He 
that sits in a judicial chair should be sage, saint, and soldier, learned, devout, and 
courageous, all in one. 4. No system of dispensing equity can command confidence 
that does not admit of appeal from inferior to superior courts. 5. Judges should 
remember that they themselves also must one day be judged. 6. How much the 
iurisprudeuce of modem times is indebted to the Bible 1 — W, 



EXPOSITION. 



OHAPTEB XX. 



Of this chapter, with its thirty-seven verses, 
only the six verses (31 — 36) find any dupli- 
cate or parallel in Kings (1 Kings zzii. 41 — 
49). The chapter is occupied with a state- 
ment of the invasion of Judah by Moabites 
and Ammonites and certain problematical 
others (vers. 1,2); with an account of the way 
in which the king and people prepared to 
meet the crisis (vers. 3— 13); with the pro- 
phecy of Jahazlel the Levite as to how, 
under certain conditions, things would go 
(vers. 14 — 19) ; and with the narration of the 
victory and the manner of it (vers. 20 — 30) ; 
while the remaining verses partly summarize 
•nd then conclude the account of the life, 
character, and reign of Jehoshaphat. 

Yer. 1. — ^Ihe children of Uoab. In 2 
Kings iii. 5 — 27 we read of a rebellion on 
the part of Moab, and of the victory of 
Israel's king Joram, together with Jehosha- 
phat and the King of Edom, over Moab, now 
probably in quest of revenge. Beside the 
Ammonites. The reading of our Authorized 
Version here cannot stand. The Septuagint 
gives ns some guidance in the name '' the 
Minosi" By the mere transposing of one 
Hebrew character in the name Ammonites, 
we obtain the name Maonites (read D^)^^!^ 
for D<:iQ];), i.e. the people of Maon, a town 
near Petra, no doubt Edomitish (see vers. 
10, 22, 23), and possibly the same with the 
Septuagint Miixei (see also ch. xxvi. 7). 

Ver. 2.— Beyond the sea on this side Aram 
{B]/rid) ; ie. south-east of the Salt Sea, and 



something west of Edom (the right reading 
in place of Aram, where a reth had turued 
out a daleth), Eazazon-tamar . . . £ngedi ; 
i.e. the place Engedi {Ain-jiddy), a Uving 
" spring of water " from a lime-cliff, half-way 
up the west coast of the Salt Sea, " in the 
midst of palms " (inter palmar), the compound 
word " Hazazon-tamar " meaning literally, 
" the division of the palm." 

Ver. 3. — Proclaimed a fast. This is the 
first recorded occasion of a general fast by 
royal proclamation, and of individual fasting 
it is remarkable that there is no record before 
the time and the act of Moses (as e.g. Ezod. 
xxxiv. 28) ; after which, for individual fasting, 
come occasions like those of David (2 Sam. 
xii. 16) and Elijah (1 Kings xii. 8); for 
general fasting, occasions like those of Josh, 
vii. 6 ; Judg. xx. 26 ; 1 Sam. vii. 6 ; and for 
partial fasting, by semi-royal authority, that 
"proclaimed" by Jezebel (1 Kings xzi. 
9, 12). 

Ver. 4. — This verse expresses the response 
of all tlie kingdom to the proclamation of 
Jehoshaphat. 

Ver. 5. — ^The new court (see ch. iv. 9: 
XV. 8). 

Vers. 6 — 12. — The recorded prayers of 
Scripture are indeed what they might be 
expected to he, model prayers, and the pro- 
sent a model instance of the same (see homi- 
letics). The prayer before us invokes the one 
God " in heaven ; " claims him the God " of 
onr fathers ; " recites his universal authority 
above, below ; pleads his former conduct of 
the " people Israel," in especial his stabli^h- 
ing of that people in their present land ; moat 
touchingly recalls his covenant of condescend- 
ing, everlasting " friendship " with Abraham, 
the grand original of the people (Gen. xviii 



CH. XX. 1—37.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



23S 



17—19, 33 ; xvii. 2; Exod. xxxiii. 11); makes 
mention of the consecration of the land by 
the sanctuary, and in particular of the very 
service of consecration and the special fore- 
seeing provision in tliat service for a crisis 
like the present (1 Kings viii. 33 — 45 ; ch. 
vi. 24—85; vii. 1); and then (vers. 10, 11) 
states pointedly the case and complaint with 
its aggravations (Deut. ii. 4, 8, 9, 19 ; Numb. 
XX. 21 ; Judg. xi. 18), and with ft parting 
appeal, confession of their own weakness, 
ignorance, and dependence unfeigned, com- 
mits the cause of the alarmed people to God. 
Our eyes are upon thee. So, with a multi- 
tude of other peissages, that supreme pattern 
one, Ps. cxxiii. 2. 

Ver. 13.— If the whole narration called 
for one more touch, it has it in the pathetic, 
brief, telling graphicness of this verse. Their 
little ones. The familiar Hebrew word (dsd) 
is expressive of the quick, tripping step of 
the young and of women. Gcsenius would 
regard it in this passage as designating the 
whole family as distinguished from the head 
of it, and as amplified by " wives " and 
" children "instanced afterward, quoting the 
very insufScient support of Gen. xlvii. 12. 
Our text occurs again in oh. xxxi. 18. 

Ver. 14. — Jahaziel. This Jahaziel, a Le- 
vite of the sons of Asaph, is not mentioned 
elsewhere. His genealogy is traced to Mat- 
taniah, i.e. Nethaniah (1 Chron. xxv. 2), 
who is parallel with Araariah of 1 Chron. vi. 
11. It is very possible that Fs. Ixxxiii., 
which is a psalm of Asaph, and which men- 
tions the enmity of Moab, Ammon, and Edom, 
may be synchronous with this history. 

Ver. 15. — The battle is not yours, but 
God's ; i.e. God will do the fighting (see ver. 
17, first and third clauses) ; so also 1 Sam. 
xvii. 47. 

Ver. 16.— The cliff of Zii. Bead with 
Revised Version, the aecerU of Ziz (or 
probably Hazzii), a place named only here. 
The Hebrew word here rendered "cliff" is 
the familiar nf?g.D, meaning " an ascent," or 
" a rising ground." It is replaced in the 
Septuagint by both ivifiairis and wpitrfiairis. 
Stanley, in an interesting note on the word 
('Sinai and Palestine,' p. 500, edit. 1866), 
says it is applied to several localities in 
Palestine, viz.: (1) The "Ascent of Akrab- 
bim," i.e. scorpiont (Numb, xxxi v. 4 ; J udg, 
i. 36 ; Josh. xv. 3), on the south border of 
Judah and probably the same as the Pass of 
Safeh. (2) " The going up to (or o/) Adum- 
mim," i.e. the "ascent of the Ked," near 
Gilgal, on border of Judah and Benjamin 
(Josh. XV. 7 ; xviii. 17), probably the same 
with the " Pass of Jericho.' (3) The " going 
up to Gur" (2 Kings ix. 27). (4) Our 
present text. (5) The "mounting up of 
Luhith" in Moab (laa. xv. 5 ; Jer. xlviii. 5). 
The word U ako applied to the steep pass 



from Gibeon to Beth-horon (Josh. x. 10 ; 1 
Maec. iii. 16) ; to the road up the Mount of 
Olives (2 Sam. xv. 30) ; and to the approach 
to the city in which Samuel anointed Saul 
(1 Sam. ix. 11), i.e. "the hill up to the 
city." The passage, Judg. viii. 13, Autho- 
rized Version " before the sun was up," Ee- 
vised Version " from the ascent of Heres," 
possibly designates a rising ground, named 
" tho Ascent of tlie Sun," or, " of Heres." The 
following extract from Keil, with its quota- 
tions from Eobinson, is interesting. " Tha 
wilderness Jezreel was without doubt the 
name of a part of the great stretch of flat 
country bounded on the south by the Waddy 
El Ghar, and extending from the Dead Se« 
to the neighbourhood of Tekoa, which is now 
called El Hassasah, after a waddy on its 
northern side. The whole country on the 
west side of the Dead Sea, ' where it does 
not consist of mountain ridges or deep val- 
leys, is high table-laud sloping gradually 
towards tlie east, wholly waste, merely 
covered here and there by a few bushes and 
without the slightest trace of having ever 
been cultivated ' (Kohin son's ' Palest.,' sub 
voce). Our present ascent of Ziz, or Hazziz, 
has perhaps remained in the Wadiiy El 
Hassasah. . . . Eobinson takes it to be the 
pass, which at present leads from Ain-jiddy 
to the table-land. Yet it is described by 
him as a 'fearful pass,' and it can hardly 
be thought of here even if the enemy like 
the Bedouins, now when on their forays, 
may bo supposed to have marched along the 
shore of the sea, and ascended to the table- 
land only at Engedi ; for the Israelites did 
not meet the enemy in this ascent, but above 
upon the table-land." Josephus translates 
1"2tn by eioxvs, but with no legitimate justi- 
fication. The end of the brook ; t.e. rather 
the end of the brook-way, or course of the 
brook when there was water to make one. 

Ver. 17. — Stand . . . and see the salvation 
of the Lord with you. The grand original of 
these words (Exod. xiv. 13) would be known 
to both Jahaziel and Jehoshaphat. 

Ver. 18. — The infinite relief to the mind 
of Jehoshaphat and bis people finds now fit 
expression in simple adoration. Would that 
such first gratitude were but sustained to 
the end more frequently than it is common 
to find the case I 

Ver. 19.— Of the ohUdren of the Eorhites; 
i.e., witli Revised Version, of the Korahitei^ 
who were the best of the Kohathite family 
(1 Chron. vi. 22 ; also at head of Ps. xlii.— 
xlix.. Authorized Version and Revised Ver- 
sion). Keil would translate, " Of the soni 
of Koliath, yea, of the Korahites." 

Ver. 20.— The wilderness of Tekoa. Th« 
king and people, army and prophet and 
Levite singers, start early for the wilderness 
of Tekoa, not less than ten miles' distance 



240 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xx. 1— 37. 



south of Jeinsalem, and fi:om it a waddy 
running to the Dead Sea. So shall ye be 
established. (8o Isa. yii. 9.) Jehoshaphat's 
own faith and zeal make him nervously 
anxious that his people should not fall 
behind him, and fall short of their duty 
and the grandeur oi the occasion. 

Ver. 21. — And when he had consulted with 
the people; i.e. possibly simply " conferred 
with " those who were over the singers, as 
to who should be the most prominent in 
leading the service of praise, or as to what 
ihould be the words suug and other like 
matters of detail; or more probably, consider- 
ing the exact form of language used, the 
reference is to what we are told Jehoshaphat 
had just done, to wit, counselled well the 
people and given good advice to them. 
Praise the beauty of holiness. The render- 
ing should no doubt be in the beauty of holi- 
ness, i.e. in garments of beauty (1 Chron. 
ivi. 29 ; Ps. xxix. 2 ; Ee vised Version mar- 
gin, " in holy array "). Praise the Lord; Ke- 
vised Version, give thanks to the Lord (ch. T. 
13 ; vii. 3, 6 ; Ps. cvi. ; cxxxvi.). 

Ver. 22. — Set ambushments. The Hebrew 
is D<3n«D )nj, i.e. "set persons lying in 
wait," or " in ambush " (piel part. plur. of 
aijS). So Judg. ix. 25, but kal participle with 
apparently future equivalent meaning occurs 
eighteen times in Joshua, Judges, Samuel, 
Ezra, Jeremiah, and Lamentations. Who 
the persons were, supernatural or not, or 
what their mode of operation, is not told, and 
is not plain. The effects are quite plain — 
that first the two confederates, Moab and 
Ammon, thought they saw reason to fall on 
them " of Mount Seir ; ' and secondly, having 
this done, to fall on one another to the end 
of mutual extermination. They were smit- 
ten. The marginal, " they smote one an- 
other," may be better, but it is not at all 
necessary, the meaning being that collec- 
tively they became the smitten instead of the 
■miters I 

Ver. 23. — This verse proceeds to explain 
how this resulted in a kind of triangular 
dnel on large scale. 

Ver. 24. — The watch-tower. See ch. xxvi. 
10, where, however, the ordinary 'jJjD, and 
not the present word (only found, except as 
a proper name, here and Isa. xxi. 8), is em- 
ployed. It is scarcely likely that a built 
watch-tower is intended even here, but 
rather a lofty site and point of view from 
which a large number of people could see. 
The proper names Mitzpeh (Mizpeh) and 
Mitzpah (_Mizpah) are of course familiar. 
They looked unto the multitude. Judah and 
it» army and heralding Levite singers would 
see now in new significance the thing said 
by Jahaziel in our ver. 16. " Ye shall find 
Uem at the end of the hrook-courie, before 



the wilderness of Jeruel." And none escaped; 
».e. " without an exception." 

Ver. 25. — Both riohes with the dead 
bodies. The Hebrew text reads literally, 
both riches and dead bodies (no article). 
The D'n;ipi of the text, however, appears in 
several (" old authorities," Bevised Version) 
manuscripts, as nnjni ("garments"), and 
the versions of both Septuagint and Vulgate 
lend their authority to this reading. Jewels. 
The Hebrew term is '^3, the most frequent 
rendering of which is " vessels," so rendered, 
that is, a hundred and sixty times out of 
about three hundred and eight times in all 
of its occurrence. It is, however, a word 
of very generic quality, and is rendered an 
here "jewels " about twenty-five other times. 
It would seem nugatory to tell us that there 
were " dead bodies," in the bald rendering 
of "and dead bodies." Our Authorized 
Version rendering, "riches with the dead 
bodies," of course both ingeniously glosses 
the difficulty and makes a sufficiently good 
meaning. 

Ver. 26.— Beraohah. This is Just the 
Hebrew fern, subst. from a verb. It is used 
in 1 Chron. xii. 3 as the name of a man. 
The present name of the valley survives in 
the Waddy Bereikat on the Hebron road, 
beyond, therefore, the date unto this day of 
tHe writer. 

Ver. 27. — The lord had made them to 
rejoice. Note the extremely similar and 
almost identical language of Ezra vi. 22 
and Neh. xii. 43, and add also to the com- 
parison the last sentence of our ver. 29. 

Ver. 29. — With this verse compare par- 
ticularly vers. 10, 11 of ch. xvii. 

Ver. 30. — His Ood gave him rest (so sea 
oh. XV. 15). 

Ver. 31. — ^With this verse recommences 
the parallel of 1 Kings xxii. 41 — 50. In 
this verse we find the addition in the 
parallel very naturally to be accounted for, 
of "began to reign in the fourth year of 
Ahab King of Israel." Otherwise the vereet 
are almost identicah Of Aznbah nothing 
more is heard. 

Ver. 33. — Howbeit the high places , , . the 
people had not prepared. The statements 
so precisely made in this verse evidently 
serve the purpose of distinguishing between 
the wishes and orders of the king and the 
unequal conduct of his people. 

Ver. 31.— The rest of the aots of Jehosha- 
phat, etc. These "acts of Jehoshaphat" 
are said in this verse to find their record in 
the book of Jehu . . , mentioned in the book 
of the kings of Israel. The parallel has, 
" in the book of the chronicles of the kings 
of Judah." For our " mentioned," note mar- 
gin, literal, " made to ascend " and Bevised 
Version " inserted." The " book of the'kinga 
of Israel" may (note also the remarkable 



OH. xx, 1—37.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE (JHRONICLES. 



241 



apparent miBnomers of our writer, as illus- 
trated by oh. lii. 6; ixi. 2, 4) very possibly 
be one with the parallel, "book of the 
chronicles of the kings of Judah " (see our 
•Introduction,' 1 Chronicles, pp. vii., viii.). 
Of this larger collected cyclopaedia of royal 
biography, Jehu's account ('i?'!) of Jeho- 
shaphat was one component part. Though 
Jehu's (n?7) book is not mentioned else- 
where, he himself is particularly in 1 Kings 
xtI. 1, as well as in our oh. xix. 2. 

Ver. 35. — And after this. The historical 
episode of these three verses (35 — 37) is 
evidently misplaced. As Ahaziah succeeded 
his father Ahab In Jehosbaphat's seven- 
teenth year, we of course are at no loss to 
fix the time of Jehosbaphat's " joining him- 
self with Ahaziah." He had "joined him- 
self" with Ahab, and had smarted for it, 
and yet "after" that, he "joined himself" 
with his son Ahaziah. We do not doubt 
that the " who " of this verse refers to Aha- 
ziah, not, as some think, to Jehoshaphat. 

Ver. 36. — This verse tells us the object 
with which Jehoshaphat had joined him- 
self with Ahaziah, and 1 Kings xxii. 49 
tells us how at last, by a point-blank re- 
fusal to Ahaziah, he withdrew from the 
very brief commercial alliance after he had 
not merely been witnessed against by the 
Prophet Bliezer spoken of in our next 
verse, but more decisively witnessed against 
by the shattering of his ships. To go to 



Tarshish. This clause, even if the text is 
not corrupt, yet cannot mean what it teemt 
to say ; but in the word " to go " (Hebrew, 
n?^^) must mean, of the sort that were wont 
to go to Tarshish, i.e. that were used for the 
Tarshish trade. "We are guided to some 
such explanation by 1 Kings xxii. 48, where 
it is said the ships were " ships of Tarshish 
to go to Ophir" (1 Kings x. 22 ; ch. viii. 18> 
That the ships could not be to go to Tarshish 
is plain from the fact of the place, Ezion- 
geber (ch. viii. 17, 18 ; 1 Kings ix. 26), on 
the Eed Sea, where they were built. Some, 
however, have suggested that some other 
Tarshish (e.g. in the Gulf of Persia) than 
that of Spain (Tartessus) may conceivably be 
meant. The clear statement of the parallel 
saves the necessity of any such supposition, 
however. 

Yer. 37. — Eliezei the son of Sodavah of 
Uareshah. Nothing beside is known of 
this prophet. For Mareshah, see ch. xi. 8, 
and note there. The ships were broken ; i.«: 
presumably by some storm. One general 
remark maybe made upon these versed (34 — 
37), together with vers. 45 — 50 of 1 Kings 
xxii., viz. that the dislocation of both manner 
and matter, observable in both of them, pro- 
bably betrays something out of order for 
whatever reason or accident, in the more 
original source, from which both drew, the 
apparently disjointed mixture of matter in 
the parallel being the more patent of the two. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 37. — 2%« last chapter in Jchoshaphat's career. The aspects in which the 
character of Jehoshaphat offers itself to our view, in the last seen of him, are now to 
be considered. Few men there are who bear themselves well in prosperity, especially if 
the prosperity be great ; and many there are who fail to submit well to the discipline 
of adversity. Of this latter weakness of human nature it can scarcely be said that 
Jehoshaphat was an illustration. The punishment that had been foretold, that solemn 
consequence, at any rate, of " helping the ungodly, and loving them that hate the 
Lord ; therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord " (ch. xix. 2), now impended ; 
and almost the entirety of what remains to be recorded respecting Jehoshaphat ia 
occupied with the subject in this chapter, of the manner in which Jehoshaphat met hi* 
evil days. He did not defy them, he did not aggravate them, he did not make them a 
case of hopeless repining ; he met them in a calm, brave, religious spirit. The indica- 
tions and the proofs of this are noticeable as follows. 

I. The alabu of what was cominq is attended to at onoe, and is at onc» 

FBEPABED FOB. (VorS. 1 4.) 

IL The imuediate first pkbpabation is the ebsoet to peatbb. Li the presenoe 
of all " the congregation of Judah and Benjamin, in the house of the. Lord," when " all 
Judah stood before the Lord, with their little ones, their wives, and their children * 
(vers. 6, 13), prayer is made to God — prayer that recounts his great attributes ; that 
claims his Fatherhood as vouchsafed by promise and covenant of old ; that rehearsei 
his mighty works; that lays faith's clinging hold upon the comparatively recently 
built and consecrated and dedicated temple, with all that it involved ; that finds an 
argument, even, in the specially ungrateful turpitude of the foe, who now is the attacking 
party ; and that closes with an unreserved and a beautiful expression of conMencfl ik 
Ood and utter self-distrust Cvers. 6 — 12)^ 

II. OHBONIOUiS. II 



242 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xx. 1—37, 

III. The promise, bt which that pbateb is answered, n taken hold op, a 
«BATEFnLLT GEASPED, IS UNFALTERINGLY BELIEVED. The promise is a vBTy gracious 
one, a most liberal oue, conveyed in a very inspiriting and encouraging manner, and 
Jehoshaphat is overwhelmed with the impression of it (ver. 18). 

IV. Jehoshaphat and the people and the Levitbs, all with onk accord 

ACCEPT IT WITH SUCH FAITH, THAT JOT AND PRAISE AND THANKSGIVING ABE ALL 

BENDBBED BT ANTICIPATION. (Vers. 14 — 19.) The inspired Levite had communicated 
the promise, and had added to it all encouragement and exhortation, in the first place ; 
but we read that Jehoshaphat himself took up after him both these ministries in the 
presence of the people, and in his great desire to keep them thoroughly up to th« mark 
(vers. 20, 21). 

V. When the promise is fulfilled to the most signal extent, the acknow- 
ledgment OF IT, AND DUB THANKSGIVING FOB IT, ABE NOT FORGOTTEN, AND ARE NOT 
stinted; BUT TO THE MEASURE OF HUMAN ABILITT C0EBE8P0ND WITH IT. The 

testimony of this is explicit and repeated, while the description of it is exceedingly 
graphic (vers. 26—28). 

VI. The FINAL TBSTIMONT TO THE CONSISTENT, HONEST ENDEAVOUR OF THE LIFE OF 

Jehoshaphat, the solidity op his work, and the blessing that rested upon it 
FBOM above. It is most true that the work of Jehoshaphat had not been absolutely 
perfect, inasmuch as he had not absolutely succeeded (ver. 33) in what nevertheless he 
had earnestly and conscientiously endeavoured (ch. xvii. 6). And it is most true that his 
character and life and work bad not been absolutely perfect, inasmuch as his defection 
in regard of his intimacy with Ahab — ^now strangely repeated in the lesser instance of 
Ahaziah and " the ships of Tarshish " (vers. 35 — 37) — stands against him. This 
latter also met with its punishment (ver. 37) ; but we may judge that it was acknow- 
ledged and repented of io the best way, by being forsaken (1 Kings xxii. 49). Yet w« 
cannot be wrong to follow, with the tenor of the testimony of the mingled faithfulness 
and graoiousness of Scripture biography, and say that, like its ultimate Inspirer and 
Author, it loves to " forgive transgression," and to " cover sin," and that the last note of 
Jehoshaphat is that his heart was right, that he " did that which wag right," and that 
he and his work were graciously accepted of Gtoi, 



HOMILIES BT VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 13. — The source of safety in the hour of peril. Very suddenly does th« 
scene change in these chronicles of the kingdom of Judah. Prom ihe peaceful aud 
pleasant duty of completing the arrangements for securing justice throughout the land, 
Jehoshaphat was driven to consider the alarming intelligence that a powerful com- 
bination of enemies was threatening the independence of his kingdom. We learn from 
these facts — 

L That we mat suddenlt find ourselves in most sebious pebil. Judah does 
not seem to have done anything to provoke this attack, or to have had any reason to 
expect it. It came upon them like a clap of thunder in a clear sky. Such things do 
occur to nations, to Churches, to families, to individual men. In some wholly unexpected 
quarter a grave difficulty arises. That power which should have been an ally suddenly 
becomes an enemy ; that very institution which had been the source of sustenance 
threatens to drag us down with itself into financial ruin ; the very men who promised 
to be, and who were, our best friends on whom we could rely, turn into our opponents 
and thwart our purposes j the bright, the brilliant morning has become a clouded noon, 
and a severe storm impends. Unhappily all history, observation, and experience will 
furnish abundant proof that this is not a remarkably exceptional, but an occasional or 
even a frequent occurrence in human life. It is a possibility that has so much of 
probability about it that we do well to be prepared for it lest we should be called to 
face it. 

II. That oub teue Eefugk is in God. 1. But if that is to be so, we must be 
in a right relation to him. We must be able to say, with a deep significance, not only 
" O Lord God of our fathers," but also " Art not thou otir God ? " (vers. 6, 7). We must 
be true children of Abraham, who was himself the " friend of God " (ver. 7). We must 



«H. XX. 1—37.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 243 

be distinctly and definitely on the Lord's side ; we must be with Christ and not against 
him (Matt. xii. 30). We cannot look for the delivering grace of God if we have not 
been reconciled unto him through Jesus Christ, if we have remained amongst those 
whose " sin has separated between them and their God." 2. Then there must be a 
consciousness of rectitude under the special circumstances. Jehoshaphat could plead that 
ho and his people were in the land as rightful possessors of the soil ; they inherited 
from God himself (ver. 11), and these invaders were wholly in the wrong ; their attack 
was utterly indefensible (ver. 10). The king could plead that the cause of Judah was 
just and right. This consciousness of integrity vm also must have, if we would fall 
back on God. " If our heart cohdemn us not, then we have confidence toward God " 
(1 John iii. 21); but otherwise we cannot raise our hopes. We cannot ask him to 
intervene on behalf of a cause which is one of unrighteousness, or one in which we 
have been acting quite unworthily of our Lord and Leader. 3. We must bring to 
God the attitude of conscious dependence. "Our eyes are upon thee," we must be able 
to say, sincerely (Ps. xxvii. 1 ; xlvi. 1 ; Ixii. 5, 6). 4. We should be united in our 
attitude and action. " All Judah stood before the Lord, with their wives and little 
ones " (ver. 13). It is not only the leaders or the representatives that should make 
their appeal to God. Let all the people, let the " little ones," whose presence and 
whose prayer might not seem to be so essential, appear before God and join in seeking 
his help. 

III. That we uust make dibegt and earnest appeal to him. Jehoshaphat took 
active measures to enlist the intervention of Jehovah ; he " set himself to seek the 
Lord," etc. (vers. 3 — 6). It behoves us, in the day of our trial and our peril, to take 
active measures to secure the merciful and mighty succour of our God. We must 
make our earnest and our persevering appeal to him, and be waiting upon while we 
wait /or him. And our appeal will, at any rate, be threefold. We shall plead : 1. Our 
utter helplessness apart from his effectuati ng power. " We have no might," etc. (ver. 12). 
We shall, of course, be alert, diligent, energetic ; we shall put forth all our skill and 
strength ; but we shall feel that all will be wholly unavailing except our God works 
with us and through us. 2. His almighty power. (Vers. 6, 7.) 3. His Divine faith- 
fulness. (Vers. 6 — 9.) We also, like the King of Judah, can plead the inviolable word 
of our Lord. He has promised to be with us, to provide for us, to guide us through 
all our journey, to give us the victory over our enemies, to reward our faithful labour 
with a blessed increase; " And none shall find his promise vain." — 0. 

Ver. 7. — Friendship with Qod. " Abraham thy friend." 1. Before Jesus came to 
reveal God to our race as he did reveal him, the Eternal One was known and 
worshipped chiefly as the Almighty One, or as the Creator of all things, or as the 
Divine Sovereign, whose rule we are bound to obey. Not exclusively ; for he was 
known as the Father of men (see Deut xxxii. 6 ; 1 Chron. xxix. 10 ; Isa. Ixiii. 16 ; 
Ixiv. 8 ; Fs. ciii. 13). Here also he is spoken of as a Friend (and see Isa. xli. 8 ; Jas. ii. 
23). But it is evident that it was only in a restricted sense, and by a very limited 
number, that God was thus apprehended. 2. It was Jesus Christ that revealed the 
Father as the Father of souls ; it was he who taught us to address him as such, to 
think and speak of him as such, to approach him and to live before him as such. 
3. It is Jesus Christ also who has enabled us to think and to feel toward God as our 
Friend. " I have called you friends," he said to his disciples (John xv. 15). And he 
has so related himself to us that in him we can recognize God as our Divine Friend ; 
as One of whom we may rightly speak, and toward whom we may venture to feel 
and to act as our Friend indeed. But on what ground and in what respects ? On the 
ground of — 

I. Reoifbocateo love ; including, what all tme love must include, both affeetitm 
and trust. God loves us. He loves us with parental affection, as his children who were 
once indeed estranged from him, but are now reconciled unto him ; as those who have 
become endeared to him, both by his great sacrifice for their sake, and by their seeking 
after him and surrender of themselves to him. And God trusts us. He does not treat ns 
as slaves, but as sons ; he does not lay down a strict and severe code of rules by which 
our daily conduct is to be regulated ; he gives us a few broad principles, and he trusts 
us to apply them to our own circumstances. We, in return, love and trust him. Not 



244 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE 0HE0NICLE8. [ch, xx. 1— 37. 

hkving eeen him, but having understood his character and his disposition toward ui 
in Jesus Christ, having realized how great and all-surpassing was his kindness toward 
us in him (Titus iii. 4), we love him in response (1 John iv. 19). And in him, in his 
faithfulness and in his wisdom and in his goodness, we Lave an unfaltering trust. Thus 
we have the reciprocal love of friendship. 

II. Closb KB8BMBLAN0B OF OHAEACTEB AND SYMPATHY. There Cannot he friendship 
worthy of the name where there is not this. Our character and our sympathies must 
be essentially alike, must he substantially the same. And so it is with the Divine 
Lord and those who worthily bear hia Name. His character is theirs ; his principles 
are theirs ; his sympathies are theirs. What he loves and what he hates, they love 
and they hate. Towards all that to which (and towards all those to whom) he is 
drawn, they are drawn ; that which repels him repels them. Here is the true basis of 
friendship, and even that distance of nature that separates the Divine from the human 
is no barrier in the way. Being so essentially like Christ as his true followers are, they 
are his friends and he is theirs. 

III. Onbnbss of atu and action. Friendship is established and nourished by a 
common aim and by fellow-labouring. They who join heart and hand in any noble 
enterprise become united together in strong bonds of true companionship. It is so 
with our Master and ourselves. He is engaged in the sublime task of recovering a lost 
world to the knowledge, the love, the likeness of God ; so are we. He has laboured and 
suffered to achieve that most glorious end ; so do we. We are " workers together with 
him." His cause is ours ; he and we are bent on the fulfilment of the same great 
purpose ; and while he works through us and in us, he also works with us in this 
greatest and noblest of all earthly aims. " We are labourers together with God " (1 Cor. 
iiL 9) ; " We then, as workers together with him " (2 Cor. vi. 1). We are his friends. 
Let us : 1. Realize how high is the honour he has thus conferred upon us. 2. See that 
we walk worthily of such a lofty estate. 3. Take care that we never do that or become 
that which will make us forfeit so great a heritage. Let us he found faithful as the 
friends of Gk)d. — C. 

Vers. 14 — 19. — Before the battle: lessons. Having made their appeal to the Lord 
God of their fathers, Judah now waited for God. Nor had the king and his subjects 
to wait long. We have here an instance of — 

I. God's eeadinesb to asswbb the pbayee of his people. " In the midst of the 
congregation," while they were still before the Lord, in the very act and attitude of 
prayer, an answer was vouchsafed to them. While they were yet speaking, God heard 
(Isa. Ixv. 24). Though he does not constantly grant us so speedy a response, yet we 
may he quite sure that he always hearkens and heeds ; and if there be such reverence 
and faith as there were on this occasion, we may be sure that God always purposes at 
once to send us the best kind of deliverance, even if he does not at once start the train 
of events or forces that will bring it to pass. 

n. That wb need not be gebatlt afpbotbd by mebb maonithds. " Be not 
afiaid by reason of this great multitude '' (ver. 15). We are in no little danger of over- 
estimating the worth of numbers, whether they be on our side or against us. It is a 
Eeat mistake to imagine we are safe because we are in a large majority. There is no 
ng and there is no cause " saved by the multitude of an host " ^s. xxxiii. 16). 
EQstory has shown again and again that the presence of a vast number of people 
(soldiers or supporters) often begets confidence, and confidence begets carelessness and 
negligence, and these lead down to defeat and ruin. Besides, it is never quantity but 
quality, never size but spirit, never numbers but character, that decides the day. Better 
the small band of fearless men under Gideon's command, than the large numbers 
of the faint-hearted who were left behind, or even than the innumerable host of the 
lOdianites. We may not trust in the nimiher of our friends, and we need not fear the 
hosts of our enemies. If the " battle is not to the strong," it certainly is not to the 
multitudinous. 

IIL That rr is evebtthino to have Qod on oub side. We may he sure that 
when the people of Jurlah had this assurance from Jahaziel, they were not only 
oalmed and comforted, but they had a sense that all would be well with them. 
L That God had made their cause bis own. " The battle is not yours, but God's " 



CH.ri.1— 37.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHBONICLES. 246 

(yer. 15). 2. That God's presence would be granted to them. " The Lord will be with 
you " (ver. 17). 3. That God had promised them his salvation, and would therefore 
work on their behalf. "The salvation of the Lord" (ver. 17). This was enough even 
for the timid and the fearful-hearted. This should be enough for us. Conscious that 
the battle we fight is that of the Lord himself, and is not ours only or chiefly; knowing 
that he will be with us, and assured that he will work out a blessed issue, we may be 
calm, and even conSdent, though the enemy is advancing. 

IV. That we must be beady to take oub part and to do cue work, whatever 
that may be. " Go ye down against them " (ver. 16) ; " Set yourselves, stand ye still " 
(ver. 17). To do this may have been too much for the inclination of the cowardly or 
the indulgent ; it may have been too little for the active and the militant among the 
people ; but it was enough for the obedient and the trustfuL God will have us bring 
our contribution of activity as well as devotion to the great spiritual campaign. But 
it may not be just that hind or just that measure which we should select if we had our 
choice. We must let him choose our service as well as our inheritance (Ps. xlvii. 4) 
for us ; and whether that be high or humble, greater or smaller, we should be more 
than content that he is calling us to the field in which Christ is our Captain. 

V. That a spirit of reverent aRATiTUDE is always becoming. (Vers. 18, 19.) 
Before the shouts of victory are in the air, while we are going forth to the battle in 
which God is leading us, while we are serving under a Divine Saviour, while we are 
anticipating the issue, so long as we are trustful in him and not confident in ourselves, 
we do well to let our hearts be filled and to let our songs be heard with reverent 
joy.— 0. 

Vers. 23 — 37. — At and after the hattle : lessons. Armed with a holy trust in God, 
the king and his people advanced to meet their multitudinous enemies with bounding 
heart and tuneful lip. Nor were they unwarranted in so doing ; the event completely 
justified their hopes. We learn — 

L That our enemies sometimes dispose op one another. (Ver. 23.) We some- 
times find that the enemy is best " left well alone." Let Shimei " cast stones " at us , 
even though they be words of false accusation, they will do him much more harm than 
they will do us. Let the enemy blaspheme ; his profanities will be a dead weight in 
his own balances. Let men make virulent attacks on ,our holy religion ; they will 
answer one another ; we can better spend our time (as a rule) in positive endeavours 
to build up the kingdom of God. 

II. That, under God's hand, the evil we fear is more than balanced by the 
GOOD WE GAIN. When the Jewish army returned from the wilderness of Tekoa, richly 
laden with spoil (ver. 25), they would doubtless have said that it was much better for 
them to have had their agitation followed by their success than not to have had any 
invasion of the enemy. They certainly congratulated themselves upon the entire 
incident, and, in their hearts, blessed those Moabites and Ammonites for j;iving them 
such an opportunity of enrichment. When God is on our side we may expect that 
our dangers will disappear, and that from the things that threaten us we shall 
ultimately derive blessing. Such is now and ever " the end of the Lord " (John v. 11 ; 
Job xliL 10). Only we must make quite sure that God is on our side ; and this we 
can only do by making a full surrender of ourselves to him and to his service, and by 
seeing to it that we choose the side of righteousness and of humanity, and not that of 
selfishness and of guilty pride. 

III. That ooodnebb of heart should first take the fobm of OBATrrnDi, 
Whither but to "the house of the Lord" should that jubilant procession move? 
(ver. 28). Gladness finds its best utterance in sacred song, its best home in the 
sanctuary of God. Thus and there it will be chastened ; it will be pure, it will be 
moderated, it will leave no sting of guilty memories behind. Moreover, if we are not 
first grateful to God for our mercies, but rather gratulatory of ourselves, we shall nurse 
a spirit of complacency that is likely to lead us astray from the humility which is our 
rectitude and our wisdom. 

IV. That it is well when our triumph is lost in the furtherance of thb 
OAUBE OF God. It was much that Jerusalem was safe ; but it was more that " tha 
fear of Gtid was on all tiie kingdoms" (ver. 29). We may heartily rejoice that ooi 



246 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHBONIULES. [oh. xx. 1—37. 

own person, our own family, our own country, has been preserved; we may much 
more rejoice when the cause and kingdom of Christ has been greatly advanced. This 
should be the object of our solicitude and of our rejoicing. 

V. That rest is the eightfui. purchase of labour and of strife. (Ver. 30.) 
The country that has won its religious liberty by heroic suffering and strife (as with 
Holland) may well settle down to a long period of rest and peace. The man who has 
gone through several decades of anxious and laborious activity may well enjoy a long 
evening of life when the burden is laid down and the sword is sheathed. The quieter 
service of the later years of life seems a fitting prelude to the peaceful and untiring 
activities which constitute the rest of immortality. 

VI. That the worthiest humak lives do not correspond to our idfal. If we 
were to construct an ideal human life, we should not introduce another unwise com- 
bination (ver. 37) and a disastrous expedition to cast a shadow on its closing years. 
Yet this was the case with Jehoshaphat. Our lives, even at their best, do not answer 
to our conceptions of what is perfectly beautiful and complete. We must not look for 
this, for we shall very seldom find even the appearance of it. We must take the good 
man as God gives him to us, with a true soul, with a brave spirit, with a kind and 
faithful heart, with a character that is very fair and perhaps very fine, but that leaves 
something to be desired ; with a life that is very useful and perhaps very noble, but 
that bears marks of blemish even to the end. — C. 

Vers. 1 — i. — An alarm of war — aninvaaion/rmn the East. I. A startling report. 
The safety of Jehoshaphat's empire was threatened by a lormidable foe. 1. The com- 
position of the enemy. (Ver. 1.) (1) The children of Moab. Descendants of Lot and 
lis elder daughter (Gen. xix. 37). Their teiritory lay east of the Jordan and the Dead 
Sea, and had for its northern boundary first the Jabbok (Deut. ii. 20), and afterwards 
t(he Arnon (Numb. xxi. 13 — 26), the modern Wady Mojeh, opposite Bngedi. After 
the conquest a large portion of this region was occupied by the tribe of Eeuben, wiiioh 
caused the Moabites to put forth long-continued efforts to recover their lost possessions. 
This they did soon after Joshua's death, and even acquired ascendancy over Israel 
until their yoke was broken by Ehud (Judg. iii. 12, etc.). In Saul's time troublesome, 
they were by David completely subdued (1 Sam. xiv. 47; 2 Sam. viii. 2). Under 
Solomon or the first kings of Israel they must have asain broken loose, for they were 
once more reduced by Omri, who, according to the Moabite inscription, " took the laud 
of Medeba, and occupied it in his days and his son's days forty years " (' Records,' etc., 
xi. 166). On the accession of Jehoram, Ahab's son, to the Israelitish throne, Mesha, 
the son of Chemoshgad, rebelled and successfully asserted his independence (2 Kings 
iii. 5). (2) The children of Ammon. Likewise descendants of Lot (Gen. xix. 38). 
These originally occupied the same region as their kinsmen, the Moabites, but were 
eventually " obliged to retreat eastwards to the water-shed (Deut. ii. 37), where they 
remained in the mountains, in a district not annexed by Israel, in which their name 
is still preserved at Amman, tlie ancient Eabbath-Ammon (Numb. xxi. 24)" (Conder, 
• Handbook to the Bible,' p. 237). The Ammonites worshipped the supreme Being, 
under the name of Moloch or Miloom (1 Kings xi. 7). (3) The Ammonites. Probahly 
the Mennites, or Maonites (ch. xxvi. 7) — " a tribe whose head-quarters were the city 
of Maan, in the neighbourhood of Fetra, to the east of the W4dy Musa " (Keil) ; they 
are afterwards described as "inhabitants of Mount Seir" (vers. 22, 23). 2. The 
number of their army. " A great multitude " (ver. 2) had often before assailed Israel 
(oh. xiv. 11 ; Judg. vi. 5 ; Josh. xi. 4), and afterwards did assail Judah (ch. xxxii. 7). 
When Solomon spoke of I»rapl as a people like the dust for multitude (ch. L 9), it was 
rhetoric 8. The place of their encampmerit. Ha zazon-tamar, or " the pruning of th« 
palm tree " (Gen. xiv. 7) — " a name probably preserved in that of the tract called 
Sasdsah, 'pebbles' near 'Ain-Jidy" (Conder, p. 414)— otherwise Engedi, or "fountain 
of the kid," the modern 'Ain-Jidy — was situated on the west coast of the Dead Sea, 
about the middle and directly opposite the mountains of Moab. " Pew landscapes are 
more .impressive than the sudden unfolding of the Dead Sea basin and its eastern wall 
from the top of the pass of Engedi " (Tristram, in ' Picturesque Palestine,' iii. 191). 
The allied forces had probably not crossed the lake (Josephus), but rounded its southern 
extremity. 



OH. rs. 1—37.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHBONIOLBS. 247 

IL Ah CNEA8T APPREHENSION. The fear felt by Jehoshaphat was justified by 
a variety of circumstances. 1. The cJia/racter of the invasion. It was the first time 
Jehoshaphat's kingdom had been exposed to the horrors of war within its own borders. 
Heretofore Judah's campaigns had been beyond the limits of her own territory, as at 
Ramoth-Gilead (oh. xviii. 28). Foreign wars are apt to be invested with a spuricms 
glory ; war at home discovers its repulsive features to all. When a land becomes a 
battle-field', then — 

" All her husbandry doth lie on heaps, 
Corrapting in its own fertility. 
Her vine, the merry cbeerer of the heart, 
Uuprunfed dies," etc. 

(' King Henry V.,' act v. so. 2.) 

2. Th« eomhination of powers. It was three against one ; yet Jehoshaphat had no 
scruples in combining formerly with Ahab against Benhadad, or afterwards with Israel 
and Edom against Moab (2 Kings iii. 7). " With what measure ye mete," etc. (Matt, 
vii. 7), applies to kingdoms and kings no less than to private individuals. 3. The pre- 
diction of Jehu. Hanani's son had spoken of wrath upon Jehoshaphat for helping 
Ahab: was this invasion a fulfilment of that threatening? Jehoshaphat might well 
tremble as he turned his thoughts southward to Engedi. 

IIL A FBUDENT BESOLVE. In the sudden and dangerous emergency Jehoshaphat 
concluded to do three things. 1. To set himself to seek the Lord. So David had com- 
manded Israel (1 Chron. xvi. 10 ; Ps. cv. 3) and Solomon (1 Chron. xxii. 19), if they 
would prosper as people and sovereign. So had Oded's son, Azariah, directed Asa and 
his subjects if they would protect themselves against all future assailants (ch. xv. 2). 
So Asa and his subjects did; and the Lord gave them rest round about. Jehoshaphat, 
perhaps recalling these details of national history, possibly also remembering how 
disastrously he had fared by going up against Benhadad without Jehovah's help, 
decided that the first thing to do was to draw more closely together the alliance 
between himself and Jehovah, by a more diligent observance of worship and a more 
faithful performance of duty. Like all sincere reformers, whether in Church or state, 
Jehoshaphat began with himself (Luke iv. 23 ; Rom. ii. 21 — 23), and began in earnest, 
setting his heart in it as a work he delighted in and intended to carry through. 2. 
To proclaim a fast throughout all Judah. Fasting a usual aacompaniment of religious 
exercises in Israel, especially in times of anxiety and distress, whether individual or 
national. Witness the cases of David (2 Sam. xii. 16, 21), Esther (iv. 16), Nehemiah 
(i. 4), Daniel (ix. 3), Darius (Dan. vi. 18), and of the Jews at Mizpeh (Judg. xx. 26 ; 
1 Sam. vii. 6), the returning exiles at Ahava (Ezra viii. 21), and the Ninevites (Jonah 
iii. 5). It was intended as a sign of self-humiliation, an expression of sorrow, and 
a confession of guilt. 3. To hold a national convention at Jerusalem. Whether he 
actually summoned the heads and representatives of the people, as Asa previously did 
(ch. XV. 9), is not stated ; but the princes, chiefs of the fathers' houses, and principal 
men out of all the cities of Judah hastened to the capital to ask help of Jehovah in the 
crisis that had arisen. 

Lessons. 1. The hostility of the world-powers to the Church of God, exemplified 
in this combination against Judah. 2. The distinction between fear and cowardice 
in front of danger, illustrated by the behaviour of Jehoshaphat. 3. The place and 
value of fasting in religion. 4. The best defence for a nation in the time of peril — 
prayer and piety. 6. The duty and advantage of kings and peoples standing shoulder 
to shoulder when their safety is threatened. — W. 

Vers. 5 — 19. — The prayer of Jehoshaphat. I. The boenb. 1. The place. (1) 
Jerusalem, the metropolis of the land, whose safety was imperilled. (2) The house of 
Jehovah, the sanctuary on Mount Moriah, erected by Solomon as a dwelling-place for 
the God of Israel. (3) The new court, the outer or great court of the temple (1 Kings 
vii. 12). A quadrangle, this was probably called "new," because of having been 
restored or repaired by either Asa or Jehoshaphat. 2. 2%e assemhly. (1) The inha- 
bitants of Jerusalem with their wives and children. (2) The representatives of Judah 
from all the cities of the land — whether accompanied with their wives and children 



248 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xx. 1— 37 

uncertain. 3. The suppliant. Jehoshaphat acted as the mouthpiece for himself and 
his people. Stauding forth in the centre of the congregation, he offered " without form 
or any premeditation (?) one of the most sensible, pious, correct, and, as to its composi- 
tion, one of the most elegant prayers ever oflfered under the Old Testament dispensa- 
tion " (Adam Clarke). 

II. The pratbe. 1. ITie Being addressed — Jehovah. Adored as : (1) Personal and 
present. The Grod of Jehoshaphat and his people (vers. 7, 12), " He that coraeth to God 
must believe that he is " (Heb. iL 6). (2) Ancestral and faithful. The God of their 
fathers (ver. 6), who had covenanted with these fathers (Deut. v. 2), and would remain 
true to the engagements then undertaken (ch. vi. 14 ; 1 Kings viii. 57). (3) Celestial 
and mundane. The God of heaven as well as of earth, who dwelt among the armies of 
light and ruled among the kingdoms of the heathen (Dan. iv. 35). (4) Universal and 
local. Not the God of Israel and Judah alone, but the God to whom all empires and 
sovereigns owed allegiance (Ps. ciii. 19 ; cxxxv. 5, 6 ; 1 Chron. xxix. 11 ; Dan. iv. 17 ; 
Mai. i. 14; Rev. xi. 4). (5) Omnipresent and omnipotent. Possessed of resistless 
power and might which no one could withstand (ver. 6). 2. The pleas offered. (1) 
The covenant mercies of Jehovah in first gifting the land to his friend, their father 
Abraham, and to his seed for ever (Gen. xii. 1; xiii. 17); second, driving out the 
inhabitants of the land before them (Exod. xxxiii. 2 ; xxxiv. 11 ; Deut. xi. 23 ; Ps. 
xliv. 2) ; and third, in establishing them in possession of the vacated territory, so that 
for centuries they had dwelt in it (Lev. xxv. 18 ; Deut. xii. 10). (2) The expectation 
of Judah, that Jehovah would hear and keep them when in danger they called upon 
his Name (ver. 9). In this hope the temple had been built, and in the belief that this 
hope would be realized they now stood before Jehovah's presence (Ps. cxlvL 5). (3) 
The ingratitude of the enemy, whom Israel on her way from Egypt had not been suffered 
to invade (Deut. ii. 4, 9, 19), and who now repaid her clemency by attempting to drive 
her from her land. Such ingratitude on the part of nations and individuals is by no 
means infrequent. The only things men find it easy to remember are insults and 
injuries; kindnesses remain with difficulty in the human memory (Gen. xl. 23 ; 1 Sam. 
xxiii. 5 — 12 ; Eccles. ix. 14 — 16 ; ch. xxiv. 22). (4) The helplessness of Judah. 
Jehoshaphat and his people were without strength to contend with so great a company. 
Neither knew they in what direction to turn or what to do. No better plea can be laid 
before Heaven than a confession of human weakness (Ps. vi. 2 ; xxii. 11), aince God's 
strength is perfected in weakness (2 Cor. xii. 9). (5) The attitude in which they then 
stood. Their eyes were waiting upon Jehovah (Ps. xxv. 15; cxxi. 1, 2; cxxiii. 1, 2), 
trusting, desiring, expecting. They had placed their hope in and anticipated their help 
from him, as in a similar crisis Asa had done (ch. xiv. 11 ; Ps. cxxL 1). 3. The 
petitions v/rged. That Jehovah would (1) judge and defeat their enemies ; (2) hear 
and help them, the petitioners. The two requests were inseparable. Deliverance to 
Judah could only come through destruction of her adversaries. The Church of God 
may still conjoin the two petitions. 

III. The answer. 1. From whom it proceeded. Jehovah (ver. 15), or the Spirit of 
Jehovah (ver. 14j. No answers to prayer except from him. Human lips can reply 
for God only in so far as God puts his words into them (Isa. li. 16 ; Ezek. iii. 17 ; Jer. 
V. 14). 2. Through whom communicated. Jahaziel, the son of Zechariah, the son of 
Benaiah, the son of Jeiel, the son of Mattaniah, a Levite of the sons of Asaph ; a man 
of (1) honourable pedigree, being the fifth in descent, not from the Hemanite Mattaniah, 
a contemporary of David (1 Chron. xxv. 4, 16), but from Nethaniah the Asaphite 
(1 Chron. xxv. 2, 12); the letter n having been accidentally changed into an m 
(Movers, Keil, Bertheau) ; (2) honourable rank, being a Levite, and therefore of priestly 
station ; and (3) honourable calling, being, as a son of Asaph, a leader of psalmody in 
the temple worship, and now suddenly invested with the dignity of the prophetic 
office. God can find prophets anywhere when he wants them, not being bound tc 
prophetical any more than to apostolical succession — Elisha at the plough (1 Kings 
xix. 19), Amos among the herdsmen (Amos i. 1). 3. To whom it was addressed. To 
all Judah, to the inhabitants of Jerusalem and to Jehoshaphat, the persons in whose 
name and on whose behalf the prayer had been offered. 4. Of what it consisted. (1) 
A dissuasive against fear. " Be not afraid nor dismayed by reason of this great multi- 
tude," similar to that given by Moses to the fleeing Israelites (Exod, xiv. 13), and for 



OH. XX. 1—37 J THE SECOND BOOK OP THE OHEONIGLES. 249 

a similar reason, that the battle was Jehoyah's more than theirs, and he would fight 
with and for them (Exod. xiv. 14 ; 1 Sam. xvii. 47). The same is true of the battle 
the Ohristian Church is summoned to maintain against the three powers of evil, kcown 
as the world, the flesh, and the devil (Matt. x. 28). (2) A command to advance. " Go 
ye down against them " (ver. 16), exactly as Moses was instructed to speak unto the 
children of Israel that they should go forward (Exod. xiv. 15). Little as God's people 
can or could do if left to themselves, they are not at liberty to play the coward in face 
of the foe (Deut. xxxi. 6 ; 2 Sam. x. 12 ; Murk xv, 43 ; Acts ix. 27 ; 2 Pet. i. 5), to 
subside into despair or take to their heels. Their duty is to stand fast, quit themselves 
like men, be strong, and persevere. (3) A direction where to find the enemy. " Behold, 
they come up by the cliff [or, ' ascent '] of Ziz, and ye shall find them at the end 
of the valley, before the wilderness of Jeruel" (ver. 16). This a part of the flat 
country extending from the Dead Sea to the neighbourhood of Tekoa, and called M 
Hus&sah, irom a wady on its northern side (Robinson, vol. ii. p. 243). The ascent or 
mountain-road, Hazziz, led towards it from Engedi (4) An instruction what to do on 
meeting them. To set themselves in battle array — stand still and see the salvation of 
God (ver. 17). They would not require to fight. Jehovah would do the rest. Compare 
again the orders of Moses to the Israelites (Exod. xiv. 13). The instruction here given 
has its counterpart in that given by the gospel to sinners : " To him that worketn not, 
but believeth," etc. (Rom. iv. 5). (5) An encouragement to hope for victory. " The 
Lord would be with them " (ver. 17), and fight for them as he did for Israel at the Red 
Sea (Exod. xiv. 13) and at Gibeon (Josh. x. 14), as Moses promised he would do every 
time they faced their enemies (Deat. xx. 4), and as Nehemiah (iv. 20) afterwards 
believed he did. The same presence is enjoyed by the Church of God still (Matt. 
xxvii. 20). 

IV. The acknowledgment. 1. By the king. " Jehoshaphat bowed his head with 
his face to the ground " (ver. 18), in token of humility and reverence, as well as of 
adoration and submission (ch. xxix. 30 ; Gen. xviii. 2 ; xxiv. 26 ; Exod. iv. 31 ; xxxiv. 
8 ; Josh, xxiii. 7). 2. By the people. " All Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem 
fell before the Lord," in a solemn act of worship. 3. By the Levitea. Those belonging 
to the children of the Kohathites and the children of the Korahites " stood up to praise 
the Lord God of Israel with an exceeding loud voice," adding notes of thanksgiving 
and rejoicing to those of adoration and self-humiliation which Jehovah's gracious 
answer inspired. 

Learn : 1. The sorest need of man — a God to flee to in the hour of trouble and day 
of calamity. 2. The highest glory of God — that he can hear prayer and rescue the 
perishing. 3. The greatest peril of the Church's enemies — the fact that Jehovah fights 
against them. 4. The surest guarantee of victory for the Church of Jesus Christ — the 
fact that the battle is the Lord's. 5. The brightest hope for an anxious sinner — that 
he only needs to stand still and see the salvation of God. — W. 

Vers. 20 — 30. — A victory without a blow, I. The mabch to Tbkoa. (Vers. 20, 2].) 
1. 2%e composition of the a/rmy. (1) The king commanded in person (vers. 25, 27). 
Modern monarchs stay at home when their soldiers go to war, and even when they iw 
not, seldom place themselves like Jehoshaphat in the forefront of their troops. Perhaps 
"discretion is the better part of valour;" but the arrangement commends itself as 
reasonable that kings and captains should share the perils of their subjects and foUoweri. 
(2) The inhabitants of Jerusalem contributed their contingent to the force. Probably 
the flower of the nation's troops, these may have served as the king's body-guard. (3) 
The warriors of Judah completed the armament. The entire army mustered at and 
took its departure from Jerusalem. 2. The time of its setting forth. " Early in the 
morning," i.e. the nex't after Jahaziel's assurance. An indication of (1) faith, since 
without this they had hesitated and delayed, if not sat still and trembled (Ps. xxvii. 
13) ; (2) zeal, discovering the eagerness with which they entered on the path of duty 
once it had been pointed out (Ps. cxix. 33) ; (3) courage, as being afraid of nothing 
with Jehovah as Leader and Commander (Ps. xxvii. 1). 3. The address of it$ king. 
Standing in the city gate as regiment after regiment filed into line and sallied forth, 
Jehoshaphat exhorted them (successively) to calm confidence in the ultimate success ol 
the campaign upon which they were entering. (1) Two things he recommended— 



250 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xx. 1— 37. 

absolute faith in Jehovah as their covenant God, and perfect trust in his prophets as 
the bearers of his message. (2) Two things he promised — the permanent establishment 
of their kingdom in spite of all attacks from without ; its certain prosperity through 
being exempt fiom unbelief a sure but fatal source of weakness and division. 4. The 
arrangements for its march. Jehoshaphat made special preparations for encountering 
the I'oe. (1) A consultation was held with the people. Besides exhorting them as 
above recorded (Bertheau, Keil), he took them into counsel with himself, in the dis- 
position next made. Tliis conference occurred before the army left Jerusalem rather 
than on its reaching Tekoa. (2) Singers were appointed to march in front of the 
iroops. Arrayed in sacred vestments, Levitical musicians were to praise the beauty of 
holiness, or to praise the Lord in the beauty of holiness, saying, " Praise the Lord ; for 
his mercy endureth for ever " (Ps. oxxxvi.). Their singing and praising most likely 
began as they left the capital, was discontinued on the way to Tekoa, and was ngain 
resumed on reaching the vicinity of the enemy (ver. 22). 5. The advance towards the 
foe. A singular method of warfare it must have seemed — as ridiculous as the march 
of Joshua's warriors round the walls of Jericho and the music of their rams' horns 
must have appeared to the inhabitants of that old Canaanitish fortress (Josh. vi. 
12—16). 

II. The scene fbom the watoh-towbb. (Ver. 24.) This " watch-tower," a 
height in the wilderness of Tekoa which overlooked the desert of Jeruel, where the 
invading host lay encamped (ver. 16), was prohably the conical hill Jebel Fv/reidis, or 
the Fiank Mountain, from which a view can be obtained of the Dead Sea and the 
mountains of Moab (' Picturesque Palestine,' i. 137). From this elevation Jehoshaphat 
and his soldiers beheld the whole ground strewn with corpses, and not the vestige of a 
living foe to be seen. The enemy had been: 1. Completely slaughtered. The deal 
bodies were so numerous that "to all appearance none had escaped" (Keil); but the 
Chronicler manifestly intended to describe a case of not apparent, but real extermina- 
tion. Not merely all whom the men of Judah beheld prostrate on the field were dead, 
but of all who had come up against Judah none had escaped. 2. Self-destroyed. They 
had fallen on and annihilated one another. That perhaps was not remarkahle; thieves, 
rohbers, and wicked men in general often fall out and destroy one another. The pity 
is they do not always do so before attacking other people. In this case two things 
were remarkable — the time when and the mode in which it happened. (1) It occurred 
when the army began to march and the Levites to sing and to praise the Lord in the 
beauty of holiness (ver. 22). Exactly, then, when God's people were manifesting forth 
their obedience, faith, zeal, and holiness, their enemies were destroying one another. 
The same thing would happen in the experience of the New Testament Church were 
she in a similar fashion to confront her adversaries, first arraying herself in the sacred 
garments of holiness, next trusting in God for the victories he had promised — in fact, 
praising him beforehand on account uf them, and then going forth to behold them and 
gather up their fruits ; her enemies, too, would destroy themselves. (2) It occurred 
through the direct instrumentality of God. Jehovah set against the children of 
Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir (ver. 22) " liers in wait," supposed to have been angels 
or heavenly powers sent by God, and called insidiatores because of the work they 
did against the enemy (Bertheau, Bwald), but more probably " Seirites, greedy of spoil, 
who from an ambush made an attack upon the Ammonites and Moabites" (Keil). 
These, becoming alarmed for their safety, not only repelled the " liers in wait," but 
turned with fury upon the Seirites marching with them, and absolutely exterminateil 
them ; after which, growing suspicious of one another, they flew at each other's throats 
and rested not until they had completely destroyed one another. 

m. The GATHBBiNa op the spoil. (Ver. 26.) 1. The articles. (1) Bicheb — 
movable property, such as cattle, tents, etc., the usual wealth of nomads. (2) Dead 
bodies, i.e. corpses of men and carcases of animals; the former with clothing and 
jewellery, the latter with harness and accoutrements. The reading " garments " (Ber- 
theau, Clarke), though not unsuitable (Judg. viii. 26), is probably incorrect. (3) 
Precious jewels, " vessels of desire," gold and silver ornaments like those Gideon's 
soldiers took from the Midianites (Judg. viii. 25). 2. The quantity. So abundant 
that three days were occupied in collecting it, and when collected it was found to be 
more than they could carry. The ear-rings taken by Gideon's warriors firom the 



OH. XX. 1—87.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 261 

Midianites weighed seventeen hundred shekels of gold (Judg. viii. 26) ; that ohtained 
by Hannibal's soldiers at the battle of CanDas was so great " ut tres modios aureorum 
annulorum Carthaginem mitteret, quos e nianibus equitum BomaQorum, senatonim 
et militum detraxerat" (' Eutropii Historia Romana,' xli.). 

IV. The mustekino at Bebachah. (Ver. 26.) 1. The place. The valley, after- 
wards named from the incident of which it was the scene, must have adjoined the battle- 
field. A trace of it has been recovered in the Wddy Bereikut, to the west of Tekoa, 
near the road from Hebron to Jerusalem (Robinson, vol. ii. p. 189). There is no ground 
for identifying it (Thenius) with the upper part of the valley of Eidron, afterward* 
called the valley of Jehoshaphat (Joel. iii. 2, 12). 2. The time. On the fourth day 
after their arrival at Tekoa, the three intervening days having been employed in collect- 
ing the spoiL 3. The business. (1) To render thanks to Jehovah. National mercies 
should receive national acknowledgment, just as national sins require national confession. 
Full of gratitude for the marvellous deliverance they had experienced, Jehoshaphat and 
his people blessed Jehovah on the spot he had consecrated by so wondrous an inter- 
position on their behalf. From this circiunstance the valley afterwards came to be 
designated Emek-Berachah, or " the valley of blessing." (2) To prepare for returning to 
Jerusalem, which they forthwith did. 

V. The eetubn to Jeeusalbm. (Vers. 27, 28.) 1. Without delay. After causing 
the wilderness to echo with anthems to bim who had smitten great and famous kings 
(Ps. cxxxvi. 17, 18), they had nothing to detain them from their homes. 2. Withmit 
loss. Though they had gained a glorious victory, not one of their company was left 
upon the battle-field. "Every man of Judah and Jerusalem" that marched to Tekoa 
returned to the capital 3. Without disorder. The same solemn and orderly proces- 
sion that had characterized their going forth now distinguished their coming back. 
4. Without sorrow. Few returns from the battle-field are without saddening recollec- 
tions ; theirs was marked by unmixed joy, to which they gave formal expression with 
psalteries and harps and trumpets in the house of the Lord. 

Learn : 1. The best evidence of faith — prompt and cheerful obedience. 2. The true 
secret of national as of individual prosperity — belief in God and in God's Word. 3. The 
value of sacred song as a means of exciting religious feeling and sustaining religious 
fortitude. 4. The necessity of holiness in them who would command or lead the Lord's 
host. 5. The ease with which Grod could make the enemies of his people annihilate 
one another. 6. The rich spoil that belongs to faith. 7. The joyous home-coming of 
all God's spiritual warriors. — W. 

Vers. 31 — 37. — Hie biography of Jehoshaphat. 1. JehoshafAat's parent age. 1. 
His father. Asa, a good king who enjoyed a long and honoured reign. Though goud 
fathers have sometimes bad sons, as in the case of Jehoshaphat himself, yet there is a 
presumption in favour of a parent's piety being reproduced in the son. " Lord ! I find 
the genealogy of my Saviour strangely checkered with four remarkable changes in four 
immediate generations. (1) Roboam begat Abia; i.e. a bad father begat a bad son. (2) 
Abia begat Asa; t.e. a bad father a good son. (3) Asa begat Josaphat; i.e. a g>'ud 
fitther a good son. (4) Josaphat begat Joram ; i.e. a good father a bad son. I see, Lord, 
firom hence that my father's piety cannot be entailed: that is bad news for me. But 
I see also that actual impiety is not always hereditary : that is good news for my son " 
(Thomas Puller, 'Good Thoughts in Bad Times,' p. 43). 2. Bis mother. Azubah, 
the daughter of Shilhi. Otherwise unknown, she was, nevertheless, the wife of a good 
man, the consort of a pious king — alas 1 also the mother of a wicked son. She was 
probably herself a woman of worth, and to her credit her name has been transmitte<l to 
posterity rather as her father's daughter and her husband's spouse than as her son's 
mother. In her case the hand of Providence has drawn a veil over her misfortune. 

n. Jeboshapbat's beion. 1. When it began. When he was thirty-five years old. 
There was no room in this case for the royal preacher's woe (Eccles. x. 16). 2. How 
long it continued. Twenty-five years — a quarter of a century ; during which time ha 
and his people experienced much of the Divine favour and blessing. 3. When it ended. 
When he was sixty years of age ; t.e. before he reached the allotted space of three scora 
years and ten (Ps. xc. 10), and after a shorter life than was afterwards enjoyed by som* 
of his less worthy successors, e.g. Uzziah (ch. xxvi. 3) and Manasseh (ch. xxxiii. 1) — a 



252 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xx. 1—37 

ptoof that the promise of long life as a reward for piety was not intended, even under 
the Old Testament, to be accepted uniTersally and without exception. 

nL Jehoshapbat's realm. 1. Its extent. He reigned over Judah, the southern 
kingdom. 2. Its condition. Quiet. With the exception just mentioned it had 
suffered no invasion. It was disturbed by no internecine feud or civil strife. S. Its 
Protector. Jehovah. " God gave him rest round about." 

IV. Jehoshafhat'b keiqhboubs. 1. Their attitude. They stood in awe of Jehosha- 
phat and his people. Compare the terror of the peoples through the midst of whom 
Jacob passed on his flight from Shechem to Hebron (Gen. xxxv. 5), and the fear which 
fell upon the city of Jerusalem on beholding the miracle of Pentecost (Acts iL 43). 
2. The reason of it. They heard that the Lord fought against the enemies of Israel 
(rer. 29). So Miriam expected the report of Jehovah's victory over Pharaoh would 
paralyze the surrounding peoples through whom the ransomed host had to pass (Exod. 
XV. 14—16). 

y. Jehobhapeat's chabaoteb. 1. Piova. Like his father Asa, he walked in the 
way of the Lord. 2. Persevering. He departed not from doing right in the sight of 
Jehovah, i.t. in the matter of worship. 3. Defective. Not perfect in the sense of 
being faultless, he allowed the high places dedicated to Jehovah to remain, though 
other similar high places dedicated to idols were removed (ch. xvii. 6) ; and though he 
was better than his people, whose hearts were not prepared for a thorough-going refor- 
mation, he yet in a blameworthy spirit of complaisance yielded to their demands and 
permitted the unhallowed altars to stand. 

VI. Jehoshafhat'b acts. 1. Those recorded by the Chronicler, (1) The establish- 
ment of garrisons throughout the land (ch. xviL 2). (2) The appointment of an 
itinerant ministry for the religious education of the people (ch. xvii. 7). (3) The 
fostering of commerce in the cities of Judah (ch. xvii. 13). (4) The creation of courts 
of justice (ch. xix. 5). (5) The reformation of religion (ch. xvii. 6 ; xix. 4). (6) The 
marriage of his son with Aliab's daughter (ch. xviii. 1). (7) The war at Bamoth-Gilead 

Soh. xviii. 28). 2. l^se written in the book of Jehu, Eanants son. (Ch. xix. 2.) These 
leeds of Judah's king are lost. How much of every life drops into oblivion, even 
thoi:^h set down in a biography! Only that history wliich God writes lives for ever. 

VII. Jehoshafhat'b faults. 1. Plentiful. Good as Jehoshaphat was, both as 
man and sovereign, he committed grievous blunders, and indeed fell into aggravated 
sins. The three worst were : (1) The marriage of his son Jehoram with Athaliah, the 
daughter of Ahab — the mating of a lamb witli the cub of a tigress. (2) The war with 
Benhadad which he entered on to please Ahab, without thinking whether he would 
thereby please God. (3) The joining of Ahaziah, Ahah's successor, in making a fleet 
to go to Tarshish, or a fleet of Tarshish ships in Ezion-geber. 2. Punished. None of 
these offences were overlooked by Jehovah. The alliance of Jehoram with Athaliah 
avenged itself in the depravation of Jehoram's character. The Syrian war, besides 
exposing him to imminent peril, brought upon him the Moabitish invasion. The fleet 
which he and Ahaziah made was wrecked in the Bed Sea, and never went to Tarshish. 
So Eliezer, the son of Dodavah of Mareshah, predicted it would happen — ijecause 
Jehoshaphat had a second time joined himself with the house of Omri. 3. Pardoned. 
Though chastised for his errors, Jehoshaphat was not abandoned to wrath. A child of 
the covenant and an heir of the promise, he was rebuked but not rejected, corrected but 
not condemned. So God deals with believers when they err (1 Cor. xi. 32). 

Vin. Jehoshafhat'b END. 1. Sis death was peaceful. " Be slept with his fathers " 
(eh. xxL 1). 2. Hit burial was honourable. He was entombed in the city of David, in 
the sepulchre of the kings of Judah. 3. Sit throne was confirmed. His son Jehoram 
Itigned in his stead. 

Leun: 1. The fallibility of good men. 2. The infalUbility of God's Word.— W. 



OH. XM. 1—20.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 



258 



EXPOSITION 



CHAPTER XXI. 
The matter of this chapter may be divided 
into four parts. The death and burial of 
Jehoshaphat, and the number, names, and 
position of his eons (vers. 1 — 3). The acces- 
sion and wicked course of Jehorara, the eldest 
son (vers. 4 — 11). The written warning and 
denunciation of EUjah, and the very prac- 
tical warning of the Philistines, etc, (vers. 
12 — 17). The disease, death, and burial 
of Jehoram (yers. 18—20). 

Ver. 1. — The parallel for this Terse is 
1 Kings xxii. 50 ; and, with the exception of 
one word, it is an exact paralleL To under- 
stand the questions set in motion by the last 
clause of the verse, comparison must be made 
of 2 Kings i. 17 ; iii. 1 ; viii. 16. For any- 
tliing that appears here, we should take for 
granted that Jehoram now first began to 
exercise any loyal authority and enjoy any 
royal dignity. But the first of the just- 
quoted passages says Jehoiam (of Israel) 
succeeded his wicked brother Ahaziah in 
the second year of Jehoram (of Judah), son 
of Jehoshaphat. In the second of the above- 
quoted passages, however, we are told that 
the same Jehoram (of Israel) succeeded to 
the throne in the eighteenth year of Jehosha- 
phat, which date tallies with our parallel of 
last chapter (1 Kings xxii. 41), to the effect 
that Jehouhaphat himself began to reign in 
Ahab's fourth year, and AhJaziah in Jeho- 
saphat's seventeenth year. While, lastly, 
the third of the above-quoted references 
says that in the fifth year of Joram (of 
Israel), "Jehoshaphat being then King of 
Jndah" (which, however, is itself an un- 
faithful rendering of what must be a corrupt 
text), his son Jehoram "began to reign." 
It has therefore been conjectured that the 
roytd name was given Jehoram (of Judah) 
by his father in his father's sixteenth year, 
and that in bis twenty-third year he further 
invested him with some royal power (our 
ver. 3 gives some plausibility to this conjec- 
ture), from which last date Jehoram's "eight 
years" (2 Kings viii. 17; ch. xxi. 5, 20) 
must be reckoned; this was not less than 
two years before the death of Jehoshaphat. 
Were it not for the countenance that our 
third verse (describing the cut-and-drled 
arrangements that the father made for his 
eons) gives to the tenableness of the above 
conjectures, we ahould prefer the conjecture 
that the passages commented upon are so 
much corrupt t^t 

Yer. 2. — Though in our version two 
Agn riaha appear among the six sons of 



Jehoshaphat here given, the Hebrew text 
shows rupipi in the one place and vrprg, ia 
the other, toothing is known of the previous 
history of these six, now so cruelly murdered 
by their eldest brother. It will be observed 
that Jehoshaphat is styled King of I»rael, 
probably merely generically. Into this way 
the writer of Chronicles would run, at any 
rate, more easuy than the writer of Kings. 

Ver. 3. — ilie fe.ther's foreseeing care issued 
Teiy_ differently from what be had thought, 
waking now the greed and mturderous intent 
of Jehoram. Jehoshaphat, nevertheless, was 
but following in the wake of the head of the 
separated Bngdom of Judah, Eehoboam 
(ch. xi. 22, 23), wherein he is said to have 
"dealt wisely;" even the parallel (in the 
matter of one sou Abijah, son of Maachah, 
the favourite wife, being appointed king) 
obtaining there in an aggravated form, as 
he was not the eldest son. This case, with 
those of Solomon and Jehoahaz (by the 
favour not of the parent but of the people, 
2 Kings xxiii. 30), formed the exceptions to 
the usual observance of and honoiu done 
to the principle of primogeniture (Dent. xxi. 
15—17). 

Ver. 4. — Slew all his brethren . . . and also 
of the princes of Israel. It may be, as sug- 
gested by the genius of the last clause of 
onr ver. 13, that Jehoram's wicked heart 
prompted him the rather because his own 
works were evil and his brothers' righteous. 
He may have thought their practical witness 
against him, and that of the " princes" who 
shared their fate, would be growingly incon- 
venient, and would work in them a necessary 
disloyalty (Judg. Ix. 1—5). On the other 
showing, the "princes" now cut down may 
have shown partiality and affection to the 
six brothers, one or other of them. 

Ver. 5. — He reigned eight years. This 
reign dates to begin with the twenty-second 
or twenty-third year of the reign of his 
father Jehoshaphat, according to note on 
ver. 1, above. The parallel of 2 Kings viii 
17 — 21 may be consulted for our vers. 5 — 11 ; 
our vers. 11, 13 expound in clearer detail 
the " evil " that Jehoram wrought than the 
narrative of Kings. 

Ver. 6. — The daughter of Ahab to wife. 
That is, Athaliah, called (oh. xxii. 2 ; 2 Kingi 
viii. 26) the daughter, that ia, granddaughter, 
of Omri. 

Ver. 7. — The covenant ... a light . . . 
his sons for ever (bo 2 Sam. vii. 12, 13, 15, 
16 ; xxiii. 5 ; 1 Kings viii. 20, 24, 25 ; 1 Ohron. 
xxii. 10; Pb. cxxxU. 11, 12; l8a.lv. 3; 
Acta xiii. 34). 

Ver. 8. — In his days the Sdomites r*. 
▼olted . . . made tbemselvea a king. The 



264 



THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxi, 1— 20. 



expression, " in his days," scarcely fails in- 
tendittg to accentuate the mournful change 
now as compared with the state of things 
depicted in our ch. xvii. 5 — 11. 

Ver. 9. — With Ma princes. The parallel, 
2 Kings viii. 21, reads, "t» Zair." Of any 
such place nothing is known, and it has been 
proposed to supersede the word there by 
" Seir," which a certain amount of similarity 
of the Hebrew characters might countenance. 
Possibly by some mishap, not so readily 
explainable by miaoccurrence of characters 
«imply, our words, " with his princes," should 
stand in place of "to Zaii." It must be 
noted that the two first clauses of the verse 
in the parallel become something inconse- 
quential (which is not the case with the 
reading of our text), in that it says, " The 
king and chariots went forth to a place, and 
rose up by night," etc. The dislocation is, 
perhaps, not serious, but our text avoids it 
in reading, " The king, princes, and chariots 
went forth, and rose up by night and 
emote," etc. 

Yer. 10. — Libnah . . . because he had for- 
saken. The parallel states the revolt of 
Libnal i also, but does not make the closing 
remark of our verse. 

Yer. 11. — Caused ... to oonimit fornica- 
tion. Perhaps the meaning is exclusively 
here the infidelity of Idolatry, but at any 
rate it includes this. 

Yer. 12. — A writing. The Hebrew is 
ai^c, noun, from verb sns. This noun does 
not occur very frequently, but is found in the 
following passages, viz.: Exod. xxxii. 16; 
xxxix. 30; Deut. x. 4 ; ch. xxxv. i ; xxxvi. 22 ; 
Ezrai. 1 ; Isa. xxxviii. 8. A note in Grove's 
interesting article, " Elijah " (Smith's ' Bible 
Dictionary,' vol. i. p. 5K0), says that the word 
is almost identical with the Arabic word of 
the present day, while the ordinary Hebrew 
word for a " letter " is ISD, oftener rendered 
"book." There came. That this is the 
precise language used rather helps the per- 
suasion that it was the well-known Prophet 
Elijah of Israel, who, not resident in Judah, 
and perhaps very near the end of his life, 
and in sight of his translation, was taught 
•nd directed divinely to send this message 
of rebuke and terror for Jehoram. Elijah 
the prophet. Some hold that it certainly 
was not the well-known prophet of the 
northern kingdom who is here intended. 
" Time, place, and circumstance," says Pro- 
fessor Dr. James G. Murphy, of Belfast 
(•Handbook to the Books of Olironicles,' 
p. 127), difference him " from the Tiahbite." 
And lie confidently considers him (with 
Cajetau) another Elijah (Ezra x. 21), or 
Eliah (1 Chron. viii. 27; Ezra x. 26; for 
the form rendered so), or Eliyaliu, in which 
form the Hebrew name appears (n;^tt, or 
11*7^ being the forms of the name found). 



on the gronnds that the Tishbite was tranc- 
lated in the time of Jehoram's father Jeho- 
sliaphat (2 Kings iii. 11); that his sphere 
was in the northern kingdom, and himself 
more of one who wrouglit mighty works and 
spoke otherviise than as a prophet ; and that 
the designation " the prophet " need by no 
means deuote him exclusively. He adds that a 
" writing" from a prophet is nothing strauge, 
which may be easily conceded but poorly 
instanced by 1 Chron. xxviii. 19 ; better by 
Jer. xxxvi. 1, 2, 6. On the other hand. 
Grove (in article above quoted) and others 
find no invincible difficulty in accepting this 
Elijah for the famous prophet. His men- 
tion here is, of course, exceedingly interest- 
ing, as the only mention of him in Chro- 
nicles — a fact which very remarkably falls 
in with the abstinence as well as the fulness 
of the compiler of Chronicles. .Tosephus 
pronounces that the letter was sent dimng 
Elijah's life (' Ant.,' ix. 5. § 2), surmises to 
the contrary having been made. While 
Elijah's translation seems to have taken 
place before Jehosbaphat's death, ftom what 
we read of Misha (2 Kings iii. 11), we may 
well account that Elisha had begun hia 
ministry before his master's translation. 
Not only the other passages that confirm, 
but in especial the passage (2 Kings i. 17) 
which tells of Jehoram's being, before his 
&ther's death, on the throne of Judah at 
the time of Elijah's interview with Ahaziah 
(a passage that occurs immediately preceding 
the account of Elijah's last acts), might have 
led us to suppose that Elijah's letter was 
before Jehosbaphat's death, during the joint 
reign, but for the mention of tlie slaying of 
his sons. Bertheau, in our text in his 
' Chronik,' points out the resemblance which 
the " writing " shows to the matter of the 
speeches of Elijah, while in certain respects 
of style, and the very insulated sort of intro- 
duction it has here, it greatly differs from 
the narrative in, which it is now set. Al- 
though the calculation may seem rather a 
fine one, the circumstances described accu- 
rately point to the "writing" of Elijah 
reaching Jehoram before the chronologically 
misplaced translation of Elijah as given in 
2 Kings ii. 1 — 11. This question may bo 
instanced as one of the interesting moot 
points by no means compassed with insuper- 
able difficulty, but challenging careful study 
and patient comparison of chronological and 
historical passages. 

Yer. 13. — See note in previous verse on 
Jehoram's ilaying of hit brethren, and the 
conclusive proof this statement allows that 
Elijah's letter must have been subsequent to 
the death of Jehoshaphat. The better than 
thyself probably points to the fact that they 
had not fallen into idolatrous practices. 

Yer. 14. — A great plagne; Hebrew, n^iO, 



OH. xxi. 1— 20,] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHB0NICLB8. 



265 



Out of the twenty-six ocourrenees of this 
woid, it ia rendered (Authorized Version) 
twenty-three times by the word " plague, 
twice by the word " slaugliter '' (2 Sam. xvii. 
9 ; xviii. 7), and once " stroke " (Ezuk. xxiv. 
16). It is not the word (p}i) which about 
sixty times (chiefly in Leviticus) describes 
the physioal plague, but both of the words 
are applied to the plagues, e.g. of Pharaoh, 
and to the suffering that came of any severe 
smiting of the people. As no physical 
affliction in the shape of disease visited, 
so far as we know, the people, ^nves, and 
ohildren of the king, and as his goods are 
reckoned in for the great plague, the general 
opinion is probably the correct one, that the 
invaaions spoken of (vers. 16, 17) fulfilled 
the punishment now announced. 

Ver. 15. — Therefore against Jehoram and 
Judas Iscariot and Herod was it decreed 
that their very bowels should bear witness. 

Ver. 16. — The moreover of this verse is 
simply tlie conjunction " and ; " it is not the 
0} of ver. 11, for instance. Our Authorized 
Version " moreover " obscures the purport 
of the verse. Better the simple "and," as in 
the Revised Version. The Lord stirred np. 
Beference may again be made to ch. xvii. 
10 — 12. The things then gained are now 
being lost. The Arabians . . . near the 
Ethiopians. The Ethiopians, i.e. Cushites, 
fully fifteen centuries before the date of 
those original treatises from which the 
writers of Kings and Chronicles respectively 
borrowed their materials, or some of them, 
are recorded both genealogically and geo- 
graphically in Gen. x. 6—8. They had their 
loeation very early in the south of Arabia, 
as also to the south of Egypt, speaking 

fenerally, with the Bed Sea on the east, the 
libyan desert on the west, and Abyssinia 
on the south, whilst Syene marked con- 
spicuously a site on the line of the northern 
luunds between them and Egypt (Ezek. 
xxix. 9 — ] 1 ; Isa. xviii. 1, 2 ; zlv. 14 ; Zeph. 
lii. 10). They are almost invariably con- 
nected with Africa, firom whence it is now 
that stress is laid npon those of them to 
whom the Arabians, on the other side of the 
Bed Sea, were contiguous. 

Ver. 17.— Brake into it; Hebrew, kal 
future of Pj33 (compare the other four sig- 
nificant and expresaiTe occurrences of this 



exact form, Judg. xv. 19; 2 Sam. xziii. 16; 
1 Chron. xi. 18; Isa. xlviii. 21). The 
elementary idea of the root is to divide; 
and it occvurs in one conjugation or another 
fifty-one times, there being no more typi- 
cal occurrence than that of Gen. vii. 11. 
Carried away. The Hebrew uses the word 
" carried captive" (i3B';i) ; possibly the ordei 
of ver. »4 is inadvertenfly neglected, wbioh 
puts the living beings before all the lub- 
Btanoe, or, goods {el\2-yy^^j). His ions 
also. From ch. xxiv. 7 we note that the 
sons were not punished for their father's 
sins alone, but for their own. Jehoahax. 
This person is called Ahaziah in ch. xxii. 1 
(the syllables of the name being reversed) 
and Azariah in ch. xxii. 6, which cannot be 
explained, but must be supposed an error. 
The Jehoiachin of oh. xxxvi. 9 is written 
Jeconiah, or Jeehoniah, in 1 Chron. iii. 16, 
17 ; Coniah in Jer. xxii. 24, etc. ; and Jeclio- 
niah in ch. xxiv. 1, etc. The two parte of 
the word combined in either order make the 
same meaning. On account of the express 
mention of the camp in ch. xxii. I, some 
think that the slaughter and the plunder 
were all such as might have been wrought 
in the royal quarters there ; others that we 
are to infer the taking by assault of Jeru- 
salem itself and what was therein. 

Ver. 18. — An incurable disease ; t.«. it was 
60 severe that it was in this case incurable. 

Ver. 19. — After the end of two years. 
That " two years'" space began at the end 
of nearly two years after his father's death. 
Two years' warning and space for repent- 
ance subsequent Jehoram had turned to no 
account, and even affliction and suffering 
brought him no amendment. No burning 
(see our note on eh. xvi. 14). 

Ver. 20. — Departed without being desired ; 
literally, without desire. The closing com- 
mentary, so quietly written, becomes the 
more patheticsdly mournful The "desire " 
spoken of is the detiderimn of Horace, of 
nearly nine centuries later (' Odes,' i 24). 
But there was now no "desiderium . . . 
tarn oari capitis," for want of room for this 
latter description. They buried him in th* 
city of David, but not in the sepnlohrei of 
the Idngs (see again our note on oh. xvi. 14 ; 
and oomp. ch. xxiv. 25 ; xxviiL 27). 



HOMILETICS. 

Vera. 1 — ^20. — A reign of unmitigated iharm. To the career of Jehoshsphat of almost 
exemplary excellence, that of Jehoram, Ma son, forms a contrast most humiliating. 
Obviously it is not the least painful feature of this latter that it so inevitably forces 
into our memory the parental fault, which, if it were not the cause and very foundation 
of an eldest son's abandoned character and course of conduct, could not fail to haye 
given opportunity for it, and could not fail to incur the responsibility before all the 
world of having lent the occasion. This chapter teaches us significantly 



256 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHB0NICLES. [oh. xxi.l— 2a 

I. The babb vanity of human endeavoue to pbovidk bt ant conteivanoeb 

AOAINBT THE 00NSE()UEN0E8 OF ITS OWN FAUIiTS AND SINS. No disposition in his will, 

no disposition of the gifts of his property on the part of Jehoshaphat, sufficed to avert 
these in this instance (vers. 3, 4). 

II. The immense addition of pain and punishment fob bin that abb involvbd 

BEBEIN IN EVEN SUCH POOB MEABUBE OF FORESIOHT AS BELONGS TO HUMAN NATURE. 

This is an indication of the great mercy that lies in the limited measure of the powers 
of human nature. To be hunted and goaded by the forces of memory from behind, and 
•t the same time terrified by the only too just apparitions of anticipation, and the 
pictures of what awaits us in front, even in this lile, — how dreadfully might they at 
times add to the misery of life I How often might they induce remorse, and the despair 
that comes of remorse 1 

III. The special botal humiliation and punishment which consist in victory, 
POSSIBLY victobt ON VICTORY, WITHOUT CONQUEST. (Vers. 8, 10, 16, 17.) It is the Sisy- 
phus of kinu;s and rulers and nations, and -Jehoram was the Sisyphus of this time and 
history. But it involves also misery and a scourge for the nation cursed with such 
rulers. 

IV. The ACCUMULATION OF EETRIBUTION THAT OOVEBED AND CBOWDED THE END FOR 

Jehobam. Forewarned by the great Prophet Elijah, perhaps the very last, certainly 
among the very last, of the acts of his ministry, a horror of a bodily disease ; a plague 
for his people, his children, his wives, and his goods ; the slaughter of all his sous save 
one— the one necessary to carrying on the line of Judah ; an unhonoured death, and the 
forfeiting of a place in the ancestral sepulchres of the kings ; — these were " the portion 
of his cup," and the filling up of its bitterness — the retribution of an iniquitous and 
godless career, apparently unrelieved by a single virtue or sinde good deed I It was 
impossible, indeed, that his father could learn from notice and experience of the son ; 
but " all these things were written for our admonition " for all succeeding generations, 
and tell their gravest lessons, and offer their most fearful warnings for many another 
father. 

HOMILIES BT VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 11. — A life spent in undoing. For the quarter of a century Jehoshaphat 
■pent all his individual power and devoted all the weight of his royal office to the work 
of establishing piety, justice, and (in consequence) real prosperity throughout his 
kingdom. And right well he succeeded. When he died he left Judah much purer, 
stronger, and richer than he found it. Then came his firstborn son in succession to 
him. And what came with him ? What else but a baneful and lamentable undoing 
of all that he himself had done — all, at least, that his son had it in his power to 
overturn ? 

I. The course of one evil life. 1. Jehoram's reign began in selfish cruelty. To 
secure his own position, he murdered his six brethren ; to avert a contingent evil to 
himself, he wrought the last and worst evil to his own mother's sons (ver. 4). 2. It went 
on to personal apostasy. (Ver. 6.) He turned away from the God of his fathers, from the 
worship of the God to whom he might and, indeed, must have known that his throne 
was due, to serve Baal ; and in so doing he forsook the way of wisdom and of purity for 
paths of error and iniquity. 3. It led down to the abuse of royal power. For he not 
only made Jerusalem to be partaker of his sin, but he tyrannically compelled Judah to 
do the same (ver. 11). He employed his royal authority (and probably his standing 
army) to constrain his people to depart from the way of holiness, from spiritual and 
moral integrity. 4. It issued in national disaster. In the loss of the Divine favour ; 
in the consequent defeat of his troops and loss of a dependency ; in the revolt of an 
important city (vers. 8 — 11). 6. It closed in an early and miserable death. 

n. Its MOST btbikino ohabacteeistic. It went far to undo all that a long and 
devoted life, all that a useful and brilliant reign, had done. It pulled down a large part 
of that which had been so carefully, so laboriously, so wisely constructed. How easily, 
and in how short a time, can a bad man undo what his predecessor, with infinite efibrt, 
has accomplished! The striking and the holding of a lucifer match may bring the 
stateliest structiu'e to a heap of ruin. The deflection from the way of rectitude on 



CH XXI. 1—20.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 257 

the part of one prominent life, the wanrlering from God of one strong human ipirit, may 
have the effect of bringing to nought the labour of more than one lifetime. How true the 
proverb, " One sinner destroyeth much good " 1 There are amongst us the names of men 
who have reached that poor and most pitiful notoriety of not having attempted to do 
any good, but of having dragged down with themselves their family, their Church, their 
community, to a dark depth of shame and ruia 

III. The explanation of it. Two factors were concerned In it and account for it. 
1, The unwisdom of his father. Jehoshaphat made one of his serious mistakes— and he 
made more than one— when he married his son to Ahab'g daughter (ch. xviii. 1 ; ver. 6). 
He could not conceivably have taken a more dangerous step ; it was the very last thing 
a faithful servant of Jehovah should have done. What was likely to happen when the 
daughter of Jezebel was presiding at the court of Jerusalem ? Thus Jehoram's father, 
with a fatuity at which we can but wonder, introduced a blighting influence into th« 
home and so into the heart of his son. 2. His own evil choice. These two things — 
unhealthy forces acting upon ns from without and our own false resolves— determine 
our character, our course, our destiny. Let us be thankful for all holy influences ; let 
MB be most solicitous to bring all and only good ones to bear on those for whom we care. 
Let those who are young set before them the honourable ambition of confirming the 
£ood work of their fathers ; let them beware lest a bad and selfish commencement lead 
down to a miserable and disgraceful end. — 0. 

Vers. 19 (latter part), 20. — Hie trouble that is worse than sorroro. " His people 
made no burning for him;" he "departed without being desired." It is wise for u* 
•all not only to enjoy the present appreciation of our friends, which may be an expres* 
sion of their desire to stand well with us, but also to consider what will be — 

I. The afteb-estimatb that ymA, be formed op us. Jehoram probably comforted 
himself while he lived with the approval of many of his courtiers. There are always 
found men mean enough to compliment the man in power, however they may despise 
him. But probably he did not foresee that his body would hardly be cold before he 
would receive marks of general dishonour, and that not one week would elapse before it 
would be signified to all the land that he was held unworthy to sleep with his fathers. 
It is surely the mark of a very narrow and earthly mind not to care what men will 
think of us when we are departed because it will make no difference to us then. That 
is not quite certain ; but if it were, it surely behoves us, as upright spiritual intelli- 
gences, to care much for our reputation when we have left these scenes. Shall we not 
desire to enjoy " the memory of the just " ? Shall it not be a matter of moment to u* 
that, when we are no longer here, those who remember us will think and speak kindly 
of us, as of men that played their part bravely and faithfully, as of men that loved and 
helped their kind ? If this be so, since this is so, let us reflect that after a while dur 
-character will stand in its true colours ; that all our pretences will disappear; that men 
will know us to have been just what we are ; that after death disguises fall away, and 
the man himself stands forth in his virtue or in his guilt, in hia manliness or in hit 
meanness, in his large-mindedness or in his selfishness and smallness. We must h» 
right if we would be so regarded when death takes off the veil from our character. But 
we see here another thing worthy of our consideration. 

IL The tbodble that ib worse than borrow. 1. It is sad enough when a good man 
dies and is regretted. When some great gap is left ; when from the home, or from the 
Church, or from the state there is taken one who had loved and been beloved, who had 
served well and been highly honoured ; — when such a one is borne to his burial, amid 
the tears and lamentations of many hearts, we feel that a great affliction has befallen 
us, and we must bow in subjection to the Father of spirits. 2. But it is sadder far 
when a bad man dies unlamented ; when, as with Jehoram, no one cares to pay him 
funeral honours ; when the Chronicler has to say about him that he " departed without 
being desired." For of what does it speak ? (1) Usually it speaks of the Divine condem- 
nation. The indignation of a people, especially of a nation that has received instruction 
from God himself, is commonly a reflection of the judgment of Heaven ; it signifiei 
that " the departed " is a man whose life the Holy One has condemned. (2) Always it 
speaks of the deliberate reprobation of man. For when a man dies, ther^ is a disposition 
•to be lenient in judgment, to overlook offences and to magnify service and virtue ; when, 

n. OBBONIOLKB. g 



2S8 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CEISONICLllS. [oh. xa. 1—20. 

therefore^ the dead are distinctly dishonoured, when there is no one to pronounce & 
eulogium or even to feel a lament, it is clear that their contemporaries have decidedly 
and seriously condemned them. (3) It speaks of a deplorable failure. Excepting in 
those comparatively rare cases of the very best and greatest men, who have been before 
their age in understanding and in action, and have therefore been misunderstood, when 
men die dishonoured and without regret it may be taken that their lives have been 
unworthy ; that they have been marked by evil ; that they have been fruitful of folly 
and of wrong. And what can be sadder than that ? That God should give us our 
powers and our lives in order that we may spend them for his honour, to promote the 
real well-being of our fellow-men, and to cultivate in ourselves wisdom and worth that 
will fit us for higher spheres; and that we should degrade our priceless opportunity by 
scattering seeds of error, by diffusing unholy principles, by doing our utmost to injure 
the spirits and to lower the lives of men, thus starting influences for evil which will 
spread far and wide, and will go down from generation to generation ; — ^there is nothing 
we can conceive of which is more deplorable than this. (4) It is a painful and pitiable 
thing in itselt To depart unregretted by any one 1 To go for ever and to be missed and 
mourned by none 1 To leave no hearts that will be saddened by our absence, that will 
wish to see us and speak to us again 1 To be borne away, not like the fair and noble 
tree, whose fruit has been a treasure, whose form has been a perpetual joy all the year 
round, whose shadow ha.s been a kindly shelter to old and young, with a sincere if not 
affectionate regret ; but like an unsightly and cumbersome log, that has been an offence 
to the eye and an obstruction in the way, with a sense of relief and satisfaction ; — who 
of us would like to be so regarded when we die? Who of us would not infinitely rather 
be bathed in a pure and holy sorrow as we mourn some departed friend that has lived in 
love and died in honour, than leave in the grave one for whom no tear is shed, whose 
departure no soul regrets ? Let us be such men and live such lives that if our sur- 
vivors and successors do not " make a great burning for us," as was done for Jeboram's 
grandfather (ch. zvi. 14), they will lose us with a genuine regret, and mourn fur us 
with a sorrow that will hallow their own hearts, while it testifies to the worth that has 
found a home beneath other skies. — 0. 

Vers. 2 — 11. — The character <^ Jehoram. L A degenbratb sou. 1. The advantage* 
Jehoram possessed. (1) A good father, Jehoshaphat, whose example should have led 
him, whose instructions should have taught him (Prov. i. 8), whose prayers should 
have won him to walk in wisdom's ways. But they did not. Piety is not hereditary. 
Example often fails to impress, instruction to convince, prayer to save, the children of 
godly parents. Numerous instances in Scripture (1 Sam. ii. 12 ; viii. 3 ; xv. 1, etc.). 
and in ordinary life. (2) A good estate. As Jehoshaphat's firstborn, he succeeded — 
whether during his father's lifetime (Keil) or at his father's death (Bahr) uncertain — 
to an exalted throne aad a peaceful realm, became ruler of a promising people and a 
growing empire. He had much to make him contented with his lot and thankful for 
his mercies, to lead him to think of God and devote himself to the practice of religion, 
as well as to consecrate his talents to advancing the moral and material interests of his 
subjects. Nevertheless, he neglected both his own and his people's salvation. (3) A 
good Gh)d, who had kept him alive for thirty-two years, when many better men than 
he had been cut off in youth (ver. 6) ; who had allowed him time to mature in wisdom 
before calling him to assume the burdensome responsibilities of the throne ; who had 
promoted him to his father's crown, which might easily have been given to another 
(ver. 3) ; who bore with him in his wickedness for his servant David's sake (ver. 7) ; 
who punished him by suffering the Edomites to revolt (ver. 8), stirring up the Philis- 
tines and Arabians against him (ver. 15), and afSicting him with a mortal malndy 
(ver. 18), of which he was forewarned by a letter from Elijah (ver. 12). Yet for all 
this Jehorsm walked not in the ways of JehoshaphaJ' his father, or in the ways of Asa 
his grandfather, but in the ways of Ahab, the Kmg of Israel (vers. 6, 12, 13). 2. Th» 
disadvantagei under which he laboured. (1) A bad heart That Jehoram, though 
belonging to Judah and a son of Jeiioshaphat, was not a child of grace, his whole sub- 
sequent career attested. "All are not Israel, that are of Israel: neither, because they 
are Abraham's seed, are they all children " (Rom. ix. 6, 7) ; " For he is not a Jew, wh ich 
Is one outwardly i. , . but he is a Jew. whir.h is one iuwardlv " (Rom. ii. 28, 29). That 



CM. XXL 1—20.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 259 

Jehoram was not born good was no excuse, since Jehorah's grace was ready to assist 
him in oyercoming his natural corruption (Deut. xxz. 6 ; 1 Kings viiL 68 ; Ps. ex. 3). 

(2) A bad wife. Atbaliah, though a king's daughter (ver. 6), was a wicked woman. 
Exalted in station, beautiful in person, gifted with high mental endowments, she may 
have been; nevertheless, she was inwardly, essentially, and radically of depraved instincts. 
Like her mother Jezebel, she was superstitious, profligate, bloodthirsty, imperious, and 
resolute. She belonged to the type of woman of which Herodias and perhaps Drusilla and 
Bemice were New Testament examples, and to which should be assigned the Shake- 
■pearean creations of Lady Macbeth and Cleopatra. In the hands of such women even 
■trong men find it difficult to resist the fatal influence of their superior natures, while 
feeble creatures like Ahab and Jehoram are dragged like captives at their chariot-wheels. 
The most dreadful calamity that can befall a weakling is to wed such a spouse. A 
woman leagued with the devil will drag her husband to perdition with a certainty and 
celerity that hardly even the grace of God can prevent. In such plight was Jehoram. 

(3) A bad environment. Though not eveiything, a man's surroundings are something. 
They help to make or mar him. If good, they will at least hinder his deterioration; 
if bad, they will hasten it. Perhaps nothing conld have been worse for Jehoram than 
to have Ahab's daughter for a wife ; it was no amelioration of his hard fate to have 
Ahab for a father-in-law, Jezebel for a mother-in-law, Ahaziah and Jehoram for 
brothers-in-law, and the house of Omri generally as relatives and friends. It was 
hardly surprising that in after-years Jehoram, the King of Judah, had no moral 
resemblance to Jehouhaphat's son. 

II. As UNNATCTBAL BBOTHEB. 1. The names of Jehoram's hrothtrs. Six in number ; 
they had excellent names. (1) Azariah, "whom Jehovah helps." "Happy is the 
man that hath the God of Jacob for his Help " (Ps. cxlvi. 5). This name may have 
been given by Jehoshaphat to his second and his fifth sons — distinguished slightly by 
the spelling, Azarjah and Azarjahu — to emphasize that all hope for stability in hii 
house and prosperity in his kingdom depended on and proceeded from the assistance 
of Heaven. (2) Jehiel, " God liveth." Perha|)S this truth was impressed upon Jehosha- 
phat's heart by the birth of his third son (Ps. cxxvii. 3), as it was upon David's, by his 
continued preservation from the hand of Saul (2 Sam. xxii. 47 ; Ps. xviii. 46). (3) 
Zechariab, " whom Jehovah remembers." Probably given by Jehoshaphat to his son 
after Zechariab, the father of Jahaziel, who predicted the overthrow of the Moabites 
(ch. XX. 14). Or, Jehoshaphat may have counted his fourth son a happy proof that 
Jehovah had not forgotten him, but was still mindful of his covenant. (4) Azariah 
(see above). (5) Michael, " who is like unto God ? " A great thought for a young 
man to carry about with him on life's journey, and one that might stir him to noble 
deeds as well as lead him into pleasant ways. This thought was familiar to Moses 
(Bxod. viii. 10), to David (Ps. Ixxxvi. 8), to Ethan the Ezrahite (Ps. Ixxxix. 6), and 
to Isaiah (xl. 18). (6) Shephatiah, " whom Jehovah defends." The name of one of 
David's sons (2 ijam. iii. 4), and probably for this reason bestowed upon Jehoshaphat's. 
2. The ranks (^Jehoram's brothers. Princes of the blood royal, they were well pro- 
vided for and well placed by their father,- whose crown fell to Jehoram as heir-apparent. 
Great gifts of silver, gold, and other precious things were bestowed upon them, while 
they were appointed, as Behoboam's sons had been (ch. xi. 23), commandants of fortresses 
in the different fenced cities of Judah. Thus they had no need to be discontented with 
their lot, and most likely were not. 3. XTie characters of Jehoram's brethren. They 
were better than he (ver. 13). Presumably in every way — physically, mentally, 
morally, religiously. This last, perhaps, specially intended. Jehoshaphat's piety had 
exercised upon them more influence than upon him ; they disapproved of the IHolatrous 
behaviour and wicked policy generally of him and his wife. 4. The m/urder of Jehoram's 
brethren. Whatever the motive — cupidity or a desire to appropriate their wealth, 
fear or a dread of being insecure upon his throne while they lived, or hatred of their 
persons because they shunned his evil ways — it was a hideous deed of blood, which has 
seldom been paralleled amongst Oriental kings. " Upon the death of Selimus II. (i58'3), 
Amurah III., succeeding to the Turkish empire, caused his five brothers — Mustapha, 
Solymon, Abdalla, Osman, and Sinagar — without pity or commiseration, to be 
•trangled in his iiresence and burned with his dead father " (Whitecross, ' Anecdotes 
on the Old Testament,' p. iUO). Along with his brethren, he put to death a number 



260 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxl 1— 20. 

of the princes of Israel, and for probably a similar reason, because they disapproved of 
his conduct and sympathized with his brethren. 

III. A woBTHLKSB KINO. 1. An opostate in rdigiim. To be sure, he never had 
religion in reality. Yet, as Judah's sovereign and Jehosbaphat's son, he ought to have 
apheld the true worship of Jehovah. But instead he became a devotee of Baal, a 
favourer of the false gods his half-heathen wife patronized, building high places for 
them ia the mountains of Judah — thus practically reversing the work of his devout 
&ther (ch. ivii. 6) and grandfather (ch. xiv. 2), and causing the inhabitants of Jerusalem 
to commit fornication, i.e. to practise idolatry (Isa. xxiii. 17 ; Ezek. xvi. 29 ; Rev. 
six. 2); yea, compelling Judah by violence to go astray (Deut. xiii. 6, 11). 2. A weak- 
ling in government. Under him the Edomites, who had in Jehosbaphat's reign been 
tributary to Judah (2 Kings iii. 9), becoming restive, achieved their independence. 
According to Josephus (' Ant.,' ix. 5. 1), they first slew their king, who had yielded to 
Jehoshaphat, and afterwards elected one who raised the standard of revolt. A feeble 
attempt to reduce them to subjection proved abortive. At Zair, on the way to Edom — 
not to be identified with Zoar (Ewald), which belonged to Moab, but perhaps with the 
modem ruin Zueirah, on the south-west of the Dead Sea (Conder)— he, with all his 
princes and chariots, encountered the rebels ; but whether he defeated them (Jamieson), 
or only cut his way through them when they had encompassed him (Keil), is obscure, 
though even on the former supposition his success was not permanent or decisive. 
Either then or soon afterwards the Edomites completely renounced the yoke of Judah. 
About the same period also, Libnah — ^a city in the district of Eleutberopulis (Eusebius), 
though as yet unknown — succeeded in establishing its freedom. 3. A pigmy in man- 
hood. Apart from the plague which struck him in his last days, while yet in middle 
life (ver. 15) he was obviously a poor and contemptible creature. When he died 
nobody lamented him — at least, nobody among his subjects. " He departed without 
being desired" (ver, 20). Men were glad to see the last of him. They would not burn 
a burning for him, as they did for his good father and pious grandfather when they died. 
His rotten carcase they buried in the city of David; they would not desecrate with 
it the sepulchres of the kings. 

Learn : 1. The necessity of personal religion — no man may trade upon his father's 
piety. 2. The duty of parents to provide for their children — exemplified by Jehosba- 
phat's donations to bis sons. 3. The bitterness of sin's fruit when fully developed : 
" Sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death " in its worst forms — murder, fratricide, etc 
4. The value of a good wife — inferred from the calamity of a bad one. 6. The mercy 
of God to great sinners, even when they do not repent — illustrated by God's tolerance 
of Jehoram. 6. The essential weakness of sin — as shown by the Edomite revolt against 
Judah. 7. The pestilential infiuence of sin in high places: " One sinner destroy eth much 
good."— W. 

Vers. 12 — 15. — The letter of Elijah. L Thk attthob op thb WEiTiNa. Various 
■uggestions. 1. Elisha, who entered on the duties of his calling before the death of 
Jehoshaphat (2 Kings iiL 11), and who accordingly would be the most likely party 
from whom should proceed such a communication as Jehoram received. In this case 
the name of Elijah must have been substituted in the text for that of Elisha (Kennicott, 
Jamieson). 2. A later historian, "who describes the relation of Elijah to Joram in 
few words, and according to his conception of it as a whole " (Bertheau) ; but " this 
judgment rests on dogmatic grounds, and flows from a principle which refuses to recog- 
nize any supernatural prediction in the prophetic utterances" (Keil). 3. Elijah, the 
author named in the text. Besides being in the text, the word occurs in all existing 
Hebrew manuscripts and in all the Oriental versions. 

n. The date of the writing. Again different explanations, 1. After Elijah'i 
translation. The notions that either Elijah sent the letter from heaven by an angel 
(Grotius), or spoke it firom the clouds (Menken), may be discarded as conjectures want- 
ing in support from any intelligible analogies (Keil). 2. Be/ore Elijah's translation. 
Here two views emerge. (1) After Jehoram had ascended the throne (Keil, Rawlin- 
son). This assumes that Elijah was alive at the commencement of Jehoram's reign 
(2 Kings i. 17), and may have learnt of the assassination of Jehosbaphat's sons — the 
knowledge of which crime may have moved him to send its perpetrator the divinely 



OH. XXL 1—20.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 261 

given announcement of his death this letter contains. The fact that Elisha accom- 
panied Jehoshaphat to the Moabitish war (2 Kings iii. 11) does not prove that Elijah 
had then been translated, since Elijah was alive in the second year of the conjoint reign 
of Jehoram and Jehoshaphat his father (2 Kings i. 17 ; iii. 1). (2) Before Jehoram 
had ascended the throne (Buddeeus, Clarke). Nothing impossible in the suggestion 
that Elijah had the wickedness of Jehoram revealed to him before it occurred, as pre- 
Tiously he had been informed of the elevation of Jehu to the throne of Israel, and of 
the accession of Hazael to that of Syria, before these events happened (1 Kings xix. 16, 
17). Either explanation is admissible, though the latter is probably more correct. 

III. Thb contents of the wbitino. 1. A twofold accusation. (1) A charge of 
aggravated Idolatry. Not only had Jehoram himself forsaken the way of Jehoshaphat 
and of Asa, i.e. the worship of Jehovah, and turned aside into the way of the kings of 
Israel, t.e. worship of Baal and other idols, but he had corrupted the whole house 
of Judah, and caused them to commit spiritual whoredom, like the house of Ahab. 
(2) An indictment of infamous murder. He had slain all his brethren, the children of 
his father's house, who were better than himself. 2. A twofold retribution. (1) A 
great stroke upon his people, upon his house (his wives and children), upon his property 
(his goods or substance). As prosperity was a usual concomitant of piety, so adversity 
was wont, under Jehovah's government of Israel, to dog the heels ot impiety. (2) A 
greater stroke upon himself, in the shape of a slow, but sure, loathsome and mortal 
disease which should seize upon his bowels. That it should continue for two years 
before terminating fatally (Bertheau) can hardly be made out from the expression, " day 
by day," or "days upon days." The prophet could speak with confidence, since 
diseases are Qod's messengers who come and go at his command (Exod. xv. 26 ; Deut. 
xxviiL 60; Ps. ciii. 3). 

IV. The fulfilment op the wbitino. 1. The invasion of Jehoram's kingdom. 
(Ver, 16.) (1) The prime mover was Jehovah, as Elijah's letter predicted. " The Lord 
stirred up the spirit of the Philistines,'' as formerly, on two several occasions, he bad 
stirred up an adversary to Solomon (1 Kings xi. li, 23), and afterwards stirred up Pul 
(Tiglath-Pileser) King of Assyria, against Pelcah King of Israel (2 Kings xv. 29 ; 
1 Chron. V. 26). God is said to do what, for the accomplishment of hia own wise and 
sovereign purposes, he permits to be done, and hence is represented as working all 
things according to the counsel of his will (Job ix, 12 ; Ps. Ixvi. 7 ; cxv. 3 ; Dan. iv. 
35 ; Eph, i. 11). (2) The acting instruments were the Philistines, an ancient enemy 
of Israel (Jndg. x. 7 ; 1 Sam. iv. 1) on the west; and the Arnbians near the Ethiopians, 
t.e. the middle Arabians, exactly south of Palestine (Sohiirer). This juxtaposition of 
the Philistines and Arabians occurs in two more places in this book (ch. xvii. 11 ; 
xxvi. 7). (3) The extent is indicated by the details given. The savage hordes broke 
into Judah. That they captured the capital seems a natural inference from the plunder 
thiy carried off (Bertheau), though, had Jerusalem been sacked, "the treasures of the 
palace as well as of the temple would have been mentioned " (Keil). In any case, they 
carried off " all the substance found in the king's house," which may signify all the 
property of the palace (Bertheau), or all the king's property found in the country, in 
the cities, villages, and castles of Judah (Keil). Along with this, they made prisoners 
of the king's wives and sons, except Jehoahaz, or Ahaziah. What they did with the 
former is not recorded; the latter they slew (ch. xxii. 1). 2. The affliction of Jehoram' i 
body. Whatever the malady, a violent dysentery, or some disease of the intestines, 
it was (1) sudden — " Jehovah struck him," pointing to a mysterious and inexplicable 
infliction difficult to trace to any immediate physical cause, and therefore ordinarily 
ascribed to a supernatural origin (ch. xxvi. 20; Acts xii. 23); (2) painful — "the 
diseases " were " sore ; " (3) protracted — his " sickness " continued " two years ; " 
(4) loathsome — "his bowels fell out" towards the end of that period; (6) mortal — he 
succumbed benes^th his ailment, and "died." 

Learn: 1. God's knowledge of the histories, characters, and actions of men (ProT. 
XV. 3). 2. God's ability to foresee and reveal to men the nature and tendency of theii 
or others' acts (Gen. xviii. 17 ; xli. 28 ; 1 Sam. ix. 15). 3. God's determination to b« 
avenged of them that do wickedly without respect of persons (Ps. xxxiv. 16; zxxvii. 
38). 4. God's resources for executing his purposes of judgment or mercy. — W. 



862 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xxii. 1— 12. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XXn. 



This chapter comprises the aooession, brief 
reign, and death of Ahaziah (vers. 1 — 9); 
•nd the following murders and usurpation 
of Athaliah during six years (vers. 10 — 12). 
The parallel of the former section is to be 
{bond in 2 Kings viii. 24—29; ix. 14—16, 
21—28 ; and of the latter, xi. 1—3. 

Ver. 1. — This verse does not so much 
purport to say how the inhabitants of Jem- 
salem proceeded to appoint Ahaziah, in 
default of any previous appointment on the 
part of his father, but merely that whereas 
they appointed him, the youngest son, it 
was because they had no choice, the elder 
brothers having been slain (ch. xxi. 17), 
though the deceasud Jehoram possibly might 
not have known up to the time of his death, 
for certain, of their several deaths. This, if 
we may judge from the particular language 
here used, had been brought about at the 
hands of the band of men that came with 
the Arabians to the camp, now first particu- 
larized. The parallel (2 Kings viii. 25), 
wanting both of these items, states that this 
reign began in the twelfth year of Joram of 
Israel. 

Ver. 2. — Forty and two ; read, twenty and 
lico, and see parallel, 2 Kings viii. 26 ; and 
note on our ch. xxi. 5. Daughter of Omri ; 
i.e. granddaughter of Omri, as Omri was the 
father of Ahab. 

Ver. 3. — The mother and the house of 
Ahab had become a proverb and a by-word 
for their evil. In this and the following 
two verses stress is laid on the evil counsel 
•nd the sources of it that prejudiced Alia- 
liali to his ruin. Although the piirallel 
wants these direct statements, perliaps it 
•caroely says less, wlien it says (ver. 27), 
" For he was the son-in-law of the house of 
Ahab." 

Ver. 5. — He . . . went with Jehoram the 
fon of Ahab. So the evil example of even 
the good lives after them. Bee Jehoslmphat 
(1 Kings xxii. 29 ; ch. xviii. 3) follow ol by 
Ub sun Jehoram first (2 Kings iii. 9), and 
now by his grandson Ahaziah. The words 
of this verse and the next are almost iden- 
tical with the parallel (2 Kings viii. 28, 29). 
Bamoth-Oilead. It will be remembered that 
Ahab failed when he solicited and obtained 
the help of Jeh-shaphat (1 Kings xxii. 3 — 
86 ; oh. xviii. 3 — 34) in his enterprise 
against Bamoth - Gilead. The present 
attempt, however, seems to have had a 
different issue (2 Kings ix. 14, 15), The 
Syrians ; Hebrew, D'ann. The initial radical 
here should be N, from neglect of observ- 



ing which the Septnagint has tranalated 
" archers " (rof ((toi). 

Ver. 6. — Both places (this and the 
parallel) tell first that Ahaziah went with 
Joram against Hazael; then that Jorum, 
being smitten, returned for healing to Jezr> el; 
next that Ahaziah, out of compassion in 
some sort, went down to see Joram in 
Jezreel ; and lastly, it is here signalized that 
in that very deed of his, Providence brought 
it about that Jehu lighted upon the track 
of him (vers. 7 — 9), and he met his end. 
This feature of the history the writer of 
Chronicles wishes to exhibit, as usual. 
Bamah ; i.q. Kamoth-Gilead. JezreeL This 
was a town in the Plain of Jezreel 
(Esdraelon), belonging to the tribe of 
IssMchar. For Azariah read Ahaziah ; com- 
pare irTJjnN (^Ahaziah) and inijin; (Jehoahaz), 
the meaning of both being " held " or " up- 
held of the Lord." 

Ver. 7. — He went out with Jehoram 
against Jehu. The "against" is the simple 
preposition 7K, and need intend nothing 
more than "to meet" Jehu; not to meet 
him hostilely. What the manner of the 
meeting was, however, we know from 
2 Kings ix. 21, 22, 27, 28. The history of 
this and following two verses is here given 
very briefly; much mist be filled in to give 
its full expl.malion, as in 2 Kings ix. 11—29. 
Whom the Lord had anointed to out off the 
house of Ahab; i.e. had raised him to 
the throne, possessed of the characteristic 
qualities which he had for this purpose 
(2 Kings ix. 1—7 ; 1 Kiuga xix. 16). Jehu 
the son of Nimshi. Strictly, "the son of 
Jehoshaphat the son of Nimshi " (2 Kings 
ix. 2). 

Ver. 8. — Executing judgment upon the 
house of Ahab. The description of all this 
is sulliciently graphically scattered along 
the verses of 2 Kings ix. 24 — xi. 20. And 
found the princes of Judah (see especially 
2 Kings X. 7, 11 ; xi. 13—20). And the sons 
of the brethren of Ahaziah. This both ex- 

plains and is explained by 2 Kings x. 12 

14. That ministered to Ahaziah. Even 
this enigmatical little clause receives its 
probable explanation from the last clause of 
ver. 13 in last quotation foregoing. 

Ver. 9. — And he sought Ahazi^ ; and they 
caught him . . . brought him . . . buried 
him. This verse, which at the first sight 
seems at variance with 2 Kings ix. 27, 28, 
is perhaps a simply surprising instance of 
undesigned corroboration of history by the 
treatment of different historians. The verse, 
e.g., corrects tlje italics of 2 Kings ix. 27; 
expunging them throws their proper force 
iiilo tho worda. " at tlje going up to Gur," 



en. ixil. 1— 12.J THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHHONICLJib. 



263 



lowing thnt Jehu reckoned on that steep 
hill to enable his pursuing warriors to over- 
take Ahaziah ; makes a sufficiently possible 
harmony, to say the least, in respect of the 
remaining incidents narrated of his life — 
that he made for the time a successful flight 
to Mfgiddo, afterwards sought to hide in 
deeper retirement in Samaria, was thence 
brought to Jehu at Megiddo, there even- 
tually slain before his eyes, and by his own 
servants, who must be supposed to have had 
some attachment to him, but probably with 
the sanction of Jehu himself, ocmveyed ''in 
a chariot to Jerusalem" for sepulture "in 
the sepulchre of his fathers in the city of 
David" (2 Kings ix. 28). The fact that he 
received decent burial being due to the God- 
fearing character of liis grandfather, and 
that this should find its record on the page of 
the book that will last while the world lasts, 
that very page already two thousand five 
hundred years old, is a most touching con- 
sideration. Megiddo was on the Esdraelon 
or Jezreel plain, that stretched between the 
bills of Galilee and those of Mount Ephraim 
or Samaria. Had no power to keep still the 
kingdom. The nndoubtud meaning of this 
clause is that there was no one of the house 
of Ahaziah who could succeed him. The 
Hebrew text does not say, "no one left," etc. 
l!ut the nllusion can soiirocly be to anything 
bjit the fact that transpires in our ver. 11 
<»here only Joash is mentioned as a son, 
and with him a nurse), viz. that his only 
surviving sou was an infant The king's 
«nns (presumably sons of Ahaziah and 
giandsouB of her own) were among the 



"seed royal," whom the wicked Atbaliah 
had "destroyed." Gesenius sayg that the 
words that wrap in them the slight ambi- 
guity, nb ijtf, are a phrase peculiar to the 
later Hebrew, and he instancies nine ex- 
amples, all of which come from Daniel <w 
Chronicles, the virtue of the phras'' amount- 
ing to the potis esse of the Latin. Trans- 
late, And there vat no one of thg haute of 
Ahaziiih able for the hingdom, the exacter 
conditions of the case not being recorded. 

Ver. 10.— But when Athaliah. For parallel 
to the end of the chapter, see 2 Kings xi. 
1—3. The words, of the house of Judah, an 
here carefully supplied, wanting in parallel. 

Ver. 11.— After of the king, the parallel 
conveniently certifies the name, Joram, and 
adds, "sister of Ahaziah" (very possibly 
half-sister, though), and nfterwards particu- 
larizes the hiding, sis from Athaliah, as in 
the latter part of this verse. We are here 
told, what is not mentioned in the parallel, 
that Jehosheba was "wife of Jehoiada the 
priest," probably the high priest. Nor is 
this negatived by the fact that the name la 
not found (1 Chron. vi.) in the line from 
Aaron to Jozadak ; for this is only the line 
of Jozadak' t ancestors, al 1 of whom were not 
high piiests. Joash is to be heard of again 
(2 Kings xi. 21 ; ch. xxiv. 1). 

Ver. 12. — With them hid in the house of 
God six years. Durint; this time evidently 
Athaliah reigned. There were in the 
"house of God " chambers sacred to the use 
of either priests or temple ofBcials (1 Kings 
vi. 5—10). 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 12. — A medley of the memoranda of evil-doing, its consequences, and its end. 
The one surviving son of Jehoram, his youngest son, Ahaziah, is put on an unsteady, 
unsafe throne. Jehoram had caused all his own brethren to be slain, and now it had 
come to pass that all his " eldest sons had been slain by the band of men that came 
with the Arabians to the camp" As Athaliah, the danghter of Ahab and grand- 
daughter of Omri, the evil wife of Jehoram, had not failed to make an evil husband of 
Jehoram, so, the evil mother, she does not fail to make an evil son of Ahaziah. She 
** was his counsellor to do wickedly." And therein her whole house, " the house of 
Ahab," were "after the death of his father, counsellors to his destruction." Ahaziah 
repeated the error of his grandfather Jehoshaphat, in associating himself with the King 
of Israel, going up with him to fight against Hazael King of Syria, at Eamoth-Gilead. 
It leads to further complications. The King of Israel is wounded and returns to Jezreel, 
and because " he was sick," Ahaziah must go thither also to " see "him. He uncon- 
sciously is courting " his destruction," •' of God " (ver. 7) ; for once there he must support 
the king of his rival line against one whom " God had anointed " to the very work 
of " cutting off the house of Ahab." He is not only setting himself " to help the 
ungodly, and to love them that hate the Lord " (ch. xix. 2), but he is setting himself in 
battle with one against whom the Lord has anointed his own servant (" Jehu the son of 
Nimshi"), that he may destroy him and his ! That is, he has put himself in the posi- 
tion of actively and directly fighting against God. And now, by doing thus, he not 
only involves "the princes of Judah, and the sons of his own brethren" (because of 



864 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxa. 1—12. 

the company in which they were found), in indiscriminate slaughter, but himself, the 
King of Judah, hidden — hidden in Samaria, searched for, caught, taken. He with bis 
mother has been run to earth in a double sense, hounded to his miserable earthly end, 
his bones being honoured with decent burial only out of reverence for his good grand- 
father Jehoshaphat. The humiliating epitaph, however, on his grave was to this effect, 
" The house of Abaziah had no power to keep still the kingdom I " Once more the 
•nraged mother of the son whom the more than any one else had driven into his sin 
knd his grave, plots the slaughter of the entire royal seed of David ; but in vain. A 
faithful promise, a sure covenant, an unalterable purpose, prevents the thing I The 
sister of the king just buried was married to Jehoiada the priest, and she was the 
appointed preserver of the royal line, in the providence of God. She saves one, an 
infant, her nephew, and with her husband hides him for six years where alone so many 
others have taken refuge, and been safely hidden till the stormy wind and tempest 
have been overpast — " in the house of God." The usurping and iniquitous Athaliah, 
daughter of Ahab, wife of Jehoram once, and once mother of Abaziah, an orphan, a 
widow, and without a son, unloving and unloved, neither fearing God nor regarding 
man, reigns awhile, but does not rule I God rules the people, rides the storm, keeps 
the sleep, the infancy, the childhood, of his anointed ; inspires his true priest, Jehoiada, 
with wisdom, patience, determination, and religious courage. The royal line of Judah 
is not cut off in its sixth king, and, when to the most of human knowledge it seemed 
so, that six years' interval may well have served as a needed pause in the life of the 
kingdom and of its chief men. " The Word of the Lord " was no doubt " precious in 
those days," but it was not lost, and there was a faithful priest. The silences of nations 
and oft of our own individual life, the silences of Scripture and of the inscrutable God 
himself, all have meaning, all bear the mark of design and long-suffering providence, 
and if improved instead of neglected, sinned against, and defied, may be rich with 
future blessings. ' 

HOMITJES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 4. — A pitiable prince ; or, an unfortunate child of fortune. The thorough 
pitiableness of one born to a high estate is the lesson of the text ; but we must wait 
to learn — 

I. That men buffeb as they sin. It appears that Ahaziah was the only son 
left to the house of Jehoram ; all the eldest had been slain by the invaders (ver. 1). 
Thus we find that the man who with shameful selfishness murdered his own brothers, 
had to suffer the loss, by violence, of his own sons. It was a fitting penalty — ^fitting 
that he who used the sword remorselessly should suffer from the sword; fitting that 
the man whose darkest crime was .committed "under his own roof" should bear his 
penalty in his own kindred. We do not, of course, invariably find such " poetic 
justice " dealt in the providence of God ; but we do find that men not only suffer 
because they sin, but they suffer as they sin. If they sin as husbands or fathers, they 
suffer as such ; if they sin as sons, they suffer through their children ; if they sin in 
the flesh, they suffer in the flesh ; or if they sin in the spirit, they suffer in the spirit. 
There is a close, a plain, a righteous correspondence between guilt and penalty. 

II. That parentage goes a vert long way to ACCOtTNT fob human CHARAOTEa 

AND FOR THE CAREERS OF MEN. Ahaziah was the grandson on his mother's side, of 
Ahab and of Jezebel What may he not have inherited from them ? He was the sou 
of Athaliah. And, apart from the consideration of heredity, what evil did he not drink 
in from the counsels of that wicked woman ? She was " his counsellor to do wickedly " 
(ver. 3). 1. We may well bless God for all the good we and others have derived from 
godly parents, especially from a holy mother, from the "counsels" received at "the 
mother's knee." The blessing thus conferred upon the world is quite inestimable. 2. 
Those who are parents may well realize the sacred burden of responsibility which rests 
upon them ; for it rests with them, very largely indeed, to determine what their sons 
and daughters shall be — ^whether a blessing or a bane to the world. 3. We do well to 
try and elevate those who are, or will be, the mothers of the future. There is no 
worthier Christian enterprise than the Zenana Mission, in which the aim is to reach 
ami to raise the women who will be "the counsellors" of the men and women of ths 



OH. xxTi. 1—12.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHR0NICLE8. 265 

next generation. 4. Evil counsel may extenuate, but it will not excuse, our individual 
folly and wrong-doing. Nut even a mother may lead us into paths of sin. 

III. That favoueablb oibocmstanoeb will not ouabanteb ant man's wEUi- 
BEINO. 1. Who 80 fortunate in Judah as Ahaziah ? Heir to the throne, and succeeding 
at an early age (see 2 Kings viii. 26 with ver. 17 of that chapter) ; married while ho 
was young ; with little children soon about him ; with every prospect of power, wealth, 
dcmestic affection, royal estate, for many years. 2. And who more pitiable than this 
young prince ? Educated and trained in the belief of error, in the practice of folly, 
with a mother whose whole influence was against moral worth, seeking and forming 
a dangerous alliance, cut off after a very brief reign (ver. 2), leaving a reputation of 
ill odour behind him. It is certain that no man can count on • future of prosperity 
•nd joy simply because the circumstantial outlook is favourable. The child of fortune, 
like Ahaziah, proves to be one of the most unfortunate of men. Whom all his young 
contemporaries were disposed to envy, we who look back unite to pity with a most 
genuine and deep compassion. Who, let us ask, is the man to be envied, or rather to 
be congratulated ? Surely it is he whc is born of Christian parents, who has about 
him in childhood and in youth "counsellors" who will know what is true, and do what 
is really kind and wise ; it is he whom his human father trains in the way of righteous- 
ness, and whom his heavenly Father disciplines, according to his Divine wisdom, 
building him up in purity, in integrity, in strength, in love.— 0. 

Ver. 4. — The counsel that destroys, and that which saves. " His counsellors ... to 
his destruction." The counsel we receive has much to do with the character we form 
and the life we live ; much, therefore, with the destiny we are weaving. 

I. The tmoENT need fob counbel in a obitioal pebiod of oub life. In our 
earliest years the river of our life flows between high and narrow banks. We are well 
fenced in, and must move according to our surroundings. But later on the banks are 
lower, the restrictions are weaker, and we may overflow, may cut a new channel for 
ourselves. At first we are under commandment from hour to hour ; we do that which 
is prescribed for us ; we shun that which is interdicted. Then comes a time when we 
disengage ourselves from this position ; it has become bondage ; we demand to enter 
upon the rights of maturity, to form our own judgment, to act according to our own 
choice. It is at this point, when the father's authority is no longer paramount, that 
we need to act under counsel. We urgently need the help of those who will advise, 
though they do not assume to direct us. We want the guidance of those who will say 
to us, not, Tou shall, but, Tou should. We require the advantage of the experience of 
men who have gone through the ways that now lie before us ; of men whose wisdom 
will equip us for the new duties that have to be discharged, for the new burdens that 
have to be borne, for the new dangers and difficulties that have to be faced and fought, 
for the new temptations that have to be met and mastered. But there are two kinds 
of counsel, and everything depends on which we shall adopt. 

II. The counsel that destboyb ; viz. the counsel that kills all that is best in our 
nature, and brings us down to spiritual if not, iQdced, to material ruin. 1. The 
counsel of a degrading selfishness, which speaks on this wise : " Take care of number 
one ; " " Every man for himself," etc. ; that would impress the opening mind of young 
manhood with the miserable falsehood that, so long as we can secure what we crave for 
ourselves, it is of little consequence what becomes of our neighbours or of our fellow- 
men. 2. The counsel of ehcmeful indulgence, which speaks in this strain : " Youth 
comes but once in a lifetime ; " "A short life and a merry one ; " counsel that would 
recommend the young to consume all that is pure and sound in their nature in the first 
of unholy passion, to drown all that is worthiest, all sense of what is becoming, and all 
self-respect, in the turgid waters of unrestraiued or ill-restrained indulgence. 3. The 
counsel of financial exaggeration, which says, " Get money by all means, honestly if 
possible, but get money ; " this is counsel which would " sacrifice life for the sake 
of the means of living," which would lead to the loss of that which Is most sacred and 
precious for the sake of that which, at best, can only supply the outward conditions 
of well-being. It makes mere pecuniary possession the goal of human life — a very 
common but an utter and pitiable mistake. 4. The counsel of a shallow mate- 
rialium : that which lays great stress on temporal success and on human &vour, and 



266 THE SECOND BOOK OK TUE CUliONlCLES. [oii. xxii. 1— Tii 

makes little or nothing of spiritual worth and the favour of God. Such counsels as 
these are truly destructive ; they kill faith, love, purity, hope, spirituality— everything, 
indeed, which makes our manhood, which constitutes our true heritage. Under such 
counsellors we may gain the world, but we lose our soul ; they are " counsellors to our 
destruction." 

III. Thb ooinrBEL which saves. There is One of whom, many centuries before he 
came, it was said, " His name shall be called Counsellor ; " of whom, when he was with 
us, it was said, " Whence hath this Man this wisdom ? " who came to be to us " the 
Wisdom of God " (1 Cor. i. 24). If we will learn of him, we shall know what is the 
truth indeed respecting human life, worldly wealth, the honour which comes from man 
and that which is of God, what constitutes eternal life below, and what it is that leads 
on to the heavenly life beyond the grave (see Matt vL 19, 20, 33 ; x. 37—39 ; Luke 
Iv. 4; xii. 15 j John v. 44; xiv. 23; xviL 24).— C. 

Vers. 5 — 12. — Ow friends and their fate, etc These verses offer us a cluster of 
truths which we may gather. 

I. That our tatb is commonly bound up with that op oub fbiends. Ahaziah 
" went with Jehoram the son of Ahab " (ver. 5) ; and, allying himself with him in war, 
he visited him as a friend when he was at his home at Jezreel. But this friendship 
with God's enemies led him to his destruction ; his coming to Jehoram was " of Grod " 
(ver. 7) ; it was the way taken by Divine Providence to bring upon him the penalty of 
his guilt. For he perished with his friend on the same day and at the same hand 
(vers. 8, 9). When we are determining upon our alliances and our friendships, it is 
well not only to consider the station, the income, the reputation in society, of those 
who invite us to their confidence, but also to inquire concerning thnr prohahle whither- 
ward. In what direction are 'they moving ? Tc^ard what goal are their faces turned ? 
What will their end be? Are they on an upward or on a downward course? For 
nothing is more likely than that we shall share their fate, that we shall become what 
they are becoming. 

II. That the influence op a good man goes fab betond his own generation. 
" They buried him, Because (they said) lie is the son of Jehoshaphat," etc. (ver, 9), 
He was Jehoshaphat's grandson ; but though they had to go back two generations, the 
memory and the moral impression of the good king had not faded — at any rate, had 
not been effaced. " The meTnory of the just " abides; it is fragrant after many years 
have gone ; and the influence of the holy lasts when the memory has disappeared. 
Knowledge in the memory, peace in the mind, soundness in the soul, beauty and use- 
fulness in the life, — these are the fruits of the good man's life, though they are not 
traced to his hand and not referred to his working ; they are influences which spread 
and widen as the years go on. 

III. That if we place ourselves under the dominion op evil, wb do not know 
TO what depth we mat descend. We have here a woman, who was brought up in a 
civilized court, and who had the opportunity of acquainting herself with the Law of the 
Lord, causing all her own grandsons to be murdered, in order that she might have the 
helm of the state in her own hands I To what a lx)ttomless depth of moral degradation 
can a woman sink, when she gives herself up to the power of evil! And we do not, 
any of us, know the lengths of wrong-doing, the depths of iniquity, to which we may 
go, if we once yield to that strong temptation — impurity, avarice. Indulgence in strong 
drink, the intoxication of applause, or whatever it may be — which is assailing and 
even threatening us. Shun the first step in an evil course, for the slope becomes 
steeper as we go further, and it leads down to a deep and dark gulf of shame and ruin. 

IV. That womanly kindness has a large contribution to bring to the causb 
and kingdom op God^ It was a very great service, fruitful of large results, which 
Jehoshabeath now rendered (ver. 11). It was a veiy valuable service that womanly 
kindness and fidelity rendered to our Lord when he lived and when he died for us. 
The Apostle Paul had to thank womanly kindness for succour in the course of his career. 
Pity, with the hand of help it stretches forth, is a handmaid of piety, a valued servant 
in the king's household. 

V. That in the house of the Lord we mat find a hiding-place for ourselves. 
(Ver. 12.) His aunt biii the infant Joash in the house of God (ver. 12). Many times. 



OH. xxiL 1—12.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. an 

in many lands, has the house of God been a sanctuary, a place where men have taken 
reiiige and have hidden thcmselvei from the wratli of the pursuer. But there is a 
better way in which God's house may be to us a sanctuary. We may go there to hi<U 
ourselves in him whose house it is. We may go there with our troubled or our sin- 
burdened heart, and wo may hide in him who is the God of all grace and consolation, 
in him who is abundant in mercy and truth (see Ps. zxylL 4, 6). When we cherish 
a living faith in God our Saviour and our Friend, we " hide ourselves under the shadow 
of his wings" (Ps. xvii. 8).— 0. 

Vers. 1 — 12. — A chapter of tragediei. I. Thb SLAuaarEB o» Jbhosau's bons. 
(Ver, 1.) An illustration of three thinga 1. The perils attending high station. 
Jeh Oram's sons were among the captives taken by the Philistines and Arabians (ch. 
zxi. 17). Had they been common soldiers, their lives might have been spared; being 
princes of the blood, they were put to death. A man's social elevation attracts towards 
him the arrows of hate, envy, malice, and other secret foes ; an obscure position tends 
to protect him. Therefore let none murmur that the Arbiter of destinies has not made 
them kings or great ones ; neither let any rejoice that their places on earth are not low. 
2. The mischances accompanying war. It was probably their duty to take the field 
against the combined hordes of the Philistines and Arabians ; nevertheless, they who 
go to war even for defence, and much more for aggression, must not be surprised if 
they are killed. In the case of Jehoram's sons, the camp of Judah bad been surprised 
by a reconnoitring party who had come with the Arabians (Eeil), or by " a band of 
wild men who served in the army of the Arabians, possibly against the will of the 
leaders " (Bertheau) ; and Jehoram's sons, having first been carried off as prisoners, 
were afterwards put to death. In ancient times, wlien prisoners became troublesome 
or proved dangerous, this was the customary way in which they were disposed of. 3. 
The retributions wrought hy Providence. Even if Jehoram's sons were not as wielded 
as himself, it was a signal illustration of the l«c talionis, a conspicuous demonstration 
of the truth that with what measure one metes it shall be measured to him again 
(Matt. vii. 2). Jehoram had assassinated all his brothers on ascending the throne ; 
before he descended from it, Jehovah suffered him to see all his sons (except the 
youngest) cut off by invading marauders. " Are not my ways equal ? saith the Lord " 
(Ezek. xviii. 29). 

II. The extermination of Ahab's house. (Ver. 7.) Incidentally referred to by 
the Chronicler, it is more fully detailed in 2 Kings ix. and x., and may here be briefly 
narrated. 1. The thing determined by God. (1) When ? As far back as the time of 
Elijah, in the days of Ahab himself (1 Kings xix. 16, 17). Divine foreordination 
interferes not with the freedom of human action. If the destruction of Ahab's house 
was carried out in fulfilment of a previously formed Divine decree, it was, nevertheless, 
effected by a political revolution. (2) Why ? On account of the incurable apostasy, 
outrageous irreligion, and flagrant blood-guiltiness of Ahab and his successors on the 
throne of IsraeL Besides being an idolater of the most debasing type, Ahab had been 
• murderer of extreme ferocity, and his successors had walked in his ways. There was, 
therefore, no remedy remaining but one — complete extirpation. Under the Divine 
government, redemption or destruction are the two alternatives that stand before all 
evil-doers (Isa. i. 19, 20). Souls that cannot be recovered must be cut off (Ps. xxxvii. 
9). When the prediluvian world had sunk below the line of possible restoration, it 
was submerged beneath the waters of a flood (Gen. vi. 7). When Sodom and Gomorrah 
had become too filthy to be renovated, they were burnt up from off the face of the 
earth (Gen. xviii. 21 ; xix. 24, 25 ; 2 Pet. ii. 6 ; Jude 7). 2. The instrument selected 
hy Qod. (1) His name. Jehu, the son of Jehoshaphat, the son of Nimshi. This 
first revealed to Elijah at Horeb (1 Kings xix. 16). In the Assyrian inscriptions 
Jehu is twice mentioned, and each time as " Jehu the son of Omri," the foreign scribe 
being unacquainted with his history as recorded in Scripture, and regarding him as a 
prince of the dynasty of Omri. An obelisk of black marble, five feet in height, found 
at Nimroud, and now in the British Museum, represents the tribute brought to Shal- 
maneser II. by vassal princes, among whom appear " Yahua, son of Khumri," giving 
" silver, gold, bowls of gold, vessels of gold, goblets of gold, pitchers of gold, lead, 
sceptres for the king's hand, and staves" (' Records,' etc., v. 41); while a fragment from 



268 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxii. 1— 12. 

the annals of Shalmaneser ITL contains a similar statement, that in the eighteenth 
year of his reign, after conquering Hazael of Damascus, he received the tribute of the 
Tyrian, the Sidonian, and of " Yahua the son of Khumri " (Schrader, ' Keilinschriften,' 
p. 210). (2) His station. Originally an officer, probably the ablest general, and there- 
fore field-marshal of Jehoram's army (2 Kings ix. 5). God culls his instruments 
from all ranks and occupations. Those who have served him most efficiently in the 
Christian Church have not unfrequently been drawn iiom the army. The profession 
of a soldier need not hinder one from being a servant of God. (3) His character. 
Energetic, active, decisive, ambitious, unscrupulous, bloodthirsty, cruel, and fanatical, 
" the worst type of a son of Jacob, the ' suppianter,' as he is called, without the noble 
and princely qualities of Israel, the most unlovely and the most coldly commended of 
all the heroes of his country " (Stanley, ' Jewish Church,' p. 338). God's selection of 
a man to be his instrument does not imply a commendation of his character — witness 
Pharaoh, Saul, Nebuchadnezzar, Herod. (4) His designation. To be king over Israel 
This first communicated at Horeb to Elijah, who received at the same time a commis- 
sion to see Jehu's anointing to the throne carried out — a commission afterwards executed 
by Elisha (2 Kings viii. 29 ; ix. 6). (6) His usurpation. In this he was assisted by 
his brother-officers (2 Kings ix. 13). Though designated and anointed by Elisha to 
the throne of Israel, more than likely, as in the case of Jeroboam (1 Kings xi. 31), the 
project of dethroning Jehoram had already floated before his mind. (6) His commis- 
sion. To execute Divine vengeance on the house of Ahab by extirpating it, root and 
branch, from the land. Bough work, it needed a rough instrument. 3. Th» work 
carried through by God. By means of his instrument. The Chronicler recognizes (vers. 

7, 8) that Jehu was God's sword. How far Jehu himself was under the dominion of 
this thought may he hazardous to affirm. But, in any case, he lost no time in dis- 
charging the bloody business entrusted to his hand. With a swiftness and relentless 
severity that suggested leonine ferocity as much as religious zeal, he posted to Jezreel 
and began the work of butchery. First he drove an arrow through the heart of Jeho- 
ram (2 Kings ix. 24) ; next procured the death of Jezebel by commanding two of her 
servants, his minions, to throw her from the palace window (2 Kings ix. 33) ; and 
finally caused the seventy sons of Ahab in Samaria to be beheaded (2 Kings x. 7). 

III. The mubdee op the princes of Jcdah. (Ver. 8.) 1. Who these were. (1) 
Sons of the brethren of Ahaziah. Not the brethren of Ahaziah (2 Kings x. 13), since 
these had aU been slain by the Arabian marauders (ch. xxi. 17), but the children of 
these brothers, and therefore Ahaziah's nephews. That they were forty-two in number 
cannot be pronounced impossible, since it is not known how many elder brothers 
Ahaziah had. (2) Princes of Judah, who were doubtless remoter branches of the 
royal house, and held important offices in the court. Possibly these should be included 
in the number forty-two mentioned above. 2. When they were killed. (1) When 
Jehu was executing judgment on the house of Ahab (ver. 8). Though not responsible 
for being connected with the house of Ahab, that they were so proved the cause of 
their destruction. Their sad fate was an illustration of two truths — that the innocent 
often suffer with and for the guilty (Job ix. 23), and that no one can predict how far 
the disastrous consequences of one false step may reach. Had Jehoram not married 
Athaliah, these princes had not fallen victims to Jehu's sword. (2) When Jehu was 
on the way from Jezreel, where he had perpetrated three murders, to Samaria, where 
he had committed one massacre by deputy, and whither he was going to add another 
(2 Kings X. 26). Haying fallen in with the princes of Judah, Jehu ordered his 
attendants to take them alive. Their resistance, it is supposed, led to their immediate 
slaughter. One massacre more was nothing to Jehu. Besides, tiie destruction of 
forty-two princes, mostly boys, was a trifle to that he was contemplating — the whole- 
sale sacrifice of Baal's worshippers in the house of Baal. (3) When Ahaziah's nephews 
were on the way to Jezreel to pay a visit to the court at Jezreel, " to salute the children 
of the queen and the children of the king " (2 Kings x. 13). One never knows 
where he may be overtaken by death ; hence the necessity of being always ready. 

8. Where they were killed. At the pit or cistern of the shearing-house, or " house of 
gathering" (2 Kings x. 13); at "the shepherds' house of meeting" (Chaldee Version, 
Thenius, Bahr) — a house which served the shepherds of the region round about for 
asnembliiiK; or at the house where the shepherds tied up their sheep for shearing 



CH. XXII. 1—12.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 269 

(Keil). "In a well close by, as at Cawnpore, they were all slaughtered " (Stanley). 
i. By whom they were killed. Jehu, whose motive may have been either (1) because he 
regarded their death as embraced within the scope of his commission, or (2) because 
he feared the exaction by some of them of blood-vengeance, or (3) because he wished 
to render impossible any future attempt at the subversion of his authority. 

IV. The assassination of Ahaziah. (Ver. 9.) 1. After a brief reign, Ahaziah 
succeeded to his father's throne in his forty-second year, or in his twenty-second 
(2 Kings viii. 26) — a discrepancy removed by supposing the forty-two to indicate the 
age of the kingdom of his mother's family (Lightfoot), but best explained by con- 
ceding that an error has crept into the text (Keil, Bertheau, Bahr). After enjoying 
regal power for one year, he fell a victim to the sword of Jehu — a startling reminder 
of the uncertainty of life and the vanity of human greatness. 2. By the hand of 
Providence, " The destruction of Ahaziah was of God " (ver. 7) ; not merely as all 
things are under the Divine control, but in the special sense that the incidents which 
led to Ahaziah's destruction were of God's permitting, if not ordering. (1) God allowed 
Jehoram to go to war, as his father had done, with the Syrian king, now not Benhadad 
II., but Eazael the usurper (ver. 6), who is mentioned along with Jehu in the Assyrian 
inscriptions, and with whom Shalmaneser II., in the eighteenth year of his reign, 
fought at Damascus, capturing his camp with 1221 chariots and 470 war-carrianes 
(Sohrader, ' Keilinsohriften,' p, 210; ' Eecords,' etc., v. 34; Savce, 'Fresh Light,' 
etc., p. 123). (2) Ahaziah of Judah he permitted to go to Bamoth-Gilead with 
his uncle. (3) In the war Jehovah ordered it that Jehoram should be wounded and 
return to Jezreel to be healed, and that Ahaziah should afterwards also leave Eamoth 
and go to the Israelitish capital to inquire for his mother's brother. (4) Heuce it came 
to pass that he was found in Jehoram's company when Jehu came to Jezreel on his 
murderous errand (2 Kings ix. 21). (5) Had this train of circumstances not preceded, 
Ahaziah's death might not have followed, at least at the time when and the place 
where it did. 3. As a just retribution for his wickedness. For Ahaziah a tremendous 
misfortune, for which he was in no way responsible, that he had Jehoram and Athaliah 
for his parents. If any man might be said to have " a double dose of original sin," or 
inherited corruption, he had. If he may be pronounced happy who has the piety of 
generations at his back and within his veins, propelling him forward in the ways of 
virtue and religion, on the other hand he should be deemed an object of pity who is 
not only held back from the paths of godliness, but urged into the broad roads of sin 
and vice by secret forces of heredity that have been gathering momentum through a 
long succession of wicked ancestors. Disadvantageously placed as Ahaziah was, he 
was under no compulsion to yield to the evil influences by which he was surrounded. 
That he did not resist them, but abandoned himself to them without let or hindrance, 
was his sin. (1) He "walked in the ways of the house of Abab," and "did evil in the 
sight of the Lord like the house of Ahab." He copied their idolatries and their immo- 
ralities. (2) He took as his example the house of Ahab, and especially his mother, 
Athaliah, whom the Chronicler, with reference to her wicked propensities, fitly designates 
" the daughter of Omri." 4. In ipite of strenuous efforts to escape. The accounts given 
of these efforts to escape are considerably divergent. According to the Chronicler, when 
Ahaziah saw Jehoram sink down in his chariot after being struck with Jehu's arrow, 
he fled by the way of the garden house, but was followed by Jehu, and, like his uncle, 
wounded with an arrow at the going up to Gur, which is by Ibleam, whence he fled to 
Megiddo, and died there (2 Kings ix. 27). According to 2 Kings, Ahaziah had hid 
himself in Samaria, and, being found there, was slain by Jehu's servants. The account* 
are pronounced irreconcilable, that of Kings being the older and more authentic (Bahr, 
Bertheau) ; but the explanations ordinarily proffered (Lightfoot, Keil) are deserving 
of consideration — that Ahaziah, on first escaping, fled to Samaria, and was afterwards 
found there by Jehu's servants, who brought him to Jehu, at whose command he was 
shot while in his chariot at Gur, beside Ibleam, and that, once more escaping, though 
this time mortally wounded, he reached Megiddo, and perished there. On the sites 
here mentioned, consult the Exposition. 

V. The destruction op the seed eotal of the house of Judah, (Ver. 10.) I, 
The victims of this massacre. All the seed royal, i.e. all the direct descendants of the 
kingly house, all who might in any measure or decree aspire to the throne. Ai 



270 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxii. 1—12. 

Ahaziah's elder brothers had been captured and slain by the Arabs (ch. xxi. 17), and 
U their SODS, Ahaziah's nephews, had been (in part at least) put to death by Jelm 
(oh. xxii. 8), it is possible that the actual victims were not numerous. 2. The perpe- 
trator of this massacre. Athaliah, the queen-mother, who thereby proved herseli' a 
true daughter of Jezebel. Instead of grieving at the tidings of her son's death, and 
taking measures to shield his young children, her grandsons, from the sword of Jehu, 
■he herself compassed their destruction. Thereby she showed herself a most unnatural 
mother, an inhuman monster — a woman, like Lady Macbeth, " from the crown to 
the toe, top-full of direst cruelty " (' Macbeth,' act L so. 5). 3. The motive of this 
massacre. Probably mingled fear and ambition. Apprehensive of her own safety 
when she saw that Jehu had slain her son, she may have judged that the speediest 
and surest way to establish her security was to cut off every possible rival from her 
side, and seize the throne of Judah for herself. It was the usual mode of procedure 
amongst Oriental sovereigns, on ascending the throne, to put to death all possible 
claimants of the crown. It is not difficult to see who was Jehoram's teacher (ch. 
zxi. 4). 4. Z%e extent of this massacre. All the seed royal, with one exception, Joash, 
Ahaziah's son, who was rescued by his aunt, Jehoshabeath, his father's daughter but 
not his mother's — she was obviously the daughter of one of Jeiioram's secondary wivei 
—and the wife of Jehoiada the priest (see next homily). 

Lessons. 1. The vicissitudes of human life (ver. 1). 2. The vanity of earthly glory 
(ver. 2). 3. The danger of evil counsel (ver. 3). 4. The self-destructive character of 
sin (ver. 4). 6. The madness of walking with wicked men (ver. 5). 6. The propriety 
of sympathizing with the ungodly in their afflictions (ver. 6). 7. The tiger-like ferocity 
of some monsters in sin (vers. 7 — 10). 8. The mystery of Providence in suffering 
Buch monsters to live. — W. 

Vers. 11, 12. — The rescue of Joash. I. The dakoer from which he was delivebbd. 
1. An early death. He was an inlant at the breast, since he had a wet-nurse : " not 
above a year old " (Josephus). More than one-half of the human race die in infancy. 
Scripture examples of the deaths of children : the firstborn of Pharaoh (Exod. xii. 29, 
30) ; the child of David (2 Sam. xii. 14—23), of Jeroboam (1 Kings xiv. 13), of the 
widow of Zarephath (1 Kmgs xvii. 17), of the Shunammite (2 Kings iv. 19, 20). Many 
exposed to the dauger of dying in infancy who nevertheless escape, like Muses (Kxod. 
ii. 3), the child of the harlot (1 Kings iii. 25), Jesus (Matt. ii. 8), the centurion's son 
(John iv. 49). 2. A violent death. He was in danger of being cut off by the sword. 
To die a natural death in infancy is sad enough ; to be cut off by a supernatural stroke 
like the Egyptian children, or the Bethlehem innocents, or by an accidental stroke like 
the Shunammite's boy, much more by a violent stroke like Samaria's children (Hos, 
X. 14), excites the imagination as a hard fate indeed. 3. An unnatural death. He 
was in danger of beins: killed by his own grandmother. Only one fate could have been 
worse — to have been slain by his own mother, like the son of the woman in Samaria 
(2 Kings vL 29) ; or by his own father, like the King of Moab's eldest son (2 Kings 
ui. 27). 

IL Thk febson bt whom eb was delitebed. 1. A kinswoman. Jehoshabeath, 
or Jehosheba, " Jehovah is the oath," was the aunt of Joash, the sister of his father 
(lee preceding homily). 2. A good woman. A plausible inference from the fact that 
■he was married to Jehoiada the high priest. " Even princesses did not then scorn 
the bed of th6se that served at God's altar " (Hall). Most likely she and her husband 
disapproved of the state religion and state policy of the day, inspired and controlled as 
these were by Athaliah. 3. A hrave woman. Scarcely witliout peril to herself could 
■he have carried out her humane design of rescuing her infant nephew. 4. A clever 
woman. Without immense tact she could never have evaded the vigilant eyes ot 
Athaliah. Of the substitution of some other child in Joash's room (Hall) Scriptur* 
b silent. 

IIL The uodb in whioh he was delivered. 1. £y secret concealment in the palace. 
Along with hia nurse he was hid in a bedchamber, or chamber for the beds ; neither 
the dormitory of the priests and Levites in the temple-courts (Vatablus), nor the 
sleeping-apartments of the royal princes in the palace (Clericus), but a room in the 
latter, where, according to Eastern custom, the beds, i.e. mattresses and coverlets, wej o 



CH. xxiiL 1— 21.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



271 



kept (Eeil). In this recess, usually uninhabited, a temporary refuge was obtained 
from Athaliah's rage. 2. By private upbringing in the temple. Not in the holy of 
holies (Targum), to which Athaliah had no access, but in one of the buildings on the 
outer wall, in which the high priest resided with his wife. Fetched at the first con- 
venient opportunity from their dangerous proximity to Athaliah in the palace, the 
young child and his nurse were for six years lodged in the priest's house. Here his 
training must have been both carefully and successfully attended to, as bis after-career 
showed (Frov. xxii. 6). From the priest's lips he would receive instruction in the Law 
of God (Mai. ii. 7) ; from his aunt, learn to love and practise the religion of his great 
and good ancestors, Jehoshaphat and Asa. 

Learn: 1. The ease with which God can defeat the projects of the wicked. 2. Th« 
tender care God takes of children, especially of such as belong to the covenant. 3. 
The blessing of possessing pious parents and kinsmen. 4. The value of early instruc- 
tion in the doctrines and duties of religion. 5. The safety of those whom God keeps. 
6. The advantage of spending one's early years in the house of Qoi. — W. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XXm. 

This chapter records first those careful 
preparations of Jehoiada which eventuated 
in the safe proolaiming of Joash king (vers. 
1 — 11); then the tragic demonstration and 
tragic end of Athiiliah (vers. 12 — 15) ; and 
lastly, the beneficent action of Jehoiada over 
people and king, to the complete restoration 
of the worship and temple-services of the 
true God (vera. 16—21). The chapter is 
very closely paralleled by 2 Kings xi. 4 — 21 ; 
while the characteristic and to be expected 
differences on the part of our text are very 
conspicuous. These will be noted as they 
occur. While each compiler so definitely 
keeps on that side of the line which 
answers the main purpose of his history, 
in the abundant material common to both, 
and to which both resorted, all harmonizes 
■till with the supposed objects of the two 
works respectively. 

Yer. 1 Jehoiada strengthened himself 

(see our note, ch. xii. 1 ; xiii. 7). He nerved 
himself with courage, and that courage 
which results from conviction of duty and 
of ripe time to achieve it. The captains of 
hundreds (or, centurions of the royal guards) 
are not mentioned in the parallel by name, 
but the significant mention tlieie (2 Kings 
xi. 5 — 7) of five detachments (three "third 
parts," plui "two parts" of another body) 
tally with the number ^w, who are here 
mentioned by name. The five detachments 
probably summed up a force of nominally five 
hundred. It is Interesting to note how often 
high religious enterprises have been due to 
the trusting mutual co-operation of very few 
to begin with, and them awakened and led 
by one. Of uo one of tljise five named bcru 



is anything known more to his honour than 
this — that his name it here recorded. It is 
said with the most perfect simplicity of even 
Hebrew language, that he took them with 
him in covenant. 

Ver. 2. — No mention is made in the 
parallel of the Levites, whom our writer is 
sure to signalize. The fathers of Israel. 
The saoredness of the phrase made it dear, 
above the narrowness of the distinctive 
appellation Judah, though the worthies all 
were gathered, as just implied, out of 
"Judah." 

Ver. 3. — All the congregation; i.e. all 
who have been mentioned in vers. 1 and 2 ; 
for so the parallel makes plain. Made a 
covenant. This was the second wider and 
more embracing covenant. This covenant 
is between all the gathered representatives 
and the young king, Jehoiada no doubt 
putting all things into shape. And he said 
unto them, Behold, the king's son shall reign. 
The he is Jehoiada, as of course. In view 
of the last clause of ver. 4 — in the parallel, 
" Jehoiada showed them the king's son " — the 
likelier rendering of our text here is, Behold 
the king's son ; he shall reign, as, etc. As the 
Lord hath said of the sons of David (see ch. 
vi. 16; vii. 18; 2 Sam. vii. 12; 1 Kings ii. 
4; ix. 5). The hereditary nature of the 
monarchy (2 Sam. vii.), pervaded ever by 
the spirit of the covenant, is evidently 
glanced at. It is probable that the exist- 
ence of Joash was news to those to whom 
Jehoiada, as the parallel has it, " shoaed . . . 
the king's son," so that double significance 
lies in the word " showed." 

Ver. 4.— The first thing that is to be 
observed is the distinct and repeated men- 
tion of the Levites, as those on whom the 
critical and onerous service that came of 
Jehoiada'i rewlution was devolved, while 
the parallel does not so much om mention 
tliem. It may next be noted that our (list 



272 



TIIK SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. XAiii. 1— 2L 



aad second verses state the part that " the 
captains of hundreds " were called to per- 
form in collecting the Tequi>ite number of 
Levitea from the proTincial cities of Judah, 
And once more it may be noted that whereas, 
while we abide close by our own text alone, 
nothing in the description of our vers. 4 — 
10 oceasiong material difficulty, eren when 
the perplexity, which is considerable, doei 
enter, on consulting and eodeaTouring to 
reconcile the parallel, it is with extreme 
probability due to our not making sufficient 
allowance for the fact that the matter of the 
two accounts does not so much offer itself 
for reconciliation as for concurrent accept- 
ance. We have now to follow the descrip- 
tion of our own text. Of you entering on 
the sabbath ; t.«. of you who enter on your 
period of duty on such a sabbath. See ver. 
8, the " men that were to come in on the 
sabbath, with them that were to go out on 
tlie sabbath." This alludes, as the next 
clause definitely says, to tlie weekly courses 
of the Levites, as described in 1 Chron. ix. 
25 ; xxiv. ; xxv. — the incoming and outgoing 
companies. Portersof the doors; t.e." keepers 
of the doors of the temple " (1 Chron. ix. 19). 
This may correspond with the middle clause 
of ver. 6 in the parallel. 

Ver. 5. — A third part ... at the king's 
house. It seems impossible to refer this to 
the royal palace, as some suppose from ver. 
19 in the parallel. It probably designates 
the place where the child had been living in 
concealment. This portion of the description 
appears to correspond with the last clause of 
ver. 5 in the parallel. At the gate of the 
foundation. The Hebrew text here is ^iDJ 
(Exod. xxix. 12 ; Lev. iv. 7 ; Hab. iii. 13); in 
the parallel nm, a name only found there, and 
nnintelligible —probably a corruption of the 
other word. The gate of the foundation is 
supposed to have stood at that comer of the 
area which was strengthened by additional 
works, where was the ravine separating 
Moriah and the hill to the south. All the 
people. Evidently the miscellaneous out- 
side people are not here intended, who were 
not entrusted with the secret and the surprise 
that was to be, but the same all the people 
as are unmistakably designated in ver. 10 ; 
«.«. all who were appointed to officiate. The 
last clause in each of vers. 5, 6, 7 in the 
parallel go strongly to confirm the position 
that •' the king's house " so far does not intend 
the royal palace, but such part of the house 
of the Lord as had been, and then still was, 
« about the king " (ver. 7, parallel) ; in order 
to keep watch " about the king," they were 
set to keep watch of a certain part of "the 
house of the Lord." 

Ver. 6. — But let none come . . . save the 
priests. Through this little chink we get 
some light confirmatory of the concurrent 



jurisdiction of the account in the parallel 
The express caution of this clause shows 
that there were others about, and others 
officiating, beside the Levites, who only 
have been mentioned hitherto in our text, 
except under the most generic designation 
(as before, so again in last clause of this 
verse) of " all the people." The last clause 
of this verse may cover the contents of ver. 
7 in the parallel. The distinction between 
" the courts of the house of the Lord " (ver. 
5), and " the house of the Lord" (ver. 6) is, 
of course, quite apparent. 

Yer. 7. — And the Levites shall compass 
the king. The matter of ver. 8 in Ihe 
parallel suggests nothing inconsistent with 
the express mention of the Levites here, but 
rather that the word " Levites" is desiderated 
there, and its significance perhaps accident- 
ally overlooked, when the writer of Kings 
was using the original authorities and 
sources of his history. 

Ver. 8. — All Jndah; I.e. all those of 
Judah's provincial cities who had been 
honoured with summons to join in this great 
and solemn enterprise. Dismissed not the 
courses; t.e. the provincial Levites co- 
operated with the regulars of Jerusalem. 

Ver. 9.— Shields . . . King David's . . . 
in the house of Ood. Some think these may 
have been the shields of gold that King 
David took from the servants of Hadadezer 
(2 Sam. viii. 7, 11). 

Ver. 10.— All the people; <.e., again, all 
those, not being Levites and priests, who had 
been trusted to assist. The parallel (ver. 11) 
summarizes them under the name ihe guard. 
It may be just noted, in passing, that, while 
the Hebrew text has in both places 
"shoulder," i.e. for the "side" of this verse, 
and the "corner" of the parallel, the Ee- 
vised Version has harmonized the rendering, 
electing the rendering side. Trom the right 
side of the temple to the left side. This 
is equivalent to saying, those composing the 
guard wero placed on the south and north 
sides. Along by the altar. This was the 
altar of burnt offerings in front of the porch, 
and close by which the young " king stood 
at his pillar," or on his pedestal (ver. IS), 
the rows of the guard bristling with weapon! 
before and behind and round about him. 

Ver. 11. — Then they brought out. The 
parallel (ver. 12) has, "he brought out," eto. 
The last clause of our verse harmonizes even 
this simple point, indicating that the " they" 
designates "Jehoiada and his sons;" of 
which group Jehoiada himself was, of course, 
the greatest part. It will be noted that it 
is not said from what exact place Joash was 
brought out Put upon him the crown and 
. . . the testimony, It is quite unnecessary, 
at any rate, to suppose that the testimony, as 
well as the crown, was put on the head of 



OH. xxin. 1— 21.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



273 



Joash. It may be taken for granted that 
the testimony was put into his hands (Deut. 
xvii. 18—20; ixxi. 24—29). If something 
new and bo out of the way as testing the 
testimony (i.e. the book of the Law) on the 
head were purported, it is likely that a 
distincter point would have been made of 
it. God save the king ! Hebrew, tj^qh 'n'j 
« Let the king Uve I " (1 Sam. x. 2iV 2 Sam. 
XTi. 16; 1 Kings i. 25, 31, 34, 39). 

Yer. 23. — ^When Athaliah heard the noise. 
The parallel (2 Kings xi. 13—16) shows 
only two diflferenoes of any noteworthiness, 
and these will come onder notice next verse. 
The noise; Hebrew, the voice; i.e. no doubt 
the voices of the people. Praising. The 
Hbbrew is the piel participle; our oorre- 
■ponding phrase would be, " singing out the 
praises of the king," t'.e. not any personal 
praises, but such as the cries of " Long live 
the king I" or, as our Authorized Version has 
it, " God save the king 1 " 

Yer. 13. — ^At his pUlar (see note on ver. 
10). At the entering in. The parallel 
(2 Kings xi. 14) has "as the manner was" 
(ia^^'Q3 vice K'l3p3). The reading in the 
parallel is quite explainable by such refer- 
ences as 2 Kings xxiii. 3 ; eh. xxxiv. 31). 
Such as taught. Piel participle of yi; ; the 
meaning here probably being not literally 
the teaching confraternity as such, but the 
leaders, and in particular those who were 
appointed on this occasion to lead. Treason ! 
-tSD ; interesting references are 2 Sam. xv. 
12 ; 1 Kings xvi. 20 ; Isa. viii. 12 ; Jer. xi. 
9; Ezek. xxii. 25. The idea of the word 
is eontpiracy, and Athaliab's eye read this 
at once, and not less promptly, that it 
amounted to treason to her. 

Yer. 14. — ^Bronght out, NJiVl, for "com- 
manded" in the parallel, ^t^_; and this is 
probably right, the Hebrew in our text 
probably a derioal or copyist's error. The 
ranges ; nHin'tf. This word is found only in 
three other places, viz. twice in the parallel 
(its vers. 8, 15), Bevised Yersion " ranks," 
and in 1 Kings vi. 9, where it is rendered 
in the Authorized Yersion " the boards," but 
in the Bevised Yersion " the planks," and 
margin "rows." The ranges are commonly 
supposed to maan the nmki or idwi of 



' soldiers. The Ynlgate (septa templi) hat 
understood them to mean the precincts of 
the temple. The indications of the remark- 
able but not nacommon prepositional ex- 
pression, rrap-^R (enjoying the analogy of 
other compounded prepositional expressions, 
as JJffl-^ ; yino-^N) favours the idea that 
Jehoiada said. Have her forth from inside 
" the house of the Lord " (ver. 12), to within 
your ranks, and there take care to make a 
way for her, no one with immature zeal 
following to slay her there, at the jeopardy 
of his own life, for under no case let her be 
slain in the house of the Lord. 

Yer. 16. — Between him. The Bevised 
Yersion reads " himself," which is the evi- 
dent meaning. The parallel leaves out, 
however, mention of Jehoiada as party to 
the covenant, viewing him rather ai the 
promoter of it. 

Yer. 17. — The house of BaaL It becomes 
plain that some building had been actually 
reared alongside, so to say, of the very templo 
itself, for BaaL Slew Hattan (Deut xiii. 6, 
9). Brake . . . his images; Hebrew, Vlf'^.; 
this is the more pronounced word, dis- 
tinguished from n'lnsa. 

Yer. IS. — Jehoiada appointed; i.e. re- 
appointed or restored. The of&oes; n^1p!^, 
Numb. iii. 32, 36: iv. 16; xvL29; IChroii. 
xxiii. 11; xxiv. 3, 19; xxvi. 30; oh. xvii. 
14 ; xxiii. 18 ; xxiv. 11 ; xxvi 11 ; see also 
Ps. cix. 8; Isa. x. 3 (comp. Job x. 12). 
The priests. There should, no doubt, to 
found the conjunction " and " after this word 
and before " the Levites," whom David had 
distributed (so 1 Chron. xxiv. 1 — 19 ; xxv. 
8 — 31). In the Law of Moses (Numb, xviii. 
1 — 7; xxxviii.2). With rejoicing . . . sing- 
ing . , , David (1 Chron. xxiiL 5; xxv. 1, 
2, 5—7; and our ch. xxix. 25—30). 

Yer. 19. — ^The porters (1 Chron. xxvi. 1 
-12). 

Ver. 20.— The high gate. There is some 
doubt as to what this gate was, whether the 
temple gate of ch. xxvii. 3, the chief gate of 
the outer court, or whether it was merely a 
palace gate, and not identified also with the 
precincts of the temple. It ii called in the 
parallel " the gate of the gnaid." 



HOMILEnC& 

Veri. 1 — 28. — 27le time of action, after six yem'i tnaiUng. In the flnrt rerw of tUi 
chapter, so full of the indications of the ruling providence of Ood, alike in his ndBinc 
up a priest like Jehoiada, and in the marriage alliance which Jehoiada had formed 
with the sister of the king, we are told that this priest " Btrengthened himself" or took 
towage, and proceeded also therewith to take measures to bring the hidden heir to the 
throne to light, and to place on his head the crown. It is not necessary to nndsrBtand 
this to imply that courage had been lacking to him before for this work, but that, till 
the time was ripe, he had not girded himself to the entarprise. Wt may notio 

II. CHBONIOLEB. 



274 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxiii. 1—21. 

I. The patient waitino of Jehoiada. To men of action, waiting is a hard task. 
Possibly simply the infancy and youngest childhood of Joaah advised that waiting. 
How could the scene hare been made one-half as effective as it was while Joash wa« 
but an infant? But there may have been other reasons, and some of them easily 
imaginable, in the state and temper of the kingdom, for the delay. Six years, at any 
rate, did he " rest, and the Kcventh "' he rose up to work — six years, not one of 
which was free from anxiety and danger. Many a time must he have turned over the 
whole matter in thought, and prayed over it, and with his God-fearing wife developed 
the plan till now the seventh year came. 

n. The wise action of Jehoiada. As politician, statesman. Churchman, ha i* 
a good example. By concerting methods of proceeding with ever-widening circles of 
co-operation (the captains of hundreds, the Levites, the chiefs of the fathers, etc., 
vers. 1, 2), he obviates the danger and almost the possibility of any breakdown ; h» 
gains sympathy; he gives to enthusiasm its natural springs, and to public spirit 
legitimate impulse, and so carries all to a successful issue. 

III. The BELiaioug bebvice obsebved, and the distinotnesb and dibeotnebs 

WITH WHICH THE PBINCIFLE AND BANOTION OF BELIOION WEBE INTBODUOED INTO 

THE WHOLE PBOOEEDiNQ. The meeting (" congregation ") gathered in the house of 
the Lord. The meeting made a " covenant " with the king there — he challenging it, 
evidently. And the priest, faithful to his knowledge, and faithful to Ma own faith, lay» 
down distinctly the common ground and the sacred bond of their co-operation : " Behold, 
the king's son shall reign, as the Lord hath said of the sons of David " (ver. 3). 

rV. The model beliqious oabe with whioh the house of God wab ouabded 
AOAINBT ANT ACCIDENTAL FBOFANATioN. The pricsts and Levites on the one hand, 
and the people on the other hand, all had their places and work assigned to them, with 
every precaution and warning (vers. 6 — 10). 

v. The cbeemont of the cobonation, with its oentbal featdbe — an alhobt 

BAOBAHENTAL celebration — OF THE TESTIMONY LAID ITFON THE KINS. Whether, 

as some think, that with the crown of gold, the testimony, the book of the Law, was 
for a moment rested upon his head — the better crown by £91 of the two— or whether it 
was put into his hands, is very immaterial The act was a most suggestive one, and 
a most impressive one, and one which, to the end of the life of Joash, now so young, 
might well be a memory of real religious usefulness. We do not read of any previous 
instance of the kind. It may be that it was thought of as a remembrancer specially 
suited to the very tender age of the young king. 

VI. The eyil-doino of Athaliah now at last silenoed fob eveb. The voice 
of priest and people was one now. And the voice of these was also one with the voice of 
Gkid. And too surely, even if it were the first time, for " so long a time," the voice 
of fear and of conscience spoke at one, from the lips of the doomed woman Athaliah. 

Vn. The vows taken afbebh hebeupon bt himself and all the people and 
THE EiNQ. These vows were in the shape, apparently, of a covenant — the contracting 
parties being the priest in the name of the Lord his God on the one side, and on the- 
other the people and the king (ver. 16). Are we not forcibly reminded here how 
right it is and how needful that the servants of God, in the sense of being public 
ministers of his truth, of religion, of the Church, should feel it their solemn duty 
not only to give instruction and the best of it, but to make earnest appeal to the people,, 
and from time to time urge and lovingly challenge them to decision in matters of their 
nlidous life ? 

Vlil. The wobk or pbaotioal beforuatiom at once BEairN, the peace or th> 

bUro KNQAQED TS THAT WOBK, AKD THE OLADNS88 OF THE WHOLK FEOFLB Qt IT. 



HOMILIKS BT VABIOUS AUTHOBS. 

Vers. 1 — ^11. — Jlte eonstittientt of tueceu. It was no light work that Jehoiada had 
is hand. He had need to " strengthen himself," as ve are told that he did (ver. 1). 
To effect a revolution in a kingdom is either a very guilty or a very noble deed. It 
can only be justified by the most grave conditions and by a reasonable prospect of 
success. When, as on this occasion, it is imperatively demanded, and when, as now. 



OH. xxin. 1— 21.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLEa 276 

it Is boldly and effectively accomplished, a very great work of patriotism and philan- 
thropy is wrought ; and it is not only man who is served, but God also. On the other 
hand, to undertake such an achievement without adequate cause and without sufficient 
means, is to plunge a country into civil strife and to ensure the spilling of much blood 
and the desolation of many homes. Jehoiada succeeded in his great undertaking, and 
his success was due to many things. These things are the constant constituents of 
prosperity everywhere. They are — 

I. A SENSE OF BACRED DUTY. Jchoiada was not seeking his own exaltation ; he 
was concerned that the purpose of God was not being fulfilled, and he was desiroui of 
acting in such a way that the will of God should be done in the land, " as the Lord 
hath said " (ver. 3). Men often carry a purpose into execution because they are ani- 
mated by a strong, energizing ambition ; but they may also be quickened and sustained 
by a nobler end. They may be charged with a commission from God ; they may be 
filled with a sense of what they owe to him. And a profound persuasion that God has 
called us to execute a certain work has again and again proved a most powerful 
inspiration. 

II. COVRAOE AND COMMAND OH THE PART OF THE LEADER (OB LEADEBS). Jehoiada 

had made up his mind that the thing was now to be done ; " The king's son iJuill reign,' 
he said. And he went about the work of the restoration of the royal house of David 
with the firmness of fearlessness. He took a commanding tone, knowing that the 
moment of revolution is not the time for divided counsels. " This is the thing that ye 
shall do," he said (ver. 4) ; they did " according to all things Jehoiada . . . commanded " 
(ver. 8). Had there been any hesitancy on his part, any laofe of decision or resolution, the 
attempt might have broken down. In perilous times, when great issues are at stake, 
we must not object to, but rather admire and sustain, the vigour and the determination 
of our leader. 

III. The GREATEST POSSIBLE co-oPEBATioK. Jehoiada called to his aid the military 
(ver. 1), the ecclesiastics (ver. 2), the people (ver. 3). We should invite aU to help on 
whose willingness and fidelity we can depend. 

IV. A CONSCIENTIOUS EEQAED FOB WHAT IS EIGHT. Jeholada Wanted to make the 
most effective arrangement of those who were to act at the critical moment, but he 
would not have any violation of sacred law under any circumstances (ver. 6). It is our 
bounden duty to neglect no measures that are likely to work toward the desired end; 
but in all our arrangements, with this in view, we must stop at the point of disobedience 
to the Divine Word. Even success itself, however ardently we may desire it, and 
however devotedly we may have been pursuing it, must be renounced if it cannot be 
won without the sacrifice of conscience. It is often bought too dearly ; and the price is 
always too high when it includes even the small change of conscientious scruples. 

Y. The gbbatest possible wisdom in contbiyanoe. The outworking and execu- 
tion of the most sagacious measures (vers. 3 — 10). 

VI. Boldness at the moment of execution. (Ver. 11.) Caution, perhaps 
secrecy, up to a certain hour ; then openness and even daring will win the prize. 

VII. A bbvbbent attitude towabd the great Disfoseb of events. — 0. 

' Vers. 11 — 16. — Sin surprised at its failure. The success of this revolution, so long 
prepared and so admirably accomplished by Jehoiada, involved the ruin of one " wicked 
woman " (cb. xxiv. 7). It was inevitable that Athaliah must perish ; here we have 
the account of her fall. We have before us — 

I. Sin subprised at its own failure. This coup d'etat evidently came upon 
Athaliah with surprise. The twelfth verse describes the action of one that is both 
astonished and alarmed, who takes hasty measures to learn what is happening, and to 
provide for her own interests. Suddenly and unexpectedly the blow fell upon her 
head. She was pursuing her evil course, reckoning on future years of power and pos- 
session, and in the very midst of her iniquity judgment overtook and overthrew her. 
How continually does this happen, though it may be on a smaller scale and in humbler 
spheres 1 Sin appears to succeed, holds up its head in triumph for a while, defies all 
justice, human and Divine ; then suddenly the ground opens beneath its feet, and it is 
■wallowed up. Its temporary success is only an incident in its short-lived career ; it 
is a stage on its way to failure and humiliation. The foolish man aoes nut unuaratand 



276 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh, xxiu. 1—21. 

this; he thinks it is a proof that God is afar off or is quite indifferent; he takes it aa 
a sign that he may safely disregard the solemn warnings of God's Word. But he it 
foolish ; he does not understand the course of things. " When the wicked spring as 
the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity do flourish ; it is that they shall be 
destroyed for ever " (Ps. xcii. 7 ; see also Ps. Ixxiii. 2 — 20). We may be surprised and 
pained at the prosperity of the wicked, at the enthronement of the sanguinary and the 
selfish. Where is God's righteousness ? where is the penalty of sin, we ask 1 Wait, 
and we shall see. The end will come before long. The shameless usurper, man or 
woman, will perish ; the guilty empire will be overthrown. Suddenly or gradually 
their fate will fall upon them. "How are they brought into desolation, as in a 
moment 1 " Nor is it only the man or woman that rises to eminence and to a great 
estate who will prove the truth of this. Any one who hardens himself against Qoi 
stands in the most serious danger of being "suddenly destroyed, and that without 
remedy," like the guilty woman at Jerusalem. 

II. Enthusiabm undeb a wise contbol. There must hive been the greatest 
excitement raised and felt on this occasion. Everything contributed to kindle popular 
feeling and to raise it to its highest point. When they surrounded the little child 
and anointed him with the sacred oil, and put the crown on his young head and cried, 
" God save the king 1 " we may be sure that the emotion which on some supreme 
occasions fills and fires a multitude of people, was then as intense as it could be (see 
ver. 13) ; but Jehoiada held it under a wise control. And when Athaliah appeared, 
and when they looked at her, and remembered what she had done and what a blight 
and a ciuse she had been to the land, they might well have slain her on the spot. 
But the priest of Jehovah would not have the sacred place profaned with her blood, 
and he stayed their hand ; they conducted her beyond the sacred precincts, and not till 
then did they inflict justice upon her. Peeling should never rise too high to be con- 
trolled by our judgment, especially strong feeling against any individual, man or 
woman. If we let our feelings carry our judgment along with them, we shall be sure 
to do that which we shall afterwards regret and which may be quite irreparable. Nor 
is any man at liberty to say that he is constitutionally impulsive and cannot control 
himself. It may be a more difficult duty in some natures than it is in others ; but it 
is every man's serious and sacred obligation to rule his own spirit, to maintain a 
mastery over his affections and his impulses and his resentments. This is to be the 
excellent result of daily discipline, of strenuous endeavour, of constant prayer. 

III. The beevioe op destruction. "Then all the people went to the house of 
Baal, and brake it down," etc. (ver. 17). As a rule, the way in which we serve Christ 
wisely and permanently is the act of construction, of btiUding up. Better to sow 
a seed than to pluck up a root ; better to raise a Christian sanctuary than to knock 
down a heathen temple ; better to implant thoughts of reverence and love than to 
rebuke and wither the profane word or the evil habit. But there is a time to plant 
and also to pluck up ; a time to kill as well as to heal ; a time to break down as well 
as to build up (Eccles. iii. 2, 3). There are evil and hurtful people to be put out of 
the room, pernicious books and papers to be put into the fire, ruinous institutions to l>e 
■uppressed by the strong hand of law, deadly practices to be sternly forbidden. There 
is a time when " slaughter is God's daughter," when the destructive hand ii the 
organ of the will of Jesus Christ. — C. 

Ver. 16. — 2%e hasis of national prmptrity. Jehoiada knew that it would be of very 
little use to be rid of one ruler and to place another on the throne unless the nation 
itself could be bound in strong bonds to Jehovah, its true and almighty Sovereign. 
Hence the action he took as here described. 

I. The tbub babes of national pbospbritt. Not a population outgrowing that 
of all other countries ; nor an army and navy such as no other nation can equip ; nor 
B full national exchequer ; nor an extensive and extending territory. A country may 
have any or even all of these things, and yet be declining in strength and on the road 
to ntter weakness and decay. The foundation of a people's strength is in (he possession 
rf the Divine favour. And thii because : 1. God will grant his Divine blessing to 
those that seek him. 2. And because God " loves righteousness and hates iniquity," 
whether in the individual man or in the nation ; and H is in " the fear of the Loid " 



DH. xxm. 1— 21.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 277 

th»t all moral and spiritual integrity rests as in its veiy root and source. That 
people, therefore, which wovdd live and thrive must be a people seeking Qod's face and 
acting in accordance with his will. Then will it enjoy hia blessing — that faTour and 
succour with which it cannot fail to prosper, without which it is bound to falL 

II. A BOUBOE or SPIRITUAL STBENGTH. Jehoiada took advantage ef the dynastio 
revolution to make it an occasion for entering into a solemn covenant " between all the 
people and between the king, that they should he the Lord's people" The time was 
suitable for this renewal of liheir covenant with God. He himself, a priest of the Lord, 
had headed, indeed had originated and effected, the overthrow of the old idolatrous 
r^ime ; the young king was to be placed on the throne as a worshipper of Jehovah, 
and now they might pledge themselves, in the most solemn and binding form, to be 
loyal to that Divine Lord whose, indeed, they were by a thousand ties. It was wisely 
and worthily done. Acts of national acknowledgment of God must need be rare. But 
it is open to Churches, to families, and especially to individual men, to renew their vows 
of attachment to their Divine Lord; to aCBrm to themselves or to declare to tbeir 
friends and neighbours that they are " the Lord's people." It is right and wise to 
employ any and every favourable opportunity of doing this. Such opportunity ia 
found in : 1. The time when the soul returns to God from the far country of indifference 
and disloyalty, and realizes that it is admitted to the Father's home. 2. The time 
when the spirit is recalled from a temporary lapse, and again recognizes the supreme 
claims of a Divine Redeemer. 3. When we meet one another at the table of the Lord, 
and there are vividly reminded of the supreme fact that he "gave himself for us" unto 
shame and death. 4. On the reception of any special, personal, or domestic mercies at 
the kind hand of our heavenly Father. — C. 

Ver. 21. — First purity, then peace. " And the city was quiet, after that they had 
slain Athaliah with the sword." We can conceive of many occasions when the 
" slaying of a woman with the sword" should not and would not lead to quietude, but 
to unrest, to turbulence, and to strife. But this " wicked woman," Athaliah, was the 
impersonation of usurpation and of idolatry. To slay her was to " put away the evil 
thing" from above and from the midst of the people of God. It was an act of purga- 
tion, of cleansing of the nation's conscience. It was a spiritual upheaval, throwing off 
a heavy weight that rested on the spirit of obedience. It was an act of excision, 
cutting off the guilty "right hand" that the " whole body " might be saved. If there 
be in the way of our conscientious adhesion to the cause, and engagement in the ser- 
vice, of Christ any such obstacle as was this Athaliah to the people of Judah, then no 
half-measures will suffice. The evil, whatever it be, must be slain with the sword, 
must be " done to death," must be relentlessly rooted out ; then, and net till then, will 
there be quiet through all the region of the soul. We may find this Athaliah of 
ours in — 

L An iksincbbe pbofession of faith we no longer hold, and consequently a dis- 
loyal practice in which we do not believe. 

II. An immobal ob injubious habit, which may be secretly cherished, but which 
we know to be guilty. 

III. An unlawfdIi oain, which our conscience condemns. 

IV. A COMPANIONSHIP (or companionships), which cannot be retiuned while Jem 
Christ is honoured and obeyed. — C. 

Vers. 1 — ^11. — The coronation of Joash. L Pbbpabationb fob thb cbbkhoxt. 
("Vers. 1 — 10.) 1. Jehoiada's covenant with the captains. (Ver. 1.) (1) The time. 
In the seventh year of Joash's life, when Jehoiada felt that matters were ripe for a 
revolution. Six years of Athaliah as queen had put the people out of love with her 
person and practices. Even those about her court were becoming intolerant of her 
tyrannies and idolatries. Besides, six years had transformed the babe Jehoshabeath had 
rescned into a boy, a miniature king, who would much more easily and effectually 
arrest the popular imagination than an infant in arms. And, finally, Jehoiada had 
himself had leisure to watch the current of the times, to learn the temper and disposi- 
tion of the people, to test the characters of those upon whose aid he must rely, to 
acquaint himself with all that would need to be done, and generally to mature hia 



278 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [on. xxiii. 1—21. 

plans. In the seventh year he judged that the hour had struck for an attempt to 
liberate the country from the yoke of Athaliah, and to restore the crown of David to 
its rightful heir. Many projects otherwise promising are lost by being launched forth 
prematurely, and many fail through want of " striking while the iron is hot " (Eccles, 
iii. 1 — 8), (2) The persons. Jehoiada called to his aid five centurions of the queen's 
body-guard, whom he probably knew to be disaffected towards the queen and favourable 
to a change in the government (2 Kings xL 4), and whose names are given — ^Azariah, 
" whom Jehovah aids ; " the son of Jeroham, " who is loved ; " Ishmael, " whom God 
hears," the son of Jehohanan, " Jehovah is gracious ; '*" Azariah, the son of Obed, 
"worshipping;" Maaseiah, "work of Jehovah," the son of Adaiah, "whom Jehovah 
adorns j " Elishaphat, " whom God judges," the son of Zichri, " famous ; " — ^all men of 
renown ; good, if their characters were reflected in their names ; capable, as their civil 
rank showed. (3) The object. To depose Athaliah — trebly lawfiil, because, as a usurper, 
she had climbed into the throne by bloodshed and violence, and had therefore no just 
title to the sceptre j because, as a wicked ruler, her longer continuance in power would 
endamage the best interests, and even endanger the existence of the state ; and because, 
so long as she wore the crown, the real heir to the throne was defrauded of his rights. 
Whether, in the first instance, Jehoiada mentioned the existence of Joasb is doubtful. 
2. The nation's covenant with the king. (1) The representatives of the people sum- 
moned. The captains to whom this work was entrusted went about (ver. 2), no doubt 
privately in Judah, and invited all the Levites and heads of fathers' houses in every 
city to a secret convention in Jerusalem. (2) The people's representatives convened. 
In obedience to the high priest's call, those invited by his messengers came. The con- 
gregation consisted of the priests and Levites, the heads of fathers' houses, and the 
captains of the guards, with their men (?). (3) The people's legitimate sovereign pro- 
duced. The meeting was held in the temple court. At the proper moment Joash 
was produced (ver. 3 ; 2 Kings xi. 4), and the story of his preservation rehearsed. (4) 
The people's duty pointed out. Skilfully done by Jehoiada, who simply said, "Behold, 
the king's son shall reign, as the Lord hath said of the sons of David ; " it was an inti- 
mation that the crown belonged to Joash by Divine appointment, and a hint to them 
to see that Jehovah's promise to their ancestor should not faiL (5) The people's assent 
given. The effect of Jehoiada's action in producing Joash and in citing the Messianic 
promise (2 Sam. vii. 12) was electrical. With one heart and voice the people pledged 
themselves to the revolution, to depose Athaliah and to crown Joash. 3. 2%e arrange- 
ments/or the coup d'etat. (1) The disposition of the priests and Levites. These should 
be divided into two main bodies, those who entered on their temple duties (ver. 4 ; 
2 Kings xi. 5) on the sabbath (the day fixed for the revolution), and those who retired 
from them (ver. 8 ; 2 Kings xi. 7). The former should again divide themselves into 
three companies. Of these, the first should act as " porters of the doors," or " keepers of 
the thresholds," i.e. were to mount guard at the gates of the temple (cf. 1 ChiY>n. iz. 
19); the second should stand "at tlie king's house," which may have been the apart- 
ments or cloister in which Joash was concealed (Keil), but more probably signified 
the palace (ver. 15), the approach from which to the temple it was desirable to guard ; 
the third should take up a position " at the gate of the foundation," or " the gate 
Jesod " — whether a temple gate (Stanley, Keil) or a palace gate (Bertheau) is uncertain. 
(On the discrepancies between these appointments and those in Kings, consult the 
Exposition.) The latter, i.e. the priests and Levites retiring from duty, should act a* 
the king's body-guard when he entered into and de[iarted from the temple. This work 
should be deputed to them alone, since they only as " holy " persons could pass into 
the temple. As their duty would be to ensure the safety of the king's person, they 
would be armed — "every man with his weapons in his hand." To them also should be 
entrusted the task of seeing that no unauthorized person came within the precincts of 
the sacred edifice, and of executing judgment on such as without warrant did. (2) The 
disposition of the people. These should be stationed in the court in which stood the 
brazen altar of Solomon. (3) The disposition of the " captains of hundreds " and their 
men. These, whom the Chronicler does not overlook while assigning the principal part 
in the forthcoming ceremony to the priests and Levites, should be employed to preserve 
order amongst the people, and guard against the possibility of attack from any of the 
queen's party who might become cognizant of what was going on. 



m. xxiu. 1—21.] TUE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 279 

IL Proceedinos in the ceremony. (Vers. 8 — 11.) 1. The carrying out of th» 
above arrangements. When the sabbath fixed for the execution of the plot arrived, 
" the Levites and all the men of Judah did according to all things that Jehoiada had 
<x)minanded." Each priest, with his assistant Levites, went to his appointed place— 
those that entered on their temple duties to their different guards, as above explained ; 
those that retired from service, instead of departing to their homes — " for Jehoiada dis- 
missed not the courses " — to the new work of guarding the king's person, also as above 
explained. The former mounted guard at the temple gates, the latter asgumed their 
places inside the temple (inner) court, " from the right side of the house to the left side 
of the house, along by the altar and the temple," so as to be " by the king round 
about." The people generally stood in the outer court, the centurions and their 
hundreds formmg a circle round the inner court, between it and the people, so as to 
prevent any unauthorized person from passing within the house. 2. The arming of 
the captaint. " Jehoiada delivered to them the spears, bucklers, and shields, that haid 
been King David's, which were in the house of God" (ver. 9). These were intended for 
themselves and their men (Bertheau), either because they had come into the temple 
unarmed (Keil), having left their weapons in the palace on leaving duty (Blihr), or 
because Jehoiada wished David's crown to be won back by David's weapons (Ewald, 
Stanley), or perhaps he judged that, as the work they were about to he employed iu 
was Ckid's, so the weapons they should use should also be God's. 3. The production 
of the hoy-prince. When everything was ready, Joash, encompassed by armed Levites, 
marched from the priest's house into the temple court, and took up his station at one 
of the pillars leading into the inner court (ch. xxiii. 13 ; 2 Kings xi. 14), so as to be 
seen by the priests and Levites in the inner, and the captains and people in the outer 
court. 4. The cormiation of the heir to the throne. Jehoiada (with the people assent- 
ing) placed upon the brow of Joash the royal diadem, "probably a band studded with 
jewels — the first direct example of a coronation " (Stanley). 5. The delivering to him 
of the testimony. Not the insignia regia, i.e. the regalia of the kingdom (Clericus), or 
the phylacteries of Deut. vi. 8 (Grotius), or Samuel's laws of the kingdom (1 Sam. viii. 
10); but the Law of Moses, often called the "testimony" (Exod. xxv. 16; xxvii. 21; 
Numb. iz. 16 ; x. 11 ; xvii. 4), which was now presented to the young king in th« 
form of a roll, to indicate that his life and government both should be regulated by its 
precepts (Deut. xvii. 18 — ^20). 6. The anointing of the new sovereign. Done by 
Jehoiada and his sons, this symbolized Joash's consecration to a theocratic or holy 
office, that of ruling over Jehovah's people. So Saul (1 Sam. x. 1) and David (1 Sam. 
xvi. 11) were anointed by Samuel, Solomon by Zadok the priest (1 Kings i. 39), and 
Jehu by Elisha's messenger (2 Kings ix. 6). 7. Th/" acclamation of the people. When 
the coronation ceremony ended, the people clapped their hands (2 Kings xi. 12) in 
expression of their joy (Ps. xlvii. 1), and shouted, as their wont was at coronations, 
" God save the king I '' or, " Let the king live 1 " (1 Sam. x. 24 ; 2 Sam. xvi. 16). (On 
*• clapping of hands," see the Theological Monthly, February, 1889, p. 135.) 

Learn : 1. It is not always wrong for ministers of religion to take part in politics. 
2. There are times when rebellion against the powers that be is a solemn duty. 3. 
Neither God's house nor God's day can be put to a better use than to set a crown upon 
the head of God's anointed. 4. In Church and state alike each man has his own place 
and work. 5. Kings may expect their thrones to be stable if these are erected on the 
good will of their suljjects. 6. No sovereign can rule well who takes not the Law of (Jod 
for his guide. 7. A great and good man in troubled times invaluable to Church or 
state. What could Judah have done without Jehoiada? 8. No man can miss the 
destiny God has in store for him. — W. 

Vers. 12 — 15. — The fall of Athaliah. I. A startled queen. (Vers. 12, 13.) 1, 
An unusttal sound. Secretly as the coronation of Joash had been conducted, Athaliah's 
quick ear caught the noise of trampling feet, clapping hands, and shouting voices that 
issued from the temple on the other side of the Tyropoean valley. Guilty consciences, 
of sovereigns, as of common sinners, are prone to be startled by strange sounds (Job 
xviii. 11, 12); cf. 'Macbeth' (act ii. sc. 2), "I have done the deed: didst thou not 
hear a noise ? " 2. An unexpected sight. Mustering her guards, Athaliah proceeded 
(torn her palace across the bridj^u that upinned th 9 valley, and entered the temple court, 



280 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxm. 1—21. 

when a most unwelcome spectacle met her gaze — a boy standing on a raised platform 
in front of the inner court, probably the brazen scaffold of Solomon (ch. vi. 13), his 
head encircled with a diadem, his hand grasping a roll of parchment as if it were a 
sceptre ; beside him Jehoiada the priest, the princes of the people, and the Levitical 
trumpeters ; around him all the people of the land, rejoicing and singing. 3. An 
unrestrained cry. Whether or not Athaliah recognized in Joash one of Ahaziah's sons, 
whom she fancied she had murdered six years before, she had no difficulty in compre- 
hending the situation. A usurper herself, she perfectly understood the scene she 
beheld to mean revolution. Ben^ng her garments in horror at the spectacle (2 Kiags 
Ti. 30; Ezra ix. 3), and perhaps in involuntary acknowledgment that the hour of her 
overthrow had struck (1 Sam. xv. 27, 28 ; 1 Kings xi. 30), she likewise rent the air 
with a shriek of " Treason I treason 1 " (cf. 2 Kings ii. 23). 

II. An avbngino priest. (Vers. 14, 15.) 1. A charge to the captains. (1) Con- 
cerning the queen. To arrest her, to lead her beyond the precincts of the temple, to put 
her to death. Sudden and peremptory, this order was absolutely necessary. Divine 
justice and public safety alike demanded Athaliah's blood. A murderess herself (ch. 
zxii. 10), her life was forfeit to the law (Gen. ix. 6). An idolatress of the rankest type, 
she had incurred the sentence, " I will cast your carcases upon tlie carcases of your 
idols, and my soul shall abhor you " (Lev. xxvi. 30). A conspiratress, so long as she 
waa spared the life of Joash was not secure. (2) Concerning her adherents. That they 
also should be put to the sword. To follow Athaliah, defend her person or champion 
her cause, was to be guilty of leze majesty against Joash, and indeed against Jehovah, 
whose vicegerent Joash was. 2. Its execution hy the captains. (1) They hurried the 
unhappy queen beyond the precincts of the temple, that the holy place might not be 
polluted with human blood. (2) They conducted her forth to the vicinity of the 
king's stables, the people opening their ranks and making way for her to pass. (3) 
They slew her there, within sight of the palace she had usurped and of the temple she 
had desecrated. As by violence she had climbed into the throne, by violence she wai 
hurled from it. As she had lived so doubtless she died, in unbelief and sin — a victim 
at once of popular fury and Divine retribution (Prov. li. 31). 

Learn: 1. That the way of transgressors is hard. 2. That the wages of sin la 
death. 3, That they who take the sword shall perish with the sword. 4. That verily 
there is a God who judgeth in the earth. 6. That with what measure one metes it 
■hall be measured to him again. — W. 

Vers. 16 — 21. — I%e dose of a revolution. I. Oovbitant-makino. (Ver. 16.) Bead 
in cotmection with 2 Kings xi. 17, this verse points to two covenant transactions. 1. 
Between Jehovah and the king and people. (1) In this the priest Jehoiada acted ai 
Jehovah's representative — symbolizing the greater High Priest over the house of Gkid, 
who in the nevr and better covenant of grace is to sinful men the Image of the invisible 
God (Heb. L 3 ; iii. 1 ; iv. 14; t. 5). (2) Of this the object was that they, Joash and 
his subjects, should be Jehovah's people, observing his worship and keeping his com- 
mandments, and that he should be their God, defending them against their adversaries, 
and bestowing on them temporal and spiritual, individual and national prosperity. 
This was the substance of the covenant Jehovah had made with the nation at Sinai 
(Exod. xix. 3 — 6 ; Deut. v. 2 ; xxvi. 17, 18), and is the tenor of Grod's covenant with 
his people in the gospel (Heb. viii. 8 — 13). 2. Between the king and the people. (1) 
On his side that he would govern in accordance with the testimony put into his hand 
that day ; and (2) on their side that they would be loyal to the throne on which he 
sat. This covenant is implicitly involved in all relationships of king and subjects. An 
unjnst and tyrannical niler ipso facto violates the contract between himself and hii 
people, and to that extent absolves them from allegiance to his authority. Piety in the 
sovereign and loyalty in the people are the two best supports of an earthly throne. 

IL £>0li-FnBOlNO. In a fit of reforming zeal the excited people entered without 
delay on a crusade against the false worship which had been introduced and patronized 
by Athaliah. 1. 27ie temple of Baal wrecked. This idolatrous shrine had probably 
been erected by Jehoram to please Athaliah (ch. xxi. 11 ; Josephus, 'Ant.,' ix. 7. 4), 
as a similar edifice had been constructed in Samaria by Ahab, under the influence of 
Jezebel (1 Kiogs zvi. 32). Most likely it stood on Mount Moriah, alongside of the 



OH. xxm. 1—21.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLEa 281 

temple, if not within its outer court (Thenius, Bertheau), rattier than on a different 
elevation (Bahr), Its proximity to the temple would account for its having hecoms 
10 soon a prey to popular fury, as when building its vicinity to the temple suggested 
. the idea of tearing down the temple walls for stones to construct it (ch. xxiv. 7). Now 
« day of Nemesis had dawned for it, as similar days had already overtaken its builders. 
Iti walls and pillars, altars and images, were shattered in pieces. Ckimpare the destruc- 
tion of the Boman Catholic edifices in Perth on May 11, 1559, after a sermon by Knox. 
" The congregation [in the church of St. John's] was still undispersed, when a priest 
came in, went up to the altar, opened the tabernacle, and prepared to say Mass. A boy 
who was present said something insolent. The priest struck him ; and the boy, snatch- 
ing up a stone, flung it at the crucifix, which fell broken to the ground. The conmion 
instinct shot through the gathered crowd ; altar, ornaments, images, in a few momenta 
lay in ruins on the chancel floor. The saints were flung from their niches, the storied 
windows dashed in atoms. Then the cry rose, ' To the Greyfriais ! ' and in an hour 
or two the poor monks, started from their nnonday dinner, were aHrift upon the world, 
and their homes going up in smoke and flame into the sky " (Frouiie's • History of 
England,' vol. vi. pp. 228, 229). " For a day or two after Knox preached his famous 
sermon, the besom of destruction was exceedingly busy in and about the fair city. 
Somebody — perhaps Knox himself — had remarked that ' if the nests were pulled down 
the rooks would fly away ; ' and so aU bands were laid to the nests. Popular fury raged 
uncontrollably. The monasteries and chapels which bad given stately adornment to 
the city and its environs were reduced to ruins, only the bare and broken walls remain- 
ing, and most of these gaunt wrecks speedily disappeared " (Fittis's ' Ecclesiastical 
Annals of Perth,' 1885, p. 81). 2. The priest of Baal slain. Mattan the "priestling" 
(the Targum), having attempted to lead the people astray, had incurred the penalty of 
death (Deut. xiii. 9), which was summarily inflicted, perhaps as Moses had directed, 
by stoning him beside the altars at which he had served. Compare the murder of 
Zechariah by Joash's minions in the later years of his reign (ch. xxiv. 20). 

in. WoBSHiP-EBPOKMiNa. (Vers, 18, 19.) 1. Irregularities corrected. The offices 
of the house of the Lord with reference to burnt offerings were arranged in accordance 
with the prescriptions of the Law of Moses. No worship was acceptable under the 
Hebrew economy that did not adhere to the regulations of that divinely inspired ritual; 
no worship ii acceptable under the gospel dispensation that departs from the rubric 
laid down by Jesus in his sermon at the well (John iv. 24). 2. Impurities prevented. 
Watchers were established at the temple gates, that none should enter in who were 
in any respect unclean, i.e. ceremonially defiled. Unrler the Law such persons wer« 
leparated from the congregation (Numb. xix. 20 ; Lev. xi. 24 ; xxii. 5), and, until they 
were purified, could take no part in the solemnities of Divine worship. The truth 
therein symljolized was that worship derives its quality from the character of the 
worshipper. An unclean Israelite could not render acceptable worship to a Gkid holy 
as Jehovah was. Not until an atonement had been offered for his trespass by the 
officiating priest, and his body had been washed in pure water, could he take his place 
in the congregation of them who had a right to draw near to Jehovah. And neither 
can any render acceptable worship under the gospel who do not do so on the l»sis 
of an atonement offered for them by the great High Priest over the house of God, and 
with the Heaven-inspired emotions of a renewed life, " with hearts sprinkled from an 
evil conscience, and Iwdies washed with pure water " (Heb. x. 19 — 22). 3. Etlaritiet 
ntperadded. That the service of Jehovah was designed to be a perennial fount of joy 
for Jehovah's people was understood and proclaimed by Moses (Deut. xxxiii. 29). 
Until David's time this was not so widely apprehended as might have been expected. 
The second king of Israel, however, discerned with penetrating vision that the worship 
of Jehovah should ever be accompanied with gladness (Ps. t. 11 ; xxxii. 11 ; Ixviii. 3 ; 
Ixxxix. 15, 16 ; c. 1, 2) ; and in order to express this idea, with the concurrence and 
approval of the captains of the host, he " separated to the service of the sons of Asaph, 
and of Heman, and of Jeduthun, those who should prophesy with harps, with psalteries, 
and with cymbals " (1 Chron. xxv. 1). During the reigns of Jehoram, Ahaziah, and 
Athaliah this part of the Divine service had been discontinued. When Joash acceded 
to the throne it was restored. So should Christians always serve God " with sinking 
and rejoicing ; " and this they will do in proportion as they are filled with that Spirit 



282 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ou. %xiv. 1—27. 



of which the fruit is joy (OoL v. 22 ; Bph. v. 18, 19 ; Phil. iv. 4 ; 1 Thess. ▼. 16 ; 1 
John i, 4). 

IV, KiHo-ENTHRONiNO. (Ver. 20.) 1. Led by the priest. Having completed his 
arrangements for the restoration of the temple Eervice, Jehoiada proceeded with what 
was still needful to perfect the revolution. Lifting the boy-king from the platform, he 
led him forth from the temple down the causeway which conducted towards the palace. 
2. Escorted hy the people. As the crowd a little before had opened its ranks to let 
Athaliah pass to her destruction, so now it opens them again to let the young sovereign 
march to his regal residence. Probably preceded by the centurions, the princes, and 
the heads of fathers' houses, as in the temple he had been encompassed by the Levites, 
he b followed by the people of the land. 3. Conducted through the upper gate. 
This, called " the gate of the guard " (2 Kings xi. 19), was not a temple door (Keil), 
but an entrance into the palace (Bertheau), perhaps the principal one, through which 
the royal guards were accustomed to pass. It was fitting that David's heir should 
publicly take possession of David's house. 4. Set upon the throne. This the natural 
termination of the ceremony. Joash was established upon the throne of the kingdom, 
the throne of his fathers, the throne which derived its authority from Jehovah alone. 

V. Popular bbjoicino. (Ver. 21.) 1. Tlie country was glad — that the queen was 
slain. Her government had been a usurpation and a curse. Nobody lamented her. 
If she had a funeral, those who bore her to her last resting-place gave vent to their 
emotions, not in sobs, but in songs. If they shed tears above her sepulchre, these were 
tears of joy, not of grief. A terrible commentary on any one's life, that one's contem- 
poraries, whether equals or dependents, are glad to be rid of one — to see one's career 
ended, one's breath stopped, and one's carcase huddled out of sight I 2. The city wot 
quiet— though the queen was slain. No one dreamt of drawing a sword to avenge her 
assassination. Those who knew her best, who had most frequent opportunities of 
studying her character and observing her behaviour, had nothing to say in extenuation 
of her faults or in cotnmiseration of her fate. The consciences of her people were 
satisfied that she had deserved her doom. Perhaps the pious among them added, " So 
let all thine enemies perish, Jehovah " ( Judg. v. 31). 

Learn : 1. That the secret of all true prosperity, for Church or state, for society or 
for the individual, is piety towards God and rectitude towards man. 2. That true 
religion can admit of no compromise with false religion, but must aim at its extermina- 
tion. 3. That in all matters of faith and practice, doctrine and duty, ritual and worship, 
the will of God, not the opinion of man, is the supreme rule. 4. That the enemy most 
requiring to be guarded against by God's worshippers is sin. 5. That the. King's house 
for Christians is not the material temples in which they worship, but their own hearts, 
in which Christ desires to be enthroned. 6. That it is legitimate to rejoice over the 
destruction of the enemies of God and his people (Prov. xi. 10). — W. 



EXPOSITION. 



OHAPTEB XXIV. 



This chapter contains the entire career of 
Joash, and is answered to by the twelfth 
ohapterof 2 Kings. It tells of Joash's fidelity 
to God, and his worship and temple, while 
Jehoiada's life lasted (vers. 1 — 14) ; of his 
departure from God and permission of 
idolatry afterwards (vers. 15—22); of the 
punishment he received at the hands of the 
Syrians (vers. 23, 24) ; and of his miserable 
end (vers. 25 — 27). The differences between 
our chapter and the parallel, in respect of 
what it both omits and supplies, are much 
larger than usual, and are very interesting 



and suggestive in the character of them. 
These points will be marked particularly in 
the notes underneath as they occur. 

Ver. 1. — His mother's name . . . Zlbiah 
of Beersheba. We do not read, in the brief 
account of Ahaziah, Joash's father, whom 
he married. Nothing is us yet known of 
Zibiah, but there must be some significance 
underlying the mention of her name and 
native place, or known place of residence. 
The references Amos v. 5 and viii. 14 may 
possibly contain the due, in holding up 
Beersheba as the most idolatrous of idola- 
trous places. Beersheba offers another refer- 
enoeof unhappy associations (1 Sam. viii. 2). 
As a terminus of the land, "Dan to Beer- 
sheba" (Judg. XX. 1; 2 Sam. xxiv. 2; 



OH. XXIV. 1—27.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



283 



1 ChroB. .1x1. 2) ; as a ternimus of the divided 
Judah, "Beersheba to Mount Epliraim" 
(ch. xix. 4), " Geba to Beersheba" (2 Kings 
zxiii. 8); and as a tenuinns of this Judah 
yet rednoed after the Captivity, " Beersheba 
to the valley of Hinnom" (Neh. xi. 30);— 
ita mention is notorious. The references 
Gen. xxi. 31 and xxvi. 18, 31—33 are full of 
interest, as bearing on the way in which the 
epot is first known in Bible history. 

Yer. 2.— All the days of Jehoiada. Of 
the " forty years " mentioned in the former 
Terse, these " days of Jehoiada" will cover, 
some, at any rate, say, two years more than 
"twenty-two years;" for compare our vers. 
6, 12 — 15 with the parallel, 2 Kings xii. 6, 
7, 9, noting the thenceforward silence there 
respecting Jehoiada, and even making ample 
allowance for it. 

Vet. 3. — That special note is made of 
Jehoiada's selecting of the wives may at any 
fate point to the suggestion that he was all 
a father to Joash, and both for his own 
sake and the kingdom's sake anxious as to 
the character of the women by whom a new 
kingly seed should take rise in placo of tliat 
destroyed by Athaliah (ch. xxii. 10). Our 
ch. XXV. 1 leaves it probable that " Jeho- 
adan of Jerusalem " was one of these, though 
it is likely enough that Joash married, 
whether her m some one else, be/ore he had 
reached the age of twenty-one. It is also 
quite likely that we may read between the 
lines, that in selecting two wives for his 
young and loved ward, Jehoiada hoped and 
prayed that Joash might not fall by sin 
like Solomon's (1 Kings xi. 3) and that 
of others of the kings of both Judah and 
Israel. 

Ver. 4. — ^To repair. The idea of this 
verb (B''in) is that of mahing new. 

Ver. 5. — To repair. The idea of this 
verb (pli;) is that of making ttrong. From 
year to year. The compound adverbial 
expression 'iD, here used for "from," em- 
braces the idea of " unfailingly from year to 
year." The command given here to the 
priests and Levites is expressed very differ- 
ently, though in no degree contradictorily, 
in the parallel (see its vers. 4, 5). The 
addition is there found, " every man of his 
acquaintance ; " this expression may glance 
•t the very supposable circumstance that 
the priest and Levite collecting deputations 
would naturally go respectively to the 
towns and cities where they had been 
located beforetime. A slight ambiguity is 
perhaps occasioned by the impression that 
the fourth verse (in the parallel) produces — 
that the priests and Levites should wait to 
receive, e.g., iu Jerusalem. This, however, 
is not what is said, and need not, therefore, 
be made into a difficulty. Howbeit the 
Levites hastened not. We are not told why 



this delay was, nor does the subsequent 
narrative seem to elucidate it, further than 
this — that the delay somehow seemed to rest 
with Jehoiada, as the king appealed to |jim 
for explanation. 

Ver. 6. — Jehoiada the chief; so. prieit, for 
comp. our ver. 11 ; oh. xix. 11 ; xxVi. 20. 
In each of these instances the Hebrew text 
shows ii'ti'iri, and the Authorized Version 
"chief" except inconsistently in our ver 
11. Revised Version " chief" in all the in- 
stances. The name "priest" occurs just 
about six hundred and aixty-six times in 
the Old Tesiament, the title "high" or 
" chief priest " only about twenty-six times, 
the first occurrence being in Lev. xxi. 10, the 
last Zech. vi. 11 ; and both set forth by 
the Hebrew adjective ^"n^, as also in fifteen 
other of the occurrences. Seven times the 
word Bfi*! is the word employed, and n^ 
the other two times. In these last two 
cases, however (Ezra viii. 24, 29 ; x. 5), it 
is not " high priests " nor " chief priests " 
that are perhaps evtn really intended, but 
the " princes " of the priests, or those who, 
for whatever reasons of personal character- 
istics, were chief. Out of Judah and out of 
Jerusalem. The statement here is precise, 
that the call of money was to he made both 
in the cities of Judah and in tlie metropolis 
Jerusalem. The ooUeotion ; Hebrew, riNE'D ; 
Revised Version, belter, the tax of, etc. Of 
this we read in ExoJ. xxx. 13 — 15 ; xxxviii. 
25, 26 ; Numb. i. 30. It was of the uniform 
amount of half a sanctuary shekel, for rich 
or poor, and was ordered to be set apart 
" for the service of the tabernacle of the con- 
gregation," here called in the Authorized 
Version the tabernacle of witness ; Revised 
Version, the tent of the testimony. Exodus 
has nriD for our nnrn. Tliis source of 
money for the holy design of Joash is again 
most specifically stated in our ver. 9. The 
version of this whole transaction seems 
rather confusing as given in the parallel, 
where ver, 4 mentions three sources of mioney, 
without any quotation as such of the or- 
dained tax of Moses, which was apparently 
the first of those three, and where ver. 8, at 
first blush at any rate, might seem to imply 
recusant priests. The meaning, however, if 
probably the contrary, the verse purporting 
that the priests consented to forego what 
they had been accustomed on receiving to 
apply to some personal or current-funds 
purpose, and who consented to forego the 
superintending of the outlay of the money 
on the repairing, that it might be done with 
more expedition by "scribe" and high 
priest" (ver. 10; comp. ver. 16; both of 
the parallel). All these details the writer 
of Chronicles passes over, only pursuing the 
essential business, Joash'a pious resolve, tin 



284 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [en. xxiv. 1—27. 



delay in its execution, and how he finally 
overcame the obstructive delay. 

Vor. 7.— The sons of Athaliah. This 
verse's testimony against Athaliah's sons 
explains ch. xxi. 17, and is explained and 
corroborated by it. That wicked woman ; 
Hebrew, npBfnQn ; fern, noun, derivative of 
li»i; meaning strictly in the abstract, "the 
wickedness," equal to that incarnation of 
wickedness. All the dedicated things; t.<. 
tlie holy vessels, treasure, and holy furniture 
of the house of the Lord, had they desecrated, 
and robbed them thence to squander them 
on their Tarious Baals (ch. xvii. 3). 

Ver. 8. — A chest ; Hebrew, iriN piN, "one 
chest." This is more accurately described 
In ver. 9 of the parallel. Without at the 
gate of the house of the Lord; i.e. in the 
court opposite the porch, and, as we leam 
from the parallel, by the side of the altar of 
burnt offering. Now, not the priests gene- 
rally, but simply those who kept the door 
(probably the north door, Bzek. li. 35), 
receiving the contributions of tlie people at 
their hands, into their own hands deposited 
them ia the one chest. 

Ver. 9. — (See notes on ver. 6.) 

Ver. 10.— Tlntil they had made an end; 
Hebrew, rh'^h, piel infin. The meaning can 
scarcely be till enough was obtained, because 
day after day, as the next verse tells us, the 
chest was brought ; but either till those who 
had come that day to give had all given in 
their contributions, or, as some think with 
much less probability, till the cliest was full 
for the day. At the same time, the clause, 
occupying only one word in the original, 
may quite possibly purport to state sum- 
mai ily by anticipation that the same system 
was observed to the end, and the method 
of tlie chest not departed from. 

Ver. 11.— Unto the king's ofBoe. Not 
" office " in the modem technical busincBS 
sense ; the meaning is the care, charge, or 
custody of the king, the Hebrew word being 
niQS ; nor docs this necessitate the supposi- 
tion of the personal care of the king. The 
body of this verse leaves it quite open to 
possibility, in hai-mouy with the usage of the 
Hebrew language and its idiom, that the 
process described took place, if necessary, 
more than once in a day, and, on the other 
hand, not necessarily every evening. The 
change of the number of the verb in " they 
emptied," etc., and the apparent statement 
that those who emptied also carried back 
the chest, betoken that while the king's 
scribe (1 Kings iv. 3) and the high priest's 
officer stood by, the usual Levite function- 
aries did the work. The phrase, day by day, 
is not necessarily equivalent to every evening, 
but to time after <in\«. 

Ver. 12. — Gave it to snoh as did the work 



of the service ; i.e. the persons lesponsible 
for the work, or " that had the oversight of 
it" (2 Kings xii. 11). Carpenters. It is 
preferable to render here literally workmen 
or workers. Probably this clause purports 
tliat those responsible, as above, hired masons 
and workmen. And also such as wrought 
Supply the preposition found in tie Hebrew 
text, "to" before "such," and render again 
the same word 0«^nn) literally, workert of 
iron and brass. 

Ver. 18. — The work was perfected by their 
hands. The margin gives the literal render- 
ing, " healing " or health, or, i.e., recovery, 
"went up upon the work." The lively 
figure of the Hebrew word used (njnti) is 
very intelligible. The term is employed 
in only five other places, viz. Neh. iv. 7 
(Authorized Version, " The walls were made 
up ; " Eevised Version better. The repairing 
of the walls went forward) ; Isa. Iviii. 8 ; Jer. 
viii. 22; xxx. 17; xxxiii. 6; in each of 
which four instances, in both Authorized 
Version and Eevised Version, the literal 
rendering " health " or " healing" is found. 
In his state ; equivalent to in its itatelinesi, 
perhaps the Idea of the Hebrew word teisna 
[only used four other times, and then ren- 
dered once "tale" (Exod. v. 8), twice 
" composition " (ch. xxx. 32, 37), once 
" measure" (Ezek. xlv. 11)], being measure, 
or proportion, or rate. 

Ver. 14.— And to offer withal. The in- 
sertion of the italic type in the Authorized 
Version "withal" unnecesoarilylielps suggest 
uncertainty in this rendering, while the Re- 
vised Version gives that word in the ordi- 
nary type ; margin, both Authorized Version 
and Revised Version, gives " pestles." The 
Hebrew word is (ni^JJii) the hiph. infin. of 
the familiar verb n^JJ, or plural of 'Sg. with 
article prefixed ; this word, however, seems 
to occur only once (Prov. xxvii 22), and 
then in the singular number. The rest of 
the money . . . made vessels for the house of 
the Lord. This passage may harmonize not 
unsatisfactorily with the parallel (2 Kings 
xii. 13), and on the very suggestion of the 
circumstantial evidence that arises from the 
place in which the information of our own 
text is found, by laying emphasis on the 
expression, "the rest of the money." The 
writer of Kings meant that nothing inters 
fered with, nothing whatsoever ran even 
with the execution of the substantial work of 
reparation of the building, and he neglects 
to record that finally a remanet of money 
being available, vessels were made of it foi 
the inner furnishing of the house. 

Ver. 15. — But Jehoiada . . . died; an 
hundred and thirty years old. This good 
man, husband of lehoram's daughter (ch. 
xxii. 11), only comes to view in rirtue of 



OH. xiiv. 1— 27.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



285 



what his wife did, and what he did, on 
behalf of Joash the infant and Joash 
the king for the good of the nation or 
kingdom of Judah. We seem to know 
too little of him, and the parallel supplies 
considerably less than our text in OhTonicles, 
His age, as stated in this Terse when he 
died, seems very improbable, and for a very 
clear and admirable putting of the case, 
see Lord Arthur C. Heivey's article in 
Dr. Smith's 'Bible Dictionary,' i. 944. 
There is, however, no manifest or nven 
suspicious symptom of corruptness in the 
text just here, supported as it is by the 
Beptuagint and Josephus, by the stress laid 
on his old age, whether it showed a 
hundred and thirty years, or thirty years or 
flfty years (as have been variously suggested) 
fewer; the little fact, otiierwise looking 
very significant, that the expression, full of 
days, is used beside only of Abraham, Isaac, 
Job, and David, loses its pertinence in that 
very circumstance that it U used of David, 
whose age was in no way extreme. The 
age of the other three, however, exceeded 
this reputed age given to Jehoiada I 

Ver. 16.— The honour done Jehoiada well 
belonged to him, not only for his goodness, 
his greatness, his practical services to the 
kingdom, but for the fact that those prac- 
tical services had entailed the necessity of 
his standing in loco regis ' for some time. 
His royal alliance with Jehoram's daughter, 
and, if it were so, his extreme patriarchal 
age, may all have contributed to the honour 
now put upon him. Little stress can be 
laid, however, upon this last consideration, 
failing any other allusion to it, or any 
emphasized statement of what we have in 
our ver.. 15. 

Ver. 17. — The princes. These turned 
aside from the better part they had per- 
formed (ch. xxiii. 13, 20). Made obeisance ; 
Hebrew, flqriB'.'. This is the word that is 
used of the sheaves of the brethren of 
Joseph bowing down, according to his 
dream, to hii sheaf; it is also the repeatedly 
used word of the worship paid to Jehovah 
the true God, and to idols and false gods. 
The word occurs nearly two hundred times. 
The dbeimnce of these princes, therefore, on 
this occasion lacked nothing of the most 
pronounced character, and the worst species 
of flattery gained its disastrous ends. Joash 
must have been now about thirty-six years 
of age ; he was seven years old when he 
began to reign, he had reigned twenty-three 
years before the restoring of the temple (2 
Kings zii. 6), and a few years had elapsed 
since. The words of the princes, to which 
Joash hearkened, are not supplied by the 
parallel, which indeed at once proceeds to 
speak of the threatening attitude of the 
Syrian king Hazael, and of hew Joash 



bought him off. Our next verse, however, 
shows to what end those words tended. 

Ver. 18. — Served groves; Revised Ver- 
sion, the Asherim, correctly (see note, ch. 
xiv. 3). For this their trespass. Comparing 
the empliatio language of ver. 23, " destroyed 
all the princes of the people /rom among the 
people," we may conclude that stress is to 
be laid on the pronoun " their " in the pre- 
sent verse. The worship of the true Gtod 
was not left by the whole people, and we 
are not told it was by the king ; but (very 
probably through want of moral courage) 
he incurred the severest sort of blame, and 
was without even the excuse of strong per- 
sonal temptation. 

Ver. 19. — Prophets. The name of only 
one, Zechariah, as in next verse, is given 
(see by the side of this verse the emphatic 
and touching language of ch. xxxvi. 14 — 16). 

Ver. 20. — Came upon; margin, clothed; 
Bevised Version margin, clothed itself with 
(1 Ghron. xii. 18). Compare the beautiful 
expression of Eev. i. 10, "I was in the 
Spirit ; " it was not merely that the Spirit 
deigned to visit St. John in Patmos, but so 
possessed him that he was in the Spirit. 
The son of Jehoiada ; i.e. very possibly grand- 
son of Jehoiada (Jehoiada's great age the 
rather countenancing this interpretation) 
and "son of Barachias" (Matt, xxiii. 35). 
That ye cannot prosper. The Hebrew text 
says, "and ye will not prosper." This 
clause may read all the more forcibly if kept 
under the dominance of the why of the 
former, reminding us of such appeals as 
"Why will ye die?" etc. (ch. xv. 2; Deut. 
zxviii. throughout). Beading these two 
clauses in the preterite or present tense 
will make them neither less forcible nor 
less correct, so indicating that they, the 
princes and the nation, were already begin- 
ning to eat the fruit of their ways, and 
" rumours of war," if not war itself, were on 
them. 

Ver. 21. — Stoned him. Yet this was their 
Law's punishment for themselves, for idolaters 
(Lev. XX. 2). At the oommandment of the 
king. The king, who had yielded to the 
flattering obeisance and worship of the 
princes, is now driven on a grievous length 
further. In the court of the house of the 
Lord. So Matt, xxiii. 85, "between the 
temple [Bevised Version, ' sanotuary '] and 
the altar." 

Ver. 22. — Bememhered not the kindness 
(Oen. xl. 23). The Lord look upon it, and 
require it. So, too, the Bevised Version, 
which also, according to its custom, removes 
the italic type from the two neuter pronouns 
" it." But probably a better and correoter 
rendering is, " The Lord will see and will 
require " (for it is not necessary to regard 
this as a prayer of Zechariah); and thus 



288 



THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xxiv. 1—27. 



bring it Into comparison with those divinest 
prayers of the Saviour and of St. Stephen. 
The words on dying Zechnriah's lips wore 
rerhaps rather the vivid reminiBcence of his 
own well-versed knowledge of the Law, or 
"the Scriptures" (Gen. ix. 5; xlii. 22). 
The sentence of the dying priest and pro- 
phet in one, is, by the writer of Chronicles 
at any rate, directed in its fall with fearful 
straightnesa to the door of Joash the king 
himself. Remarkable as is the absence of 
the matter of this and the fire preceding 
verses from the parallel, it will not escape 
notice how it is implied in vers. 17, 18 there, 
while the inclusion of it here is again in 
patent haimony with the great object of the 
writer. 

Ver. 23.— At the end of the year ; Hebrew, 
naipn; margin, both of the Authorized 
Version and the Eevised Version, revolution. 
The word is found three other times, Exod. 
xxxiv. 22 ; 1 Sam. i. 20 ; Ps. xix. 7. The 
versions, of course, express correctly what is 
meant, but probably the season of spring is 
also conveyed (2 Sam. xi. 1 ; 1 Chron. xx. 1% 
The host of Syria. Their king was Hazael 
(2 Kings xii. 17), whether actually with 
them is perhaps not certain, but the last 
clause in the verse just quoted would seem 
to convey that impression. He was King of 
Damascus (Aram, or Syria), and having 
already temporarily mastered Israel (2 Kings 
xiii. 3, 4, 22), the way was paved to Gath 
(oh. xi. 8; xvli. 11), whence wistful eyes 
were bent on Jerusalem, nearly tlirrty miles 
distant thence. Destroyed all the princes 
of the people; i.e. as in the next verse. 
And sent all the spoil. Whether intended 
BO here or not, probably the strict subject of 
the verb in this clause is Joash and his 
counsellors (ver. 18 in parallel), in their 
fright— and just fright — ^helpless after the 
slaughter chronicled in our following verse, 
bribing off Hazael and his host, as in parallel. 
The suggestion is most plausible that tidings 
of Zechariah's martyrdom and of the occa- 
siou of it were the very incentive to Hazael's 
incursion, and an illustration of the ' means " 
by which God works, and by which he 
wrought his purpose in this instance. The 
Bpoil of them, If this means only the Bpoil 
of the defeated army strictly, then our text 
gives no trace of the contents of ver. 18 in 
parallel just alluded to; but the frequent 
dislocation incident to copieil extracts and 
matter borrowed from original sources, and 
so often evidenced in the present history, 
when we have been comparing the two 
derived acconnts to which we are indebted 
for it, incline us to the above view, as one 
quite open at any rate to possibility. 

Ver. 24. — Came with a small company . . . 
the Lord delivered a very great host (so 
Ijov. xivi. 8 ; Deut. ixviii. 25, etc.). So they 



executed judgment against Joash. The 
Hebrew says literally, "and on Joash they 
executed judgments." What the judgments 
were we do not read, but surely it is pro- 
bable that they are glanced at in the next 
verse, " For they left him in great [or, ' many '] 
diseases," or perhaps " in great illness " (ch. 
xxi. 15). 

Ver. 25. — They left him in great diseases. 
See note above, and observe further that 
this parenthetic clause, as treated in both 
Authorized Version and Eevised Version, 
prepares the way for what follows, and 
especially for the fact that it was on his bed 
that they slew him. Bender thus, And 
after they had hetalen themselves away, 
whereas they left him sorely ill, his own 
servants conspired . . . and slew him in his 
hed. His own servants. These had the 
opportunity the rather at hand, in that he 
was so ill and in bed. That he died by the 
conspiring together of a couple of servants, 
whose foreiga and heathen maternity is 
particularly recorded, was the more igno- 
miuious end for him, who had commanded 
Zechariah to be openly stoned — a death 
highly honourable in comparison. The 
parallel (2 Kings xii. 20) adds that it was 
in " the house of Millo, which goeth down 
to Silla" (for the explanation of which 
passage, see note ad loc), that the servants' 
conspiracy to kill Joash took effect. The 
sons of Jehoiada. We know of only one 
son, Zechariah ; there may have been other 
sons, or other lineal relations of Jehoiaila 
may be covered by the word " sons." We 
are not obliged to interpret the avenging 
act of the servants as one to which their 
own pious and patriotic zeal led them, 
which, considering their maternal pedigree, 
is perhaps something unlikely, though of 
course not impossible, but one to which 
they were incited by the retributive provi- 
dence of him who held their hearts also 
in his hand. In a word, it was a.deed done 
for the blood — required (see note and refer- 
ences under ver. 22). Not in the septilclirei 
of the kings. See note on ver. 16, and 
references tiiere quoted ; as also the am- 
biguous expression of the parallel (ver. 21), 
" They buried him with his fathers in the 
city of David." 

Ver. 26 — Zahad. The name Jozachar of 
the parallel is probably the correct word, 
and a copyist's corruption may with some 
plausibility be argued as the cause of the 
form Zabad in our text. The parallel omits 
the names of the mothers' nationality. 
Shimrith. The parallel lias Shomer, pro- 
bably an Hebraized form of the Moabitiah 
name of our text. 

Ver. 27.— His sons. We only know of 
one, Amaziali, his successor. The burdens 
laid upon him. Some explain this espre*- 



CH. XXIV. 1—27.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



287 



■ion of the tribute and bribe Joasti bad to 
pay Hazael; others of prophetic " burdens" 
uttered against him; and others (much 
favoured by the position of the clause just 
before the repairing of the hotise, etc.) of 
tlie task which he had so voluntarily under- 
taken, the money-raising and all (Ezek. 
xxiv. 25; comp. our vers. 6, 9, 11). Tha 
repairing; Hebrew, iHd'I. Render, with the 
Bevised Version, Om rebuilding. The story 
of the book of the kings. The Bevised 
Version renders the Hebrew text ("ibd ^yp^ 
" the commentary of the book of the kings," 
probably to be followed by the words, " of 
Judak I " the parallel hat " the book of the 



Ohronioles [Q'n^ri nsT "ibdJ of the kings of 
Judah " (see our Introduction, 1 Chronicles, 
§ 5, pp. vii. — X.). The word rendered 
" story " or " coiBaientary " in our text is 
employed only once beside (eh. xiii. 22). Its 
verbal root, however, is found about a 
hundred and sixty-two times, invariably in 
the sense of inquiring, and almost invariably 
Tendered in the Authorized Version by the 
word " inquire," or " seek ; " so that perhaps 
the word "study" or "pursuit" might, 
idioms being allowed for, be the nearer 
rendering. It is rabbinic literature mostly 
that has determined the preference for the 
word " commentary." 



HOMILETICS. 

Yen. 1 — 27. — The sad and ttrange unrelidbleness of human dispotition and l\fe here. 
One of the strangest of all the sadnesses of human life is the uncertainty and unreliable- 
ness of human disposition, which it is so constantly exposing to view. Not only baa 
the fairest promise vanished (like the sun of many a morning) long before the character 
eould be supposed to be firm or even fairly formed, but after the period justly esteemed 
critical has passed, after fruit has set, and even after some fruit has been gathered ripe, 
alas for the failures and falls, the disappointments and distressing desolation, which have 
laid waste the scene 1 The turn in the life of Joash, with his miserable end, of which 
this chapter bears record, is a very distinct and typical instance of what has been and 
is still often. And in reading the present chapter, we are forcibly reminded of the 
apostle's language, "All these things were written for our admonition." We cannot 
afford to regard the contents of this chapter as of merely historic interest; they are of 
terrible though kindly import for modern life and all life. In connection with this 
thought, the following points may be picked out in the matter of the present history. 
The life which thus in its afternoon, let us say, turned aside to evil, was — 

I. One which had been, in the vert inception, nukbing, and first rearing of it, 

ALMOST MIBACnLOUSLT SAVED AND GUARDED THE VERY OKEATORE OF PhOVIDENCB, THE 

CHILD OF Divine care and watchful lovb. Many an analogy really every whit as 
strong and impressive may be found and instanced by the practical preacher here ; also 
cases which may be well within the knowledge of the parish or the country. 

II. One the bight BEOiNNiNa or which was oonspicuous both fob the greatness 

AND THE WORTHINESS OF ITS ZEAL. 

IIL One which had enjoyed the sustaining help of the best and most faith- 
ruL of friends. These friends had been of the kind that well remind us of the 
psalm of Joash's ancestor; for his "father and mother had indeed forsaken him," 
when " the Lord took him up," in the persons of the priest and his wife. All th« 
incalculable advantages of the best of early associations and religious prepossessions 
had been the happy portion of Joash, now — when every recollection and reminiscence 
should have been gilding itself with fresh sacredness — to be flung away to the winds, 
as though they were presences to the mind as much to be dreaded as in fact they were 
worthy to be cherished. 

IV. One the wrench of which with the past was surprisingly violent and 
absolute; and its motive as subprisinoly uhjustifyino of it. This apparently 
absolute reversal of what had hitherto seemed ehara/:ter and goodness was above all 
witnessed to by one central blackest blot in the conduct of Joash. Guiltily did he 
forget the debt his own very pulse and beating heart owed to the preservers of hii life, 
when he commanded that Zechariah, the son of their love, be stoned to death for his 
righteous remonstrance and warning. His dying words, " The Lord look upon it, and 
require it," no doubt did not mark the spirit of unforgivingness ; they did mark, and 
justly, the tnrpitude of the sin which was bound to " find out " the perpetrator of it I 
And then the motif of the conduct of Joash I It is written in ver. 17. The brief 



288 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xxiv. 1— 27. 

Buppressed language, which does there write it, tells the more significantly of its dishonour- 
ableness and despicableness, only fit to shun the eye of day I And the warnings of the 
Lord Grod of the fathers of Joash and his people, are so touchingly expressed, especially 
in ver. 19 ! These preclude the possibility of our deducting anything of blame from 
Joash, on the ground of his being taken unawares, or surprised by some sudden gust 
of temptation. This type of thing has indeed numbered its antitypes, times without 
niimber ; but was it not thus forcibly delineated, deeply graven or etched, that whoso 
should have eyes to see might see, and ears to hear might hear? 

v. One the end or which bbvealed most fbabptjllt alike the revulsion of 
MAH AND THE SOLEMN BETBiEtJTioN or GoD. With what Smitten wonder our awed 
thought follows unwittingly, but trembles to essay to track the ways of God's hidden 
judgment, when the account of this present life is once summed up, — hidden hecause that 
account is summed up ! What solemn need for every man to watch and pray ; to walk 
humbly ; to take heed how he stands ; and to remember the warnings of those of whom 
this is the record, that they " did run well " 1 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1, 2. — Moral weakness. The extremely interesting circumstances under 
which Joash came to the throne (ch. xxiii.) make us wish that there was something 
satisfactory to record of him when he sat upon it. Unfortunately, it is not so. 
One work in particular he wrought (see next homily) for which he deserves honour, but 
his character stands before us as that of an essentially weak man. He did what was 
right all the days of Jehoiada, but no longer. He allowed one luan, to whom he was 
much indebted, to influence him aright ; so far he did well. That, however, is not 
saying very much, for it would have been ingratitude indeed, of the deepest dye, if he 
had not been guided by those who first saved his life, and then, as the greatest risk to 
themselves, seated him upon the throne of his fathers. But goodness that goes no 
deeper than that is essentially weak ; the worth that has to be propped up by a human 
hand, and that falls to the ground when the sustaining hand is withdrawn, is of small 
account. It has taken no root ; it will have no length of life ; it will bring forth no 
flowers and fruits. Moral weakness is — 

I. DiSEEGAEDED OF GoD AND MAN. PoT such men as Joash the prophet of the Lord 
has no word of general commendation, though he has words of rebuke to utter (vers. 
19, 20). With them God " is not well pleased." And man is also and equally dis- 
satisfied. Men that are wrong and strong will find their advocates; indeed, they find 
all too many to honour and praise them, both while they live and when they are 
departed. But men that are good and weak find none to admire them. They may 
start, as Joash apparently did, with fair intentions and blameless desires, but they 
have no force of character, and being " driven with the wind and tossed," carried about 
hither and thither according to the passing breeze, they are the object of disregard, il 
not of positive contempt. There is nothing honourable or admirable in them. 

n. Fbcitlebb of ant positive aooD. Such men as Joash may do some good during 
one half of their life, or at different parts of their life ; but the good they then do is 
counterbalanced by the harm they work during the other half or on other occasions; 
and no one can say which prevails over the other. The measure of many a man's life- 
influence is a nice sum in spiritual subtraction ; and when everything is known it will 
perhaps be found to be a " negative quantity." It is a poor and a pitiful thing to see 
a man first building up and then pulling down; one day working with the people of 
God and the next associating with the enemies of true and pure religion ; subscribing 
to a Christian charity and attending a demoralizing spectacle; puUing in contrary 
directions. What can such a man doi What witness can he bear, what work 
achieve, what contribution bring to the great end we should have in view — the elevatior 
of our kind ? That will be represented by a cypher — or something worse. 

IIL Unneoessakt. It may indeed be said that this is a question of natural endow- 
ment, and rests with our Creator and not with ourselves ; that men receive from him 
either strength and force of will or else pliancy of spirit, sensitiveness of soul and 
readiness to be affected by influences from outside. This is true, in part ; but it is not 
the whole truth. We must not make our heavetly Father responsible for our short- 



OH. XXIV. 1—27.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE OHEONIOLES. 289 

cozuingg. Moral weaknees is a defect of character. It is the result of a wrong choice. 
1. Let a man give himself, as he should, in full surrender to the God whose he is and 
nrhotu he is most sacredly hound to serve, to that Divine Saviour who has hought him 
with the price of his own redeeming blood, aod he will then be in the way of gaining 
single-heartedness and strength. 2. Let him be regularly and repeatedly renewing his 
act of self-dedication. Joash did, when he was a child, pledge himself to the service 
of Jehovah (ch. xxiii. 16). But he was then too young to understand all that such a 
covenant meant. He should have continually renewed that solemn pledge. We have 
the amplest opportunities and invitations to reconsecrate ourselves to the service of 
Christ, and if we accept these, we shall retain our thorough loyalty to him, and then 
we shall not be moved and swayed, but be " steadfast and immovable." 3. Let him gain 
ttrengthfrom above. There is an unfailing Divine resource on which all the good may 
draw. " When I am weak, then am I strong," said Paul. For when he was most 
conscious of his own insuf&ciency, then he looked up for help to the " Lord of all power 
and might," to him who can and will " strengthen us with strength in our soul," who 
will "strengthen us with all might by his Spirit in the inner man," who will make 
us strong (1) to endure ; (2) to overcome ; (3) to bear witness ; (4) to labour in the 
holy fields of Christian work. — 0. 

Vers. 4 — 14. — Church renovation. We have an interesting description of » very old 
instance of — 

L Church ebnovation. Here were all the elements that ordinarily occur. 1. 
Dilapidation, or the condition of being out of repair. In this case there had been 
profanation, deliberate injury, spoliation (ver.. 7); but always there will be waste and 
decay even in " the house of the Lord." The elements of nature do not spare the most 
sacred sanctuary. 2. An energetic leader. Joash signalized his otherwise ordinary 
career by taking this matter much to heart and taking it thoroughly in hand. He 
prompted Jehoiada himself; he incited the hesitating priests (vers. 5 — 9); he called 
forth the energy of the people themselves. 3. Go-operation. " All the princes and all 
the people rejoiced " when they were zealously engaged in the work, and the masons 
and the carpenters did their part regularly and faithfully (2 Kings xii. 15). 4. Liberality, 
When the chest was made the people responded freely ; they all " cast into it until they 
made an end," until there was " much money," " money in abundance." When an 
appeal is made to the spontaneous liberality of Christian men, in a cause that is 
recognized to be good, there is usually a response. If under the Law there was this 
readiness to give, how much more should there be such forwardness and consecration 
of substance under the more constraining influences and for the far highm- privileges of 
the gospel of Jesus Christ! 5. Perseverance under discouragement. The king 
charged the priests and Levites to " hasten the matter. Howbeit the Levites hastened 
it not " (ver. 5). But the enthusiastic king was not to be daunted ; he would not let 
this slackness on the part of those who should have been eager and diligent constitute 
any serious stumbling-block. He used his ingenuity to devise other and more e£fectiTa 
measures, and his determination prevailed, as it will prevail. If we allow a good work 
to be dropped because some of our coadjutors are found wanting, we shall do but little. 
A holy perseverance under discouragement is the condition of success. As with the 
leaders, so with those that follow; the workmen must patiently continue until the 
work is perfected. Then comes the crowning circumstance, viz.: 6. The use of 
the building for the worship of God (ver. 14). We pass on to that which is far more 
important — 

II. The ebnovation of the Christian cause. 1. It may be that the cause of 
Christ is quite " out of repair." Some " sons of Athaliah " have come in and done 
devastating work. Where there was all that satisfied the observant eye of the Divine 
Lord, there is now a sad decline and decay ; there is feebleness where there should be 
strength, barrenness where there used to be fruitfulness, poverty and paucity where 
there once was fulness. There are unsightly and blameworthy breaches in the walls. 
Then there arises in some heart : 2. A strong, compelling eagerness to repair. First it 
fills one heart, then it is communicated to another and another; finally it moves "all 
the people," and they resolve that the fiagging cause of Christ shall be revived. 8. 
Then they give themselves to (1) penitence for past neglect) (2) prayer for Divine 

n. 0HB0NICLE8. Q 



290 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxiv. 1—27. 

inspiration and guidance ; (3) solemn renewal of first vows of dedication ; (4) actiTe 
and energetic work. 4. Their reconsecration is crowned with sacred joy, and with a 
happy restoration to the end for which they were called into existence (ver. 14). All 
this is based upon — 

III. The benewal of the individual heart. For if the cause of Christ has 
declined, it is because the spiritual life of the individual men has been languishing. 
There has been a cooling of love, a lessening of faith, an abatement ot zeal, a lack of 
devotion. What is needed is : 1. A sense of departure and loss. 2. A humbling of the 
heart before God. 3. A reconsecration of heart and life to the Redeemer. 4. A patient 
continuance in well-doing. — 0. 

Vers. 15, 16. — A noble character and a useful life. These are two things which are 
not always closely associated, though they are very frequently found together ; they 
certainly were thus united in the person and experience of Jehoiada. In him we 
havft— 

I. A KOBLE OHAKAOTEB. And this : 1. Was based upon true piety. Jehoiada was 
the man he was because he was a faithful servant of Jehovah. He was rich " toward 
God." His mind and heart were turned toward him, to worship in his house, to study 
and to do his will, to promote his glory. Everything else that was good in him rested 
on his religious conviction and practice as on a sure foundation ; every other virtue took 
its root and found its source and spring in that. 2. Acquired great strength. By the 
exercise and cultivation of his piety and moral worth, by his confidence in God, and by 
all that he daily gained from God in response to his devotion, he acquired great force of 
goodness. He was a man that " seemed to be a pillar," and who was such ; a strong 
stay, which no antagonism could remove, no treachery undermine. He " stood four- 
square to all the winds that blew." Men felt that in him they would find a determined 
and powerful enemy to whatever evil thing they might propose. 3. Shone forth in 
unselfish service. He fearlessly and nobly risked everything in order to rid his country 
of a vile usurper, and place upon the throne one that would rule in righteousness. And 
though he certainly lent all the weight oi his influence to the support of the sovereign, 
he does not appear to have arrogated any undue authority (see ver. 6). He was 
actuated by a pure, magnanimous devotion to the highest interests of his country. So 
he lived — 

II. A USEFUL LIFE. 1. He effected a most desirable and salutary revolution ; over- 
turning a dynasty that had no right to the throne, and restoring the family of David ; 
exchanging an idolatrous ruler for one that reigned in the fear of God. 2. He solemnly 
pledged the people to the service of Jehovah, and arrauged for systematic services in 
his temple (ch. xxiii. 16 — 18). 3.. He sustained the band of Joash in his work of 
repairing the temple. This we might assume, but this the words of the text, " toward 
his house," clearly indicate. 4. He did much (as the following verses show) to main- 
tain the worship of God in the land, against all reactionary influences, whether at court 
or among the princes or the people. He " did good to Israel " indeed. If we except 
the judges and kings as those whose ofScial positions gave them quite exceptional 
opportunities, we may safely say that there are not more than three or four men who 
rendered such distinguished service to their country as Jehoiada the priest. He was 
well worthy, when he died in an honoured old age, to be " buried amoDg the kings." 
Probably few kinglier men than he have been " gathered to their fathers." 

We learn: 1. That honour rests upon faithful service, on true usefulness — such 
honour as is worth possessing. 2. That usefulness is the product of excellency of 
character. Men may be eloquent, ambitious, capable, endowed with large administra- 
tive abilities, but if they are not unselfish, if they do not know how to subordinate 
their own aims and interests to the public weal, they are as likely to be harmful as 
helpfnl in their course. Only solid worth of character, rectitude allied with patriotism 
and philanthropy, is any security for substantial usefulness. 3. That character is only 
sound when it is sacred ; that it is only the man who reveres God, and who places 
himself and his life under Divine guidance, on whom we can thoroughly rely. All 
other defences and inspirations fail. "The fear of God " of which the devout Israelite 
■poke, the love and service of Jesus Christ of which we speak, — this is the rock on 
wUch to build a noble character and a useful life. — 0. 



OH. XXIV. 1—27.] THE SECOisD BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 291 

Vers. 17 — 26. — Sad, successive stages. With the seventeenth verse of this chapter 
there commences a very painful record. Prom one who had been so mercifully spared, 
BO admirably trained, so bountifully blessed, as was King Joash, much better things 
might have been expected. It is the melancholy story of rapid degeneracy, and a 
miserable and dishonourable end. 

I. Departure from the livino God. Not being " rooted and grounded " in rever- 
ence and in attachment to Jehovah, as soon as the directing and sustaining hand of 
Jehoiada was missed, Joash gave heed to the evil counsel of the reactionary " princes 
of Judah " and " left the house of the Lord." The young may be habituated to sacred 
services, and they may be brought up in the practice of good behaviour, but if they 
have not fully and firmly attached themselves to the Divine Lord whose praises they 
have been singing and whose will they have been respecting, their piety will not 
endure. " Being let go," being released, as they must be in time, from the human 
restraints that hold them to the right course, they follow the bent of worldly inclina- 
tion ; it may be that they yield to the solicitation of unholy passion ; but they decline 
from the path of Christian worship and godly service. It is a melancholy siglit for the 
angels of God, and for all earnest human souls, to witness — that of a man who knows 
what is best, who has stood face to face with Christ, who has often worshipped in his 
house, and perhaps sat at his table, declining to lower paths, " going after Baal," letting 
another power than that of his gracious Lord rule his heart and occupy his life. 

II. Kesentmbnt at the Divine rebuke. The true and honoured servant of the 
Lord, Jehoiada, was well succeeded by a faithful son, Zechariah. He did his work 
right nobly, and testified against the apostasy of the king and court. But the monarch, 
in the haughtiness of his heart, resented the rebuke of the Lord's prophet, and only 
aggravated his offence by persecutinn and even murder (vers. 20, 21). Thus sin slopes 
down, and at some points with sad and startling rapidity. When God's rebuke is 
heard, coming through the voice of one of his- ministers, or coming in his Divine pro- 
vidence; and when that rebuke, instead of being heeded and obeyed, is resented by the 
rebellious spirit, then there ensues a very rapid spiritual decline. Men go " from bad 
to worse," from indifference or forgetfulness to hostility, from doubt to disbelief, from 
laxity to licentiousness, from wrongness of attitude to iniquity in action. To resent 
the rebuke of the Lord is to inflict upon ourselves the most serious, and too often a 
mortal, injury. 

III. The penalty of disobedience. In the case of Joash, it was : 1. Humiliating 
defeat in battle (vers. 23, 24). 2. Bodily sufferings (ver. 25). 3. A violent and miser- 
able death (ver. 25). 4. Dishonour after death (ver. 25). In the case of the spiritual 
transgressor now, the penalty that has to be feared is : 1. Grave and grievous spiritual 
decline. 2. The serious displeasiu'e of the Divine Master. 3. The loss of the esteem 
of the truest and best human friends. 4. Condemnation in the day of judgment. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 3. — The early years of Joash. I. His parentage. 1. His father. Jeho- 
ahaz, Ahaziah, or Azariah (ch. xxi. 17 ; ch. xxii. 1, 6), Jehoram's youngest son, who 
ascended the throne on his father's death, reigned one year, was slain by Jehu (ch. 
xxii. 9), and buried in Jerusalem with his fathers in the city of David, because, though 
himself bad, he was a good man's son (ch. xxii. 9). 2. His mother. Zibiah of Beer- 
sheba, concerning whom nothing is known. Perhaps beautiful, as her name " Gazelle" 
may suggest; considering who her husband was, it will not be safe to say she was good, 
though the place she came from once had an aroma of piety about it (Gen. xxi. 33). 

II. His reign. 1. Early begun. When seven years old. Such early promotion 
would not have been safe for the kingdom (Ecoles. x. 16) or good for himself had 
Jehoiada not been beside him as counsellor of his inexperience, and, in fact, as virtual 
ruler. 2. Long continued. Forty years. Shorter by fifteen than that of Manasseh 

Sell, xxxiii. 1), his occupation of the throne was only one year shorter than that of Asa 
ch. xvi. 13), and as long as that of Solomon (ch. ix. 30). 

III. His chakaotee. 1. Promising. " He did that which was right in the sight 
of the Lord." But : 2. Imperfect. " The high places were not taken away ; the people 
still sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places" (2 Kings xii. 3). And: 3. 
Unstable. He behaved well only so long as Jehoiada lived to counsel, and perhapi 
restrain, him. 



892 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxiv. 1—27. 



IV. His maebiagbs. "Jehoiada took for him two wives," one of whom waa 
Jehoaddan of Jerusalem (ch. xxv. 1). Perhaps : 1. Good policy, to ensure a succesgion 
to the throne. But: 2. Bad morality, and against the Law of God, though reconj- 
mended by a pious priest, and sanctioned by the example of godly kings. Joash'a 
subsequent declension may have been in part due to this. 

Learn : 1. That early greatness is not always accompanied by early goodness. 2. 
That many begin to run well in youth who nevertheless decline in after-years. 3. That 
religious education is not sufScient in itself to overcome the force of inbred corruption. 
4. That permanence is an indispensable quality in all moral and spiritual excellence. 
6. That all the opinions of a good man are not necessarily good. 6. That good men 
sometimes occasion sin in others. — ^W. 

Vers. 4 — 11. — A good intention well carried out. I. Thb contemplated wobk. 

1. Th« reparation of the house of the Lord. (1) What this signified. The reconstruc- 
tion, not of the whole but of such parts of the temple walls and edifices as had been 
overturned and destroyed. A project both becoming and right — becoming that Jeho- 
vah's house should be restored to its pristine completeness and beauty (1 Chron. xxii. 
3) ; right, inasmuch as on Judah had been devolved the duty of protecting and pre- 
serving it (ch. vii. 16 — 22). In the same way is it proper for, and incumbent on, 
believers to have regard to the strength and beauty, symmetry and adornment, not 
merely of the material edifices, but also and chiefly of the spiritual temples of the 
Christian Church. (2) Why tlds was needed. On account, not of the ravages of time 
upon its massive masonry, but of the demolition it had suflfered at the hands of 
Athaliah (and Jehoram) in order to construct the temple of Baal, whose walls and 
pillars, altars and images, had just been broken in pieces by the revolutionaries of 
Judah (ch. xxiii. 17). So by false systems of religion, as well as by systems of no 
religion, have breaches sometimes been made in the Christian Church — adherents 
seduced from the faith, doctrines obscured, perverted, or rendered inoperative — ^which 
demand the utmost efforts of Christians to repair, even after the false systems, Uke 
Baal's temple, have been shattered to pieces. (3) By whom this was projected. By 
Joash, who, even if not impelled by higher motives, certainly had reason to remember 
the house in which his infant years had been sheltered, and himself when a boy had 
received his crown. If Joash moved in this matter of his own accord, the fact spoke 
well for his goodness ; if even he required to be urged to it by Jehoiada — which is not 
stated — the fact that he listened to the priest attested the reverence he possessed for 
Jehovah's servant. The pity was that neither his goodness nor his reverence were 
deeply rooted or permanent. (4) When this was moved. " After this," an indefinite 
note of time which might mean either after the revolution or after Joash's marriages. 
If the former, which is doubtful, the king evinced praiseworthy alacrity — ^if his business 
demanded haste (ver. 5), much more did God's (ch. xv. 15; xxxi. 21; Bccles. ix. 10; 
Rom. xii. 11); if the latter, his dilatoriness was not without blame (Matt. vi. 33). 

2. The replacement of the dedicated things which had been bestowed upon the Baalim 
(ver. 7). Not the dedicated things Solomon had brought into the temple (oh. v. 1) ; the 
spoil, in articles of gold and silver, David had taken from his enemies (1 Kings vii. 51), 
since these had been pillaged and carried off by Shishak (ch. xii. 9) ; probably the 
silver, gold, and vessels dedicated by Abijah, Asa (ch. xv. 18), and Jehoshaphat (2 Kings 
xii. 18); the spoil taken by the first from Jeroboam (ch. xiii. 16), by the second from 
the Cushites (ch. xiv. 12), and by the third from the Ammonites (ch.xxi. 25). 

II. Ways and means. Two plans for obtaining the money requisite for the under- 
taking. 1. The plan that failed. (1) What it was. That the priests and Levite» 
should in all the cities of Judah raise a contribution to repair the houEe of God (ver. 5) ; 
that the amount levied from each man should be " the tax of Moses the servant of the 
Lord, and of the congregation of Israel, for the tent of the testimony " (ver. 6) ; and that 
this should be done annually (ver. 5). In 2 Kings (xii. 4) the money is defined as of 
three sorts (Keil) : (o) The " money of the numbered," or, " of every one that passeth 
the numbering," t.e. the poll tax of half a shekel required of every Israelite as a ransom 
for his soul (Exod. xxx. 12 — 16) ; (6) the " money of the persons for whom each man 
is rated," i.e. the sums arising from the redemption of devoted persons (Lev. xxviL 
1 — 8); and (e) "the money that it cometh into any man's heart to bring into the 



CH. XXIV. 1—27.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 298 

house of the Lord," i.e. the free-will offerings of the people. According to another 
interpretation (Biihr), only the two last sorts were intended, and the phrase, " money of 
the numbered," should be rendered " in current money " (Eevised Version) — the reason 
for this instruction that the contributions should be in current money being, it is said, 
that the money "was to be paid out at once to mechanics for their labour" (Thenius). 
(2) Why it failed. Not because the priests embezzled the money (J. D. Michaelii, 
be Wette), which is not stated, and should not be suggested (Ps. cxl. 3; Titus iii. 2), 
but probahly because of (o) their dilatoriness in setting about the work entrusted to 
them — that the work should have been entrusted to them was the first mistake in the 
proposed plan ; (6) the difficulty they had in gathering in the money, which from the 
manner of its levying had the appearance of a compulsory payment — this the second 
mistake in the proposed plan ; and (c) the too lavish expenditure demanded by their 
own personal necessities (a legitimate charge upon the collected funds), leaving too 
small a balance for the work of temple-repairing — that the priests should have been left 
to distribute the taxes and offerings of the people between their own needs and the 
public requirements was the third mistake in the proposed plan. 

" If self the wavering balance shake, 
It's rarely right adjusted." 

(Bums.) 

The result was that in the three and twentieth year of Joash — the year of a new reign 
in Israel (2 Kings xiii. 1) — the priests had done little or nothing; in the way of repairing 
the breaches of the temple (2 Kings xii. 6). 2. TAe plan that succeeded. (1) The 
details of the new plan. According to 2 Kings, the work of collecting money for 
themselves, the temple worship, and the repair of the building was no more to be 
entrusted to their hands, neither were these three items of expense to be in future 
defrayed out of a common fund; but the trespass-money and sin-money should be 
assigned to the priests for the first two of these purposes, as the Law of Moses pre- 
scribed (Lev. V. 16 ; Numb. v. 8), while the taxes and the fne-will offerings should be 
devoted to the third (2 Kings xii. 7 — 16). According to the Chronicler, whose state- 
ments are supported by those of the Book of Kings, by Joash's command a chest or 
collection-box of wood was made with a hole bored in its lid, and placed " without at 
the gate of the house of the Lord," i.e. in the outer court " beside the altar as one 
cometh into the house of the Lord " (2 Kings xii. 9). Next a proclamation was made 
throughout Judah and Jerusalem that the people should themselves, of their own free 
will and pleasure, bring in the temple rates prescribed by the Law, and the free-will 
offerings to wliich they were impelled by their own hearts, and deposit these, unseen 
by any eye but Jehovah's, into the box. Again, it was arranged that, as often as the 
cheat or box was full, it should be conveyed by the hands of the Levites into the king's 
office, where the money should be emptied out by or before the king's secretary and 
the high priest's assistant, who should put it into hags, weigh it and hand it over to 
them " Ihat did the service of the house of the Lord," after which the chest should be 
carried back again to its place at the temple gate. (2) The recommendations of the 
new plan. It avoided the mistakes of the first scheme. It put the work into the 
hands of a board of oversight better fitted to command the confidence of the com- 
munity. It avoided the irritating weapon of compulsion, and relied upon the free will 
of the people, even with regard to the levying of taxes. It simplified the financial 
arrangements by keeping the money given for the temple separate from that paid to 
the priests. (3) The success of the new plan. The people entered into it as their 
forefathers had done when invited to contribute towards the building of the tabernacle 
(Exod. XXXV. 21, etc.), universally — "all the princes and all the people cast into the 
chest;" cheerfully, with no sense of constraint or compulsion upon them — "they 
rejoiced;" liberally — money was "gathered in abundance;" unwearledly — not once 
or twice merely, but regularly and constantly they went on with their collecting 
"until they had made an end," t.«. of the enterprise they had in hand, the repairing of 
the temple. N.B. — The above principles should regulate Christian giving, which 
should be universal — " every one of you " (1 Cor. xvi. 2) ; cheerful — " God loveth a cheer- 
ful giver " (2 Cor. ix. 7) ; liberal — " see thai ye abound in this grace [of liberality] also " 
(2 Cor. viii. 7) ; constant — " to do good ant to communicate forget not " (Heb. xiii. 16), 



294 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxiv, 1—27. 

III. Thb work executed. From the money thus collected : 1. The cost of 
materials was defrayed. " Timber and hewn stone," at least, had to be bought (2 
Kings xii. 12). 2. The wages of workmen were paid. Masons, carpenters, and workers 
in iron and brass were hired. 3. The necessary vessels were constructed. The surplus 
money, after meeting the above charges, was devoted to the manufacture of gold and 
silver utensils for the temple service. " So the workmen wrought," etc. (ver. 13). 

Learn : 1. The duty of Christian giving, which may be inferred, d fortiori, from 
this example of the Hebrew Church. 2. The superiority of the voluntary over the 
compulsory system of raising money for religious purposes, even should the latter be 
deemed permissible. 3. The propriety of financial boards, especially those connected 
with the Church, being above suspicion. 4. The wisdom of aiming at simplicity in 
schemes for receiving the contributions of the faithful. 5. The advantage of adopting 
such measures as shall place Church-treasurers beyond the reach of temptation. — W. 

Vers. 15, 16. — The life, death, hurial, and epitaph of a great mam. I. Jehoiada'b 
LITE. 1. Pious ; i.e. (1) Good. No man really pious who is not inwardly good. (2) 
Sincere. As a priest of Jehovah, he was under solemn covenant to lead a holy life. 
(3) Courageous. It required no small heroism to stand forth as a servant of Jehovah 
in the days of Ahaziah and Athaliah. 2. Useful. " We live in deeds, not years ; in 
thoughts, not breaths," etc. (Bailey). Jehoiada's life was spent, not in indolence, but 
activity ; this activity was directed, not by personal ambitions, but by considerations 
of public advantage, and ceased not until the close of his life. Besides discharging the 
multifarious duties devolving upon him as high priest of the nation, he practically 
became the nation's leader during the times of Jehoram, Ahaziah, and Athaliah ; the 
nation's saviour, effecting the overthrow of Athaliah, the preservation of Joash, and in 
him the continuance of David's throne ; and the nation's ruler, acting as regent during 
Joash's minority, and as prime minister of Joash until the end came. In particular, to 
him the nation owed the preservation of its king, its throne, its religion, its temple. 3. 
Long. Nevertheless, the end came, though long delayed. He died "full of days," 
satisfied with living, like Abraham (Gen. xxv. 8), Isaac (Gen. xxxv. 29), David (1 
Ohron. xxiii. 1), and Job (xlii. 17), an old man of a hundred and thirty years, the 
longest recorded life of any Hebrew, the patriarchs excepted. " What man is he that 
desireth life, and loveth many days, that he may see good ? " etc. (Ps. xxxiv. 12 — 14). 

II. Jehoiada's death. 1. To himself a gain. (Phil. i. 21.) (1) A blessed repose 
after life's labours (Isa. Ivii. 2 ; Dan. xii. 13 ; 2 Thess. i. 7 ; Eev. xiv. 13). " After 
life's fitful labour he sleeps well " (' Macbeth,' act iii. sc. 2). (2) A splendid exchange 
for time's vanities: "length of days for ever and ever" (Ps. xxi. 4; xxxvii. 18; 
John X. 28 ; Heb. xi. 10, 16 ; 1 Pet. i. 4 ; Bev. ii. 10). (3) A magnificent reward 
for earth's services (Ps. xvi. 11 ; xvii. 15 ; Prov. iii. 35 ; John Xii. 26 ; Rom. ii. 7 ; 
Bev. ii. 7, 17, 26). 2. To Joash a loss. (2 Kings ii. 3.) Jehoiada's death the removal 
of (1) the saviour of his infancy; (2) the teacher of his boyhood; (3) the coun- 
sellor of his manhood. Whether Joash recognized the greatness of his loss may ba 
doubtful. The notion that he felt the decease of the grey-haired priest as some- 
thing of a relief is not without countenance. 3. To the nation a calamity. (2 Sam. iii. 
38.) Born to be a king, Joash wanted the capacity to rule. The fittest man to have 
sat upon the throne was Jehoiada. Only Divine providence does not always assign 
men the posts for which they are best qualified. The incompetency of Joash would 
have earlier jiroved a curse to Judah had the statesman-priest not been at his elbow. 
So long as Jehoiada kept his hand upon the helm, the ship of state sailed over stormiest 
seas with safety ; when death compelled his grasp to relax, the vessel's rocking amid 
the tumbling waves showed how capable a pilot he had been. 

III. Jehoiada's bubial. 1. National. The people paid him public obsequies. 
Not the king alone, but the entire realm lamented him, and joined in the sad ceremo- 
nial of consigning his lifeless body to the tomb. Public funerals are often gigantic 
hypocrisies. Not of such sort was this of the great priest of Jerusalem. 2. Boyal. 
The grandeur of his obsequies equalled that lavished on the funerals of kings. Of 
some kings, among whom Joash must be numbered (ver. 25), it is recorded that tha 
people declined to honour them with royal burial (ch. xxi. 19, 20; xxvi. 23; xxviii. 
27) ; of Jehoiada, though not a king, except in nobility of soul, it is written, hie peopk 



OH XXIV. 1—27.] THE SECOID BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 296 

" buried him in the city of David among the kings" — as it were recognizing in him a 
sovereign greater than many, and equal to the best. 

IV. Jbhoiada's epitaph. 1. Short. One sentence of three clauses : " He did good 
in Israel, both toward God, and towards his house." Nothing more offensive to good 
tast« and refined feeling, not to say more untrue to fact, than the fulsome and extra- 
vagant paragraphs which often appear on tombstones. 2. Simple. All who read 
might understand, and, understanding, might verify from their own experience, assisted 
(if need were) by the recollections of others. The last place at which to make a dis- 
play of eloquence and rhetoric is the grave's mouth. What is here recorded of this 
uncrowned King of Judah stands in startling contrast with the magniloquence of 
Egyptian and Assyrian kings. 3. Sufficient. What more or better could be testified of 
any man than that in his lifetime he had done good, lived a life of piety towards God 
and of philanthropy towards man, promoted God's glory and advanced man's good, 
furthered God's kingdom and increased man's happiness ? 

Learn : 1. The possibility of combining statesmanship and piety. 2. The command- 
ing influence of religion when associated with talent and rank. 3. The advisability of 
looking beyond man in both Church and state, since statesmen and priests are not 
suffered to continue by reason of death. 4, The certainty that a life of philanthropy 
and piety will sooner or later find recognition. 6. The fitness of rewarding with 
becoming honour in death those who sincerely and successfully serve their generation 
when in life. — ^W. 

Vers. 17 — 22. — The downward career of a king. I. Joash's temptation. (Ver. 
17.) 1. When it came. " After Jehoiada's death," when the weakling king, having 
lost his counsellor, was left to the guidauce of his own vain heart and foolish under- 
standing. Temptations mostly assail men in their moments of weakness. Eve was 
probably assaulted in the absence of Adam (Gen. iii. 1) ; David, certainly, in the absence 
of Nathan (2 Sam. xi. 2); Job, when enfeebled through affliction (it. 9); Peter, when 
deprived of strength through over-confidence (John xiii. 27). The devil is too wary a 
warrior to besiege a heart when at its strongest. 2. How it looked. (1) Extremely 
pleasing ; flattering to his vanity and satisfying to his pride. " The princes of Judah 
came, and made obeisance to him." (2) Perfectly harmless. What they asked may 
be assumed to have been liberty to worship the Asherim and the idols (ver. 18) ; not 
that the king should do so, though secretly they may have hoped he would, but 
merely that toleration should be granted to them. Tempters seldom show all their 
hands at once ; if they did, their temptations would fail (Prov. i. 17). To the tempted 
also evil courses commonly appear safe when first embarked upon ; though afterwards 
their true characters are discovered, when too late. 3. How it fared. It prospered. 
Joash, poor fool ! swallowed the bait. " He hearkened unto them," because either he 
wanted courage to refuse, or desired, in return for their flattery, to please them (Dan. 
xi. 32). 

II. Judah's declension. (Ver. 18.) 1. The princes. These " left the house of the 
Lord God of their fathers," i.e. abandoned the worship of Jehovah, of which the temple 
was the centre, and embraced the abominable superstitions of the northern kingdom 
and of the preceding reigns in Judah. On the worship of the Asherim and idols, see 
ch. liv. 3 (homily). 2. The people. The language of the Chronicler (ver. 18), as well 
as of Zechariah (ver. 20), implies that Judah and Jerusalem, in their people as well as 
princes, had transgressed ; and, indeed, it is hardly likely that the princes would have 
ventured upon this step had they not been able to count upon the sympathy, if not 
the direct support, of the community. 3. The king. Though " not stated that Joash 
himself worshipped idols " (Bertheau), and though, perhaps, at first he did not, it is too 
apparent, from the moral deterioration he suffered, as well as from the judgment 
he endured, that his offence was ur.ore than " not strictly maintaining the worship of 
Jehovah " (Bertheau). 

III. Jehovah's correction. (Ver. 19.) 1. Its instruments. The prophets; in 
particular, Zechariah the son — perhaps grandson (Eadie, Ebrard, Lange, Morison)— of 
Jehoiada (ver. 20), called also Barachias (Matt, xxiii. 35). The prophets, of whom 
many have appeared in this book — Nathan (ch. ix. 29), Ahijah (ch. x. 15), Azariah 
(ch.'iv. 1), Hanani (ch. xvi. 7), Micaiah (ch. xvili. 8), Jehu (ch. lix. 2), Jahaziel (ch. 



298 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxiv. 1—27 

XX. 14), Elijah (xxi. 12) — ^were the recognized medium of communication between God 
and the people. The prophets at thia time sent to testify for Jehovah against the 
people are not named, with one exception ; which may suggest that one may be an 
honoured, true, and faithful servant of God in Church or state, and may render 
important services to both without having his name chronicled on the registers of time. 
2. Its tenor, A testimony against the nation, in terms similar to those of Zechariah. 
Their idol-worship was : (1) A direct transgression of Jehovah's commandments (Exod, 
IX. 3—5,23; xxiii. 13; Lev. xxvi. 1, 30; Deut. iv. 15—19; xxvii. 15). (2) An 
express violation of the covenant into which they had entered with Jehovah (ch. xxiii. 
16). (3) A fatal obstacle to their prosperity, whether national or individual (Numb. 
xiv. 41 ; Deut. xxviii. 29 ; Ps. i. 3, 4 ; xvi. 4 ; xcvii. 7 ; Jonah ii. 8). (4) A sure sign 
of their abandonment by God (oh. lii. 5 ; xv. 2 ; Deut. xxxi. 16, 17 ; Josh. xxiv. 20 ; 
1 Chron. xxviii. 9). 3. Its reception. "They would not give ear," Unwilling to 
obey, they would not listen. The truth was unpalatable, and hence they rejected it. 
They loved the darkness rather than the light, because their deeds were evil (John iii. 
19) ; they hated the truth, because it condemned them (Pe. 1. 17 ; Amos v. 10). 

IV. Zbchaeiah's assassination. (Ver. 20.) A deed of: 1. Atrocious inhumanity. 
Murdered by his countrymen, the princes of Judah, in some sort his near kinsmen, 
considering that he himself was a collateral descendant of the royal line, his mother 
having been Ahaziah's sister (ch. xxii. 11). 2. Revolting cntelty. Stoned with stones. 
•Lapidation, a peculiarly Jewish form of punishment, is described in the Mishna. 
" The condemned, if a man, was led naked to the place of torture, but a woman was 
allowed to retain her clothes. The offender was always taken out of the city. . . . All 
that was necessary was that the place should be in a valley, or foss, with steep banks, 
from the top of which one of the witnesses threw the accused down. If he falls on his 
back and is killed, well and good ; if not, another witness throws a stone on his chest. 
The first stones were cast at the head, so as to hasten death and shorten the sufferings 
of the victim. There were no regular executioners. In the time of the kings, the 
sovereigns appointed men to carry out the sentence " (Stapfer, ' Palestine in the Time 
of Christ,' pp. 112, 113 ; cf. Keil's ' Archaologie,' § 153). This terrible mode of execut- 
ing capital punishment the Law reserved for aggravated offences (Lev. xx. 2, 27 ; xxiv. 
14 ; Numb. xv. 35), in particular for practising and enticing to idolatry (Deut. xiii. 
10; xviii. 5). Victims of stoning were, in Old Testament times, Achan (Josh. vii. 25), 
Naboth (1 Kings xxi. 13), Hadoram (ch. x. 18), Zechariah ; in New Testament times, 
Stephen (Acts vii. 58), Paul (Acts xiv. 19), and (perhaps) Antipas (Rev. ii. 13). 3. Gross 
profanity. Murdered in the court of Jehovah's house, " between the sanctuary and the 
altar " (Matt, xxiii. 35), always regarded as an aggravation of the original crime (Lam. 
ii. 10), and a special form of defilement (Ezek. ix. 7). Jehoiada would not shed there 
the blood of Joash's grandmother (ch. xxiii. 14) ; Joash did not hesitate 'to spill there 
the blood of Jehoiada's son. 4. Horrible impiety. Murdered, although a prophet of 
Jehovah (1 Kings xix. 10); murdered, because he told them the truth (of. John viii. 40) ; 
murdered by men themselves guilty of death and di serving to be stoned (see above) ; 
murdered in Jehovah's house and before his .altar, in defiance of his Law and contempt 
for his religion. 5. Monstrous ingratitude. Murdered " at the king's commandment ; " 
done to death by a man to whom his father (or grandfather) had given life, education, 
a crown, a kingdom, a reformed religion, a settled country (ch. xxii. 11 — xxiii. 21). 
The vocabidary of vituperation has been exhaui^ted to set forth the wickedness, odiouR- 
ness, and loathsomeness of this vice. It has been likened to " a sharp-toothed vulture," 
" a marble-hearted fiend, more hideous than the sea-monster;" it has been spoken of 
as " the most detestable act " a person can commit, a vice more abominable " than 
lying, vainness, babbling, drunkenness ; " a monster whose tooth is keener than the 
winter wind. Nor is it too much to say that, amongst this hideous crew of God-for- 
saken wretches, Joash stands pre-eminent. A creature as mean and despicable the 
earth surely is seldom called on to support and nourish. 6. Unavoidable avengement. 
Zechariah himself, feeling this, ere his eyes closed and his lips became silent in death, 
nttered a prayer or invocation, " The Lord look upon it, and require it," in reality a 
prediction which soon became a history. Contrast the prayer of Stephen for his 
murderers (Acts vii. 60). Zechariah the murdered prophet, and Stephen the martyred 
deacon, each embodied and illustrated the spirit of the dispensation under which ha 



OH. X3av. 1— 27,] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 297 

lived ; that under which Zechariah lived, a dispensation (1) of law and penalty, ^2^ of 
wrath and condemnation ; that under which Stephen flourished, a dispensation (1) of 
grace and mercy, and (2) of forgiveness and justification (2 Cor. iii. 7 — 11). 

Lessons. 1. The danger of listening to flattery ; it makes men, even kings, foolish. 
2. The duty of resisting the first approaches of temptation. Obsta principiis. 3. The 
downward course of sin — Facilis descensus Averno (Virgil, ' ^neid,' vi. 126). 4. The 
folly of forsaking God; it can only end in being forsaken by God. 5. The courage 
needed to he a true servant of God in any age. He who would speak for God will often 
require to speak against man. 6. The surest evidence of original and innate depravity is 
the fact that men do not naturally care for, but rather dislike, and are averse to, God's 
Word. 7. The certainty that they who will live godly must suffer persecution. God'a 
witnesses are often slain (Kev. li. 7). 8. The baseness of ingratitude towards God; 
inferred from that of ingratitude towards man. 9. The contrast between the Law and 
the gospel ; illustrated by Zechariah's imprecation and Stephen's invocation. 10. Th« 
certainty of Divine retribution : God will avenge his saints (Luke xviii. 7, 8). — W. 

Vers. 23 — ^27. — Divine retributions ; or, the predictions and prayers of a dying man 
coming true. I. Jttdah invadbd bt the Stbians. (Ver. 23.) Zechariah had pre- 
dicted that prosperity should no longer attend Judah in consequence of her apostasy 
from Jehovah (ver. 20) ; and, before breatiiing his last, had prayed, and so practically 
predicted (Jas. v. 16), that Jehovah would avenge his murder upon the king, his 
princes, and people (ver. 22). That this incursion of Hazael (1 Kings xix. 15), who 
had first assassinated Benhadad II. and seized upon the throne (2 Kings viii. 7 — 15), 
and whose historicity is guaranteed by an inscription on Shalmaneser's black obelisk, 
which says, " In my eighteenth year, for the sixteenth time the Euphrates I crossed. 
Hazael of Damascus to battle came. ... In my twenty-first camp lign, to the cities 
of Hazael of Damascus I went. Four of his fortresses I took " (' Records,' etc., v. 34, 
35 J Schrader, ' Keilinschriften,' p. 206) — that this incursion of the Syrian monarch 
into Judsean territory, as far even as to Jerusalem, was an instalment of the wrath 
which the nation's apostasy had stirred up against itself, several things convinced the 
Chronicler. 1. The time when it happened. " At-the end," or revolution, "of the year." 
No doubt Divine judgment often tarries, and when it does men are apt to question itg 
existence (Ps. 1. 20). But sometimes it hastens on the heels of crime, as it did in the 
cases of Cain (Gen. iv. 8, 9), Pharaoh (Exod. xiv. 27), Israel in Shittim (Numb. ixv. 
4), the murderers of Ishbosheth (2 Sam. iv. 12), Ahab (1 Kings xxii. 34 — 37), Haman 
(Bsth. vii. 10), Judas (Acts i. 18 ; Matt, xxvii. 5), and others ; and their observers 
instinctively exclaim, " Verily there is a God that judgeth in the earth " (Ps. Iviii. 
11). 2. The success it attained. (1) The Syrian army, having probably conquered 
Israel, succeeded in capturing Gath, one of the five cities of the Philistines (Josh, xiii, 
3), which David annexed to Judah (1 Chron. xviii. 1), and which may still have 
belonged to the kingdom of Joash. (2) Next it moved upon Jerusalem, which wa» 
not far distant, and defeated the Judsean troops in a pitched battle, in which all the 
princes of Judah were cut off, and Joash himself seriously wounded. (3) As an induce- 
ment to make peace and withdraw his forces from the capital, Hazael obtained from 
Joash "all the hallowed things that Jehoshaphat, and Jehoram, and Ahaziah his 
fathers, kings of Judah, had dedicated," which had been recovered from the temple of 
Baal (ver. 7), " and his own hallowed things, and all the gold that was found in the 
treasures of the house of the Lord and in the king's house " (2 Kings xii. 18). (4) 
That which specially revealed the hand of God in this disaster was not so much the 
extent as the incidence of it. The blow descended, indeed, upon the common people, 
who are chief sufferers in most wars ; but in this instance a striking fitness was visible 
in the cutting off of the princes who had instigated the sovereign and his subjects to 
idolatry, and in the despoliation of the temple, which they had desecrated by their 
idolatries. 3. The weapon it employed. A small army, which had routed Judah's 
large host. This was reversing the experience of Judah, as, e.g., when Asa with five 
hundred and eighty thousand soldiers defeated Zerah with a million of infantry and 
three hundred charioteers (ch. xiv. 10). As Asa's victory was due to Jehovah's help 
go Joash's surrender was explicable only on the supposition that Jehovah had forsakeu 
him and Hazael been commissioned to execute wrath upon him. 



298 



THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xxv. 1—28, 



n. JoASH SLAIN BY CONSPIRATOBS. (Ver. 25.) LWheut "After the Syrians had 
departed from him." Though he had escaped the doom which sought him on the battle- 
field, it seemed as if justice would not suffer him to live (cf. Acts xxviii. 4). Scarcely 
had the Syrians departed than the sleuth-hound of retribution was again upon his 
trail. Only wounded by soldiers' spears, he was slaughtered by assassins' swords. 2. 
Where ? In his castle-palace at Millo (2 Kings xii. 20), and on his bed, i.e. while 
invalided by his wounds. Death found him in a fortress, behind which he doubtlesi 
expected to be secure, and at a moment when, perhaps, that expectation was high through 
the healing of his wounds. 3. By whom f His own servants, whose names are given : 
" Zabad [or Jozakat, Kings] the son of Shimeath an Ammonitesg, and Jehozabad the 
son of Shimrith a Moabitess." Led astray by those who should have been his servants, 
the princes, he was put to death by his actual servants. He had betrayed his country 
to foreign gods, by men of foreign extraction he was destroyed. Divine retributions 
frequently correspond to the character of the offence they punish. 4, Why f Because 
of the " blood of the son of Jehoiada the priest." They meant to reward him for his 
truculent deed against Zechariah. How they came to champion the cause of Jehoiada's 
murdered son is not said. Perhaps they shared the popular feeling, which had never 
wholly approved of the murder; and when they witnessed the disaster which had 
come upon their arms, with the judgment that had fallen on the princes, they con- 
cluded that Zechariah's blood must be avenged if prosperity was again to return to 
Jndah ; and believing they would find, in the public mind, approval for their action, 
they despatched the wounded man upon his bed at Millo. Their calculations concern- 
ing the verdict of the people were not astray. Nobody regretted Joash's untimely end. 
His subjects "buried him in the city of David," where his fathers lay entombed, but 
they suffered not his carcase to desecrate the mausoleum of the kings. 

Learn : 1. The overruling providence of God. Things come to pass at his ordering. 
2. The certainty that sin will be punished. Though judgment be delayed, it is not 
averted. — ^W. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XXV. 



This chapter is filled up with a very 
graphic account of the entire career of 
Amaziah, and its twenty-eight verses are 
paralleled by the twenty verses of 2 Kings 
xiv. 1 — 20, where the narrative reads in 
several places much more cuitly. Our 
chapter opens with the familiar anticipatory 
summary of the man, his age, pedigree, and 
character, whose course is to be detailed 
more precisely in following verses, again 
and yet again sounding the clear key-note 
of an unclean character and reign (vers. 1, 
2) ; it proceeds to record the king's avenging 
of his father's murder (vers. 3, 4); his suc- 
cessful sally against " the children of Seir," 
with the incident of the affronted division of 
army, formed of them that " came to him 
out of Ephraim " (vers. 5—13) ; his defec- 
tion to idolatry, and insult put upon the 
faithful "prophet" (vers. 14—16); his 
jaunty and provocative challenge to Joash 
of Israel, to his own overthrow (vers. 17 — 24); 
his end (vers. 25—28). 

Ver. 1 . — Twenty and five years old . . , 



reigned twenty and nine years. Glance at 
notes on vers. 1, 15, 17 of foregoing chapter, 
from which it appears that, as Joash died 
setat. forty-seven, and Amaziah was now 
twenty-five, he must have been born when 
his father was twenty-two years old, and 
Jehoaddan correspondingly likely to have 
been one of the two wives Jehoiada selected 
for Joash, at the age, on other data, of twenty- 
one years. Of Jerusalem, This affix to the 
mother's name may perhaps cany credit to 
the memory of Jehoiada, for having been 
careful to select a woman of the honoured 
city rather than of any provincial or even 
less worthy city. 

Ver. 2. — Not with a perfect heart. This 
is illustrated by his coming " to set up the 
gods of Edom " (vers. 14—16, 20) ; also by 
what the parallel supplies, that he resembled 
Joash rather than David, and did not sup- 
press "the high places, sacrifices, and in- 
cense-burning" (2 Kings xiv. 3, 4). In 
almost all cases, the not-perfect heart speaks 
of that which began well, but did not " endure 
unto the end." 

Ver. 3.— Was established to him; Hebrew, 
np^in. This is kal conjugation of the verb, 
which we found in piel in ver. 5 of foregoing 
chapter, and there rendered " repair." The 
kal force of the word is simply to "be 
strong" (Gen. xli. 57; Josh. ivil. 13; 3 



OH. XXV. 1—28.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



299 



Kings xiv. 5). The hiph., to " make strong,'' 
or "confirm," as it is rendered Tiere, is 
found in 2 Kings xv. 19. Again and again 
the disorders of the kingdom and the -violent 
deaths of prophets and kings must have 
^eatly contributed to nervous apprehen- 
sions, in fact only too just, wheu a new king 
ascended the throne. In the parallel and 
in passage last quoted the words, " in liis 
hand," follow the verb. Amaziah both 
needed to get his own hand in, according to 
modern phrase, and to get things well into 
his hand. His servants. It may be held 
surprising that they should have been found 
" in the place," or should now be his servanii 
at all. The explanation may be either that 
their guilt had not yet been known, or, if 
known, had not been fixed upon them. 

Ver. 4. — Slew not their children. Em- 
phasis (the emphasis of mention, at any rate) 
is laid upon this, perhaps partly to show that 
Amaziah did in some measure walk by "the 
Law of the Lord," and partly because of 
numerous cases that had grown up to the 
opposite (2 Kings ix. 8, 26 ; Josh. vii. 24, 25, 
where, however, very possibly all were more or 
less aiders and dbettore of ike wickedness'). 
For Moses' clearly written rehearsal of " the 
commandment of the Lord," ou this subject, 
see the marginal references, Dent. xxiv. 16; 
Jer. xxxi. 29, 30; Ezek. xviii. 4, 19, 20. 

Ver. 5. — This and the following five verses 
are entirely omitted in tiie parallel, which 
contents itself with giving in its ver. 7, in 
fewer words, but with the supplement of 
other matter, what is contained in our ver. 11. 
Found them three hundred thousand. C!om- 
pare Asa's " five hundred and eighty thou- 
sand" (ch. xiv. 8), and Jehoshaphat's 
" eleven hundred and sixty thousand " (ch. 
xvii. 14 — 19; see note, however, on these 
verses, and the improbability of numbers so 
high}. The Hebrew text of the second clause 
of this verse simply says, " he set them " 
(D7Dg<), or placed them acooiding to . . . 
fathers' houses, under captains, etc., glancing 
moiit naturally at Numb. i. 2 — ii. 34. Twenty 
years old and above (comp. 1 Chron. 
xxvii. 23). 

Ver. 6.— Out of Israel. The next verse 
tells us that " all tlie children of Ephraim " 
(which was strictly the northern Israel's 
chief tribe) are hereby designated. It is not 
quite clear th^it this Israel is exactly con- 
terminous with the Israel of ch. xiii. 3, the 
identity of which, however, with Joab's Israel 
(2 Sam. xxiv. 9) is very probable. The 
boundaries of the strict tribe of Ephraim, 
whose ancestor was Joseph's younger son, 
are described in Josh. xvi. 5. The tribe 
were located as nearly as possible in the 
centre of the land. Ephraim, however, is 
here, as in many other places, as the name 
of the royal tribe, so named upon the whole 



of the northern kingdom (Isa. ix. 8 ; xviL 
8 ; xxviii. .S ; several times in almost every 
chapter of Hosea, and for a typical instance, 
of. Hos. xiv. 8). 

Ver. 7. — (Pee foregoing chapter, ver. 19.) 
The name of this man of God does not tran- 
spire. To wit, with. These three words, all 
in italic type, if entirely omitted, and not 
even the preposition adopted, as in the Re- 
vised Version, into the ordinary type, will 
leave the intention of the writer clearer rather 
than less clear. 

Ver. 8. — It is hard to feel satisfied as to 
the correct rendering of this verse. The 
drift of the next verse, which shows Amaziah 
a convert to the strong exhortation of the 
man of God, makes either alternative allow- 
able under the present text very untimely, 
abd not very much in accord with what we 
should look for at the lips of the man of 
God. The very conceivable way out of the 
difficulty is to read i/h, hyphened to on (all 
the rather that no vau is present in ^<3, as 
the present text is), and proceed to supply 
S3 or ma again before nriK, crediting soma 
copyist with confusion of eye through these 
having come close together in his manuscript. 
The rendering will then be straightforward, 
and prepare the way for Amaziah's yielding 
conformably with the tenor of the next 
verse. " But if not " (i.e. if thou wilt not be 
guided by my remonstrance as to Ephraim), 
"go thou, be on the alert, exert all the 
strength possible for the battle, and yet 
nevertheless God will cause thee to stumble." 
And the remaining sentence may bear this 
significance, " For God hath power to help 
thee though alone, or to cast thee down 
though supported by an extra hundred 
thousand." If such alteration or conjectural 
restoration of the text be not accepted, we 
may harmonize the facts of the case with the 
most utter faithfulness of lip on the part of 
the prophet, by translating, "For in very 
truth, if thou go at all, and though thou make 
the best preparations, God shall make it go ill 
with thee." And Amaziah is persuaded to 
this point, that he will neither risk the liveg 
of them of Ephraim vainly, nor risk the like- 
lier displeasure of God on himself. He 
yields only partly, and therefore is nothing 
benefited. The difficulty is left untouched, 
that the prophet did not simply in toto for- 
bid Amaziah to go, and that, saving them 
of Ephraim, he saves them to be a second 
scourge for the back of Amaziah, though he 
took his prophet's advice so far, and lost his 
own money. A careful and devout observer 
of human life and perverseness, when once 
these commit themselves to the vain struggle 
with God, and equally vain attempt to 
haggle with hie providence as to how much 
to yield and how much to resist and with- 
hold, cannot but be struck with the photo. 



soo 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxv. 1—28. 



graph here thrown off, and that it is a faithful 
one, of hard facta that have met together 
disastrously times without number in men's 
liyes. The sum, then, of the matter of our 
Ters. 7, 8 may amount to this : " Under no 
ciicnmstances take Israel, and if thou go 
thyself with all best preparations, yet know 
thiit God shall destroy thee." 

Ver. 9. — This verse is consummate in the 
two touches by which it sets forth the phase 
of earth's caloulatinguess respecting the 
perishable, and Heaven's swift disposal of 
any such trifling difBoulty. 

Ver. 10. — It appears that, though this con- 
tingent from Israel's land was a hired force, 
yet for some reason their heart was in their 
calling, perhaps in anticipation of plunder. 
It may well be that they asked why they 
were discharged; and whether the right an- 
Bwer were given them, that the Lord dwelt 
not among them, or some wrong answer, it 
evidently did not improve matters, but 
rankled in their hearts till it found relief 
(vers. 13, 22), as they concluded that either 
their ability or fiilelity, or both, were called 
in question. The ' Speaker's Commentary ' 
very aptly cites the keen resentment and 
mortification that the Athenians are recorded 
to have felt in similar circumstances as told 
in Plutarch's 'Lives:' " Cimon," § 17. 
Separated them. This is the verb occurring 
several times in the first verses of Gen. i. 
(D^'P') ; there it is always followed by the 
preposition <a, when speaking of the sepa- 
rating of two things from one another. 
Though this be meant here, it is not what is 
exactly said, and the prefix preposition ^ 
before the substantive (yniiji) may, as Keil 
says, be regarded as designating the apposi- 
tional accusative to that afBxed in the shape 
of the pronoun " tliem " to the verb. 

Ver. 11. — Strengthened himself. The 
hithp. conjugation of our already familiar 
verb pin ; it was not a healthy strengthen- 
ing, and this may be considered denoted in 
the Tact that the work was all his own, and 
that he wrought himself np. The valley of 
salt. Commonly supposed to be the plain 
south of the Salt Sea, but according to Stan- 
ley ('Sinai and Palestine,' Appendix, § 2. 5, 
pp. 482, 483), more probably a "ravine near 
Petra " (1 Chron. xviii. 12 ; 2 Sam. viii. 13). 
(For the association of Seir with Edom, see 
Gen. xxxvi. 17—20 ; oh. xx. 10.) 

Ver. 12.— The top of the rook. The 
parallel uses the Hebrew word without trans- 
lation, SeldK (Jj^en). There is little doubt 
that this is Petra (Conder's 'Handbook to 
the Bible,' 305 ; Stanley's ' Sinai and Pales- 
tine,' 87—92). The parallel tells us the 
interesting fact that Amaziah, perhaps under 
the influence of a spasmodic touch of dovout- 
neai oi gratitude, changed the name of 



Selah, or rather endeavoured to ohangs it, to 
Joktheel, which Gesenius translates "sub- 
jugated of God." This name had already 
occurred in Josh. xv. 38. The new name, how- 
ever, did not last, as the Edomites recovered 
soon the country of (oh. xxviii. 17; Amos i. 
11 ; Isa. xvi. 1, 2) Arabia Petrsea, of which 
Selah or Petra was the capital. Left alive. 
The Revised Version correctly renders, carry 
away alive. The cruelty of the Edomites 
receives many illustrations (see last references, 
and Ezek. xxv. 12—14 ; Obad. 1—15). 

Ver. 13.— The soldiers . . . sent back . . . 
fell upon the oities of JTudah, from Samaria to 
Beth-horon. There is probably something 
to read between the lines here, to wit, that 
the soldiers returned to their master and king 
(Joash of Israel), and were by him remitted 
to this work. The mention of Samaria before 
Beth-horon (see map) indicates it, and the 
words " sent back " may be held to imply, 
at least, that they first went back — that the 
disappointment of spoil was the chief part 
of their aggravations, so that now the rather 
they got their maoh spoil, and note made 
thereof, and that — since not so much the 
instructive and so far forth more excusable 
revenge on the part of the disappointed 
soldiers, but the deliberate plan and order 
of their king had brought about this devas- 
tation of Amaziah's domains, in this fact we 
have the key of what we read in our vers. 17, 
18, etc., and of the very cool manner in 
which Amaziah challenged Joash. The 
cities of Judah attacked were apparently 
those tliat once had belonged to Ephraim. 
Smote three thousand of them; i.e. of the 
people of them. 

Ver. 14. — Brought the gods of the children 
of Seir ... to be his gods. Amaziah's de- 
vout gratitude to God, and acknowledgment 
of him in the name Joktheel, was soon gone, 
and at the very last, grown confident, he 
loses all, and realizes the fulfilment of the 
" man .of God's " prophetic denunciations. 

Ver. 15. — He sent nnto him a prophet. 
We are again not told whom. The tone of 
the prophet, and the words given us as his 
in the latter half of ver. 16, would lead us 
to tliink it was the same " man of God ; " but 
we cannot assert it, and had it been the 
same, it would more probably have tran- 
spired. The history now often reminds us of 
oh. xxiv. 16. 

Ver. 16. — The chapter well keeps up in 
this verse its graphic character, though 
the culminating instances of it are yet to 
come. Forbear. The faithfnl prophet is 
" wise as the serpent, harmless as the dove." 
He dioet forbear, but not till the application 
of his speech, and all that was needful is 
most outspokenly (more so tlian before he 
had heard the usual coward fashion of the 
tyrant's threat) pronounced. Ui* forbearing, 



OH. XXV. 1—28.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



801 



therefore, is open to no charge of moral 
cowardice and unprophet-like infidelity. 

Ver. 17. — Took advice; i.e. took counsel; 
ai in foregoing verse, " Art thou made king's 
counsellor?" and as in same verse, "coun- 
selled " sliould read instead of "determined." 
The verb (YV;), in kal, niph., and once only 
in hithp., occurs just eighty times, always in 
this sense, and almost always so rendered 
in the Authorized Version, Let us see one 
another in the face. A refined analogy to 
this expression, with all its speaking signi- 
ficance, occurs in 2 Sam. ii. 13 ; and, per- 
haps yet more remarkably, a strange sem- 
blance between vers. 14, 15, 17 of that 
chapter and our vers. 21, 22 may be noticed. 
Ver. 18. — The thistle . . . sent to the 
oedar. While other history shows frequently 
the abounding Eastern delight in thiij exact 
kind of composition, it will be remembered 
tliat it is not absent from Scripture, and 
th»t this is not the first recorded instance of 
it by three hundred and fifty years, for see 
Judg. ix. 7 — 15. The thistle; Hebrew, ninn. 
Tlie woid occurs, beside the four times here 
and in the parallel, eight other times : 1 Sam. 
xiii. 6 ; ch. xxxiii. 11 ; Job xxxi. 40 ; xli. 2 ; 
Prov. xxvi. 9 ; Cant. ii. 2 ; Isa. xxxiv. 13 ; 
Hos. ix. 6. Although, then, the word we 
have here is not the "bramble" (1Q><) of 
Judg. ix. 15, whicli also is brought before 
us in its contrast with Lebanon's ledar, yet 
tlie bramble bush, chiefly in virtue of its 
characteristic thorn, best answers to the 
average suggestions of all the twelve in- 
stances of the use of our word. 

Ver. 19. — If the contents of this verse do 
not fail to impress witli a persuasion of the 
kuen mental gift of Joash, they do not fall 
far short of warranting some persuasion of a 
certain moral sense and goodness about him 
also. He knows human nature well, and 
Ainaziah's particular variety therein per- 
fectly well. And many would have snapped 
at the opportunity of humbling such a man. 
But not so Joash ; he enjoys, indeed, the 
opportunity of satisfying his own sarcasm 
and patronizingness, but would still spare 
Amaziah's people and save him from him- 
self. This does not resemble, at any rate, 
the commonest, poorest, hungriest style of 
soul. To boast. Our text gives us here 
hiph. infinitive construct, where the parallel 
has niph. imperative. This lends the more 
effective shaft to the invective of Joash, 
though without material difference to the 
sense. 

Ver. 20. — The whole of the religious re- 
flection, with its special post-Co ptivity sig- 
nificance of this verse, is wanting in the 
parallel, and finds no suggestion either 
thence or from common authorities. The 
parallel shows the statement, But Amaziah 
vould not hear, followed up immediately by 



"Therefore Jehoash . . . went up." On» 
own veise, in the use of the plural pronoun 
them, and again they, takes some slight 
amount of the weight of guilt in the matter 
of the idolatry from the shoulders of the 
king, that it may be shared by the people, 
and no doubt chiefly again by the " princes" 
(ch. xxiv. 17). 

Ver. 21. — Beth-shemesh. The Beth-sho" 
mesh of Jndah, on the borders of Judah, Dan, 
and the Philistines, is to be distinguished 
from that on the boundary of Issachar (Josh, 
xi^. 22), and " the fenced city of Naphtali " 
(Josh. xix. 38). 

Ver. 23. — Joash . . . took ; Hebrew, fe'sn, 
" seized " (as Gen. xxxix. 12), or " caught 
up " (as Dent. ix. 17), or " capture " (as 
Josh. viii. 8). The gate Of Ephraim (see 
Condor's ' Handbook to the Bible,' p. 343). 
It led out on the north or north-west side of 
the city. There is very little to identify it 
with the high gate of Benjamin (see ditto, 
p. 346). The corner gate. This is not the 
translation of our Hebrew text (ra'isn iy», 
which, see margin, means " that looketh "), 
but of the Hebrew text of the parallel (nssn) ; 
see pp. 343 — 346 of Conder's ' Handbook to 
the Bible,' and map facing p. 334, 2ud edit. 
Four hundred cubits. Probably about a 
hundred and eighty yards. 

Ver. 24. — No mention is made in the 
parallel of that custodian of treasures in the 
house of God, here called Obed-Bdom, and 
who pos'sibly was a descendant of the Obed- 
Edom of David's time (2 Sam. vi. 10; 1 
Chron. xiii. 13) ; or an Obed-Edom " a 
porter " (1 Chron. iv. 18 ; ivi. 38 ; xxvi. 4, 
8). The present verse is an interesting one 
for pointing out the exact differences, even 
to the minutest of them, in what tbe two 
writers (of Kings and Chronicles) respec- 
tively took from a common original ; e.g. the 
writer of Kings has "he took;" leaves out 
" Obed-Edom ; " has not the preposition 
" in " before " the house ; " has " Jehovah " 
instead of " God ; " has the preposition " in " 
before " treasures ; " and has " Samaria- 
ward" (i.e. to Samaria) instead of only 
" Samaria ; " the writer of Chronicles differ- 
ing in each of these respects. AU the gold 
... in the house of Qod. Bee 2 Kings xii. 
17, 18, from which we must conclude that 
Hazael had already had the pick both for 
quantity and for quality. The hostages also ; 
the phr.ise runs in the Hebrew text, "and 
sons [or, ' the sons '] of the hostages " (':a riN) 
nianj/nn) ; the literal rendering of which ii 
" children or sons of pledget," i.e. ho$tage$. 
The word (and indeed the practice so preva- 
lent elsewhere) is found only here and in 
the parallel. 

Ver. 25. — Amaziah . . . lived after tht 
death of Joash. The composition of the 
previous two verses dismisses delicately the 



802 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxv. 1— 2a 



fact that Joash, ignominiously bringing 
"Amaziah to JeTusalbm" (ver. 23), con- 
temptuously left him there, with a present 
of Ills life, though less his honour and much 
wealth. 

Ver. 26.— The hook of the kings of Jndah 
end Israel. The parallel bas " the book of 
the chronicles of the kings of Judah." Con- 
sidering the amount and the cbaracter of 
the resemblance that we have noticed be- 
tween the narratives in Kings and in our 
own text, and assuming that the work to 
which each compiler calls attention for the 
fuller elucidation of his subject of biography 
is the work which he has him^ielf most 
largely laid under contribution, then we 
should justly feel in this instance that we 
had no feeble argument for ihe identity of 
the two works, called by rather different 
titles — by the writer of the pre-Captivity, 
" the book of the chronicles of the kings of 
Judah," and by him of the poot-Captivity, 
" the book of the kings of Judah and Israel." 

Ver. 27. — Now after the time that Ama- 
ziah did tnm away from following the Lord. 
Let it be particularly noted that the entire 
of this sentence (wliich is a strong anachron- 
ism «u» generis) is wanting in the parallel. 
It is, of course, in its matter intrinsically 
true, but none the less misleading in its 
form. The object of the writer cannot ba 
doubted, as so many a cross-light is thrown 



npon it, in other places, viz. to connect the 
rise and the operativcness of the conspiracy 
with the fact that (though not the exact date 
at which) the king bad turned aside from 
Jehovah to idols. They made a conspiracy. 
When every deduction is made, it may be that 
the conspiracy was one that was long hatch- 
ing, and one which began in embryo from 
the date of Amaziah's ignominious return 
to Jerusalem. Very certain it is that this 
would be historic certainty with the Paris of 
the past century or more. The French 
would have required a deadly explanation 
of such an affront, if brought upon them by 
any ruler of theirs. He fled to Lachish. In 
the Shefelah of Judah, and a strongly forti- 
fied place (eh. xi. 9 ; Josh. x. 3, 32 ; xv. 39 ; 
2 Kings xir. 19 ; xviii. 11 ; xix. 8 ; Isa. 
xxxvi. 2; Jer. xixiv. 7; Micah i. 13). 
Eusebius places it seven Boman miles south 
of Eleutheropolis. 

Ver. 28. — They brought him npon horses ; 
Hebrew text, " upon the horses," i.e. those 
same royal horses presumably with which 
he had fled to Lachish. This seems the 
most natural suggestion arising from the 
memorandum made here, and may indicate 
that they visited him with no additional 
gratuitous disrespect. In the city of Jndah. 
Probably an incorrect text for that of 2 
Kings xiv. 20, " the city of David," which 
is found in some of the manuscripts. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 28. — Another type of uncertain character. We are at once advised, in refer- 
ence to Amaziah, that he " did right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect 
heart." The expression might be supposed to cover the description of a man whose 
life was in the main right, but who was betrayed by temptation into some serious sins, 
of which, like David, he bitterly repented, bui genuinely repented, and was restored 
to peace and favour. No such interpretation, however, is here possible. And as there 
are some very marked features in the character of the folly and sin of Amaziah, they 
must not be overlooked or missed, having due regard to the brevity and exactitude 
ol Scripture biography. We have here, then — 

I. A MAN WHOSE DISCEKNMBNT WAS BUCH THAT HE WAS EQUAL TO SEEING AND 

TAKING WARNING AND GODLY ADVICE. It ig in the heart of Amaziah to fight with the 
Edomites. It is a temptation with him again, as with predecessors of his on the throne, 
to borrow and pay for the help of the separated kingdom of Israel. Certain kinds of 
friendship are certain to turn out certain snares. Our safety is often simply a complete 
separation from persons or things that have been found to partake of the nature of a 
snare. These two things look strange — only too natural, if we know enough of our 
own weak, self-deceiving hearts— in the attitude of Amaziah at this moment. He 
listens to the teaching of the prophet, is no doubt startled and vexed thus to be called 
on to forfeit his methods and arrangements for the warfare that he would war, but 
seems to take his stand rather on the money that he perceives he will forfeit for 
nothing, as it seems to him I This is one side of the matter. But the other shows him, 
happily, both amenable to the prophet's reminder that God was "able to give him 
much more " than that hundred talents ; and also equal to the effort of dismissing his 
hired mercenaries of Israel, and of encountering thereby their fierce indignation. 
Amaziah had heeded the warning of the prophet (ver. 8), and he now heeds the 



OH. XXV. 1—28.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE OnRONICLES. 303 

aBBuiance with trustful faith of the same prophet ; he goes up to war, and has a splendid 
success. 

II. A MAN WHOSE DISCBBNMBNT, UNDEK SOME UNTOWAKD INFLUENOB, SEEMED 
ALMOST SUDDENLY TO BECOME SO BLUNTED THAT HE CANNOT BROOK A GODLT PROPHBT'B 
BEMONSTBANCB, BUT DEFIANTLY AND WITH MENACE BEJECTS IT. There iS Scarcely 

room to doubt what had wrought in the interim the disastrous change. Success I 
Boastfulness and self-confidence had been the untimely growth of the very ground 
where gratitude, obedience, self-distrust, and the profoundest disposition of reliance on 
God and his prophet should have been found. . Success had more than turned the brain 
of Amaziah. He worships the gods who had not delivered him. He worships the 
gods who had not delivered "their own people," whom he had destroyed. He worships 
not, and glorifies not, his own God and the God of his fathers, but is a marvel of an 
apostate, and a monster of blinded ingratitude, and a monument of blunted discernment, 
of perverted fatuity ! 

III. A MAN FOR WHOM HIS TOWEHINO BELF-SUFFIOIENCY AND SELF-GLORIFICATION 
" EXCITB THE PITY, BEG THE WARNING, AND BEOBIVB THE BEST AND THE HONEST ADVICE 

OF THE VERY FOB WHOM HE INSULTINGLY CHALLENGES TO FIGHT. It is evident that the 

King of Israel was able to read the human nature that was in Amaziah of Judah (vers. 
18 — 20). And it is evident that the King of Israel did not desire to be answerable for 
the blood of the same Amaziah. He " puts him to the worse," takes much spoil of 
him, breaks down the walls of his city — the holy city ; and, bathos of humiliation for 
Amaziah, " took him," "brought him to" that, his own city, and left him there, in all 
his fallen glory and mulcted wealth, to meditate on "the wages of sin," even when they 
fall short of death. Men's enemies sometimes love their lives and souls better, alas I 
than they do themselves. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. 2.—" Doing right, but " It is well, indeed, when iniquity is qualified with 

some redeeming features, as we are thankful to think it often is. A man is ungodly, 
or cruel, or self-indulgent, or mercenary, lut he has something in him which makes 
him much less condemnable than he would otherwise be. Unfortunately, goodness also 
is often qualified ; of the man concerning whom we have much to say in praise there 
is something serious to say by way of detraction. Of every good man there may be 
something to record which is not favourable ; but the qualification may be so slight 
that it is the mere " dust in the balance." Too often it has to be " written in heaven," 
and perhaps upon earth also, that he " did what was right, hut not with a perfect heart." 
There are some — 

I. Discernible deficiencies in Christian character. One Christian man is blame- 
less in behaviour so far as the main features of morality are concerned, but he is so 
reserved and reticent, so unapproachable, that he exerts but very little influence. Another 
is very ardent and enthusiastic in the cause of Christ, very open-hearted and open-handed, 
but he is very irritable and ill-tempered, so that he is avoided or even disliked. A 
third is very tender and sympathetic in spirit, with a ready ear and an unselfish con- 
sideration for every tale of difficulty or distress, but he is very weak, pliant, credulous ; 
no one can attach any weight to his judgment. A fourth is possessed of many of the 
virtues and graces of Christian character, but he is very weak in some one direction, 
much too open to temptation of one particular kind, and his friends are always appre- 
hensive lest he should succumb, and fall quite seriously. These are defects (1) to be 
pointed out by friends, and to be recognized frankly by those who are the subjects of 
them ; (2) to be carefully, conscientiously, devoutly corrected and removed, lest the 
"gospel of Christ be hindered," lest the Master himself be displeased and dishonoured. 
But there are — 

II. More serious inconsistencies. 1. In Christian life. It may be that one who 
has considered himself, and who has been considered, a true disciple of Jesus Christ, 
falls back, falls down (1) into condemnable self-indulgence ; or (2) into an arrogance 
of spirit and haughtiness of bearing which are as hateful to men as (we know) they 
are offensive to God ; or (3) into a lightness and irreverence of tone which cannot fail 
to be as displeasing to Christ as it is painful to "the devout and earnest-minded among 



804 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHEONICLES. [oh. xxv. 1—28. 

men ; or (4) into a serious selfishness of soul which has no eye for anything but its 
own personal and passing interests. 2. In Christian work. It may be that one who 
has shown much earnestness in the field of sacred usefulness, either (1) loses all interest 
in that for which he once thought much and laboured hard, or (2) becomes so opinionated 
and so peremptory that no one can co-operate with him, and he has to be left alone. 
He is practically disabled by his self-assertiveness. Now, there is too often found to be — 
III. One bupbeme mistake. It is that which was probably committed by Amaziah, 
viz. that of never yielding ourselTes thoroughly to the service of God. It is likely that 
the King of Judah only gave half an heart to the worship of Jehovah ; that his piety 
was superficial, formal, constrained, essentially and radically imperfect; that he was 
like the young man of the Gospel narrative, who had " kept the commandments from 
his youth up," but who was never so thoroughly in earnest as to be ready to give up 
everything to attain eternal life (Mark x. 17 — 22). If we do not yield ourselves wholly 
to our Divine Saviour, we shall find, as we pursue our way, that at some important 
crisis our obedience will be at fault ; or our devotion will fail ; or our character will be 
blemished, and our reputation will break down ; or we shall leave the field and lose our 
reward (2 John 8). Therefore : 1. Let us realize how great, how supreme, how pre- 
vailing, are the claims of our Divine Redeemer. 2. Let us offer our hearts and lives to 
him in fuU and glad self-surrender. Then shall it not be written of us, that " we did 
right, hut not with a perfect heart." — 0. 

Vers. 5 — 9. — Qold, and the favour of Qod. There is something which approaches, if 
it does not amount to, the ludicruus in the question so solemnly proposed by Amaziah, 
" But what shall we do for the hundred talents which I have given to the army of 
Israel?" Could it be the right thing and the wise thing to sacrifice all that money? 
Were a hundred talents to be thrown away? Supposing he defeated the enemy with- 
out the help of these mercenaries, would it not be a mortifying thing that he had spent 
such a sum to no purpose? But Amaziah was so situated that he had to make thr 
choice which has so often to be made ; he had to choose between sacrificing his money 
or forfeiting the favour of his God. He had the wisdom to accept the former alterna- 
tive, and to believe the prophet, that the Lord was " able to give him more than this." 
On the choice which we make, when this question comes up for settlement by ourselves, 
there hang great issues. Wherefore let us well consider — 

I. The limitations to the value of gold. Gold serves many useful purposes ; 
through it we can secure the necessaries and the comforts of life, the conditions of 
education, the advantages of good society ; but its power is very limited, after all. 
1. Its possession, so far from ensuring happiness, often entails much burdensomeness, 
and always imposes a heavy responsibility. 2. Its tenure is slight and short; an acci- 
dent or a revolution, impossible to foresee, may take it suddenly away, and at death 
it must be relinquished. 3. It is wholly powerless in the presence of some of the 
sadder and graver evils of our life. 4. It tempts to indolence and indulgence, and it 
may be doubted whether it does not spoil more lives than it brightens and blesses. 

II. The boundless blessedness of the favotjb of God. The Lord was not only 
able to give Amaziah "much more than this," much more than " a hundred talents of 
silver," but he was able to bless him in ways which were incomparably superior to 
Buch material enrichment. And so is he able and most willing to bless us. Willingly 
should we part with gold and silver at his bidding, to be true and loyal disciples to our 
Master, to preserve our spiritual integrity ; for if we do this " for Christ's sake and the 
gospel's" (Mark viii. 35) there will be for us ample and most abundant compensation 
for what we lose. 1. The peace of God, which passes understanding, and which sur- 
passes all material values. 2. The positive and active friendship of our Lord, and of 
the good and true. 3. A life of noble and fruitful service. 4. A death of hope. 
6. A future of immortal glory. In view of these things, we need not be greatly con- 
cerned about the loss of a hundred or a thousand talents. — C. 

Ver. 16. — ThtfoUy of irreligion. The remonstrance addressed by the prophet of the 
Lord to Amaziah was well grounded ; his argument was oondusive. We are simply 
Astonished at — 

L Thb ikfatuatiok p;? jix>LATBT. What insensate folly of the King of Judah to 



OB, xxT. 1— 28.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE 0HR0NI0LE8. 806 

turn from the service of Jehovah, who had just granted him a signal proof of his power 
and his goodness, to the service and the worship of the gods of the very people be had 
defeated (ver. 14)1 Well might he be reproached for conduct bo culpable and so 
irrational. Any one who was conversant with the history of the Hebrew people, even 
up to this time, might have known that faithfulness to Jehovah was accompanied by 
victory and prosperity, and that, contrariwise, idolatry was attended with misery and 
disaster. And yet, such was " the deceitfulness of sin," we find king and courtier, 
priest and people, lapsing into disobedience and iniquity. We are not now under the 
temptation which proved too strong for Amaziah, but we may make a mistake as 
serious and as senseless as he made, 

II. The folly or ibebliqion, akd bspeoiallt of spiritual unfajthfulitess. For 
what is it that we see? 1. A large number of men and women honouring various false 
gods ; it is some form of temporal success ; it may be physical enjoyment, or it may be 
the possession of wealth, or it may be social position, or it may be political power, or 
it may be professional distinction. 2. These votaries are not blessed by the deities 
they are serving ; for these " powers" are weakness itself ; they "cannot deliver their 
own people," their own adherents. They do not deliver them from failure, from dis- 
appointment, from heartache, from misery. They do not gladden the heart and brighten 
and beautify the life of those who are seeking and serving them. Even those who 
have reached the heights they set themselves to climb, who have grasped the goal 
towards which they ran, have confessed, again and again, that they have not found 
rest unto their soul, but rather disquietude, craving, envy — a sense of dreariness and 
defeat. Why, then, should we add our souls to the number of the unblessed, of the 
deceived and the betrayed ? Why, indeed, should we who have tasted of better things 
be so indescribably foolish as to abandon "our Rock "for " their rock " (Deut. xxxii. 31)? 
Why should we seek after the " gods that cannot deliver their own people " ? And this 
folly is the greater when we take into our account — 

III. The proved wisdom of piety. For has it not been abundantly confirmed that 
" godliness has the promise of the life that now is, as well as of that which is to come " ? 
Do not we who have followed Christ know, and can we not testify, that to be his true 
disciple, his faithful servant — this is to be : 1. Gladdened with all joy; 2. Comforted 
in all sorrow. 3. Enlarged in all obscurity and lowliness of sphere. 4. Engaged in 
the best and noblest of all works — the work of human elevation. 5. Sustained by the 
most exalted hope — the hope of everlasting life in his own royal presence. — 0. 

Vers. 17 — 24. — Human presumption. In the correspondence between these two 
kings and the action which ensued we have a very striking illustration of the evil of 
human presumption. 

I. It may be begotten of a blight success. " Thou hast smitten the Edomites ; 
and thy heart lifteth thee up to boast" (ver. 19). Some men are soon inflated; even a 
little " knowledge puffeth up." And a very slight achievement, in art, or in song, or 
in speech, or in manufacture, is enough to fill them with vanity, to cause them to 
" think more highly of themselves than tUey ought to think," to make them presume 
upon an ability which they are far from possessing. Complacency is an element which 
socc rises to the surface in human nature; it takes a very slight touch to stir it. 

II. It kat ES9ET A SINFUL SC0RNFULNES8. On this occasiou the presumption of 
Amaziah provoked the contemptuous answer of Joash (ver. 18). There is something 
very unbeautiful and unbecoming in human scorn. Derision is a rather frequent 
action, and those who employ it take great pride in it. But we may be sure that it is 
offensive in the sight of the Lord of love. We may pity, we may condemn, we may 
reproach one another, rightly and faithfully. But to pour out on one another the 
spittle of our scorn, — this is an unworthy, an ungodly, a blameful thing. Joash no 
doubt felt a keen satisfaction in his reference to the cedar and the thistle, and sent his 
message with enjoyment ; but the Father of spirits would be grieved to see one of his 
children thus treating another with withering contempt. Soom may be a pleasant 
thing, but it is a sinful thing. 

III. It suffebb an humiliating defeat. (Yers. 21, 22.) Failure and humiliation 
are the inevitable end of human presumption. It is certain in time to undertake soma 
task too great for its strength, to go up to a battle against a foe which it cannot fight; 

IT. OHBONIOLSa X 



308 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh xxt. 1— 28 

and we know what will be the issue. Whatever the field may be— whether political, 
commercial, literary, ecclesiastical, social — the man of presumptuous spirit is on his 
way to an ignominious defeat. He will attempt the leap which he cannot make, and 
he will come down heavily to the ground. 

IV. It BND0EE8 OTHER PENALTIES BESIDES. In the case of Joash it meant, beside 
defeat, captivity, the violation of the capital, and the spoliation of the temple, the miseries 
of remorse as he pondered in his palace. How senselessly he had brought this calamity 
on himself (see ver. 15) ! Presumption is sure to result in adversity of more kinds than 
one. It ends in the bitter mortification of defeat, of conscious overthrow and dishonour ; 
it usually ends (as here) in loss, either of property, or of reputation, or of friendship — 
perhaps of all of these at the same time. It frequently brings down upon a man the 
severe reproaches of those who have been injured along with the principal offender. 
For guilt of this kind commonly involves misery to many beside the criminal. It is 
Jerusalem, and even Judah, as well as Amaziah, on whom the blow comes down. 

1. Let us know ourselves well, lest we make an egregious and fatal mistake. 2. Let 
us ask God to reveal our feebleness to our own eyes. — C. 

Vers. 1—4. — The accession of Amaziah. I. The title he had to the theone. 
The son of Joash, most likely the eldest. His mother's name was Jehoaddan of 
Jerusalem. Whether she, like her husband, had declined into idolatry cannot be told. 

II. The reign he enjoyed on the throne. Twenty- nine years — eleven years less 
than his father reigned. Eighteen years older than Joash when he obtained the crown, 
he was only seven years older when he put it off. Clearly idolatry in those days was 
not conducive to longevity. 

III. The ohabacter he maintained on the throne. Mixed. 1. Qood. "He 
did that which was right in the sight of the Lord," as his father did while Jehoiada 
lived (ch. xxiv. 2) ; i.e. he abandoned idolatry and became a worshipper of Jehovah. 

2. Not perfect. " Not with a perfect heart," as it should have been (1 Kings viii. 61), 
after the examples of Asa (oh. xv. 17 ; 1 Kings xv. 14) and David (2 Kings xiv. 3 ; 
Ps. ci. 2). His return to the worship of Jehovah was probably (1) dictated by fear, 
occasioned by the recollection of his father's untimely and violent death ; hence (2) 
deficient in extent, the high places not being removed (2 Kings xiv. 4); and (3) 
destitute of permanence — in fact, dropped when he felt himself secure upon his throne 
(ver. 14). 

IV. The acts he performed ebom the throne. Two. 1. A deed of vengeance. 
"He slew his servants that had killed the king his father." (1) Justice demanded 
this. If his father deserved to die, which seems indisputable, it is not clear that Zabad 
and Jehozahad had a right to be his executioners. (2) Filial piety approved this. 
Under the Law it was the next kinsman's duty to avenge the blood of a slain relative 
(Deut. xix. 12). Amaziah would have proved himself an unnatural son had he spared 
any longer than he could help the assassins of his father. (3) Prudence recommended 
this. Doubtless Amaziah feared that some day the fate of Joash would be his, if these 
men lived. 2. An exercise of clemency. " He slew not their children." (1) Consider- 
ing what the Law of Moses said (Deut. xxiv. 16), this was right ; (2) remembering the 
universal practice of the Orient, it was merciful; (3) if they were yoimg children when 
the wicked deed was done, it was humane as well as right. 

Lessons. 1. The vanity of earthly glory — even kins;s must die. 2. The imperfec- 
tion of human goodness — the best of men but men at the best. 3. The impossibility 
of escaping for ever the due reward of one's evil deeds, except by repentance and faith 
in Jesus Christ. 4. The beauty of clemency in all, but especially in kings. " Earthly 
power doth then show likest God's when mercy seasons justice " (' Merchant of Venice,' 
act iv. 80, 1). — W. 

Ven. 6 — ^13. — A campaign against the Edomites. I. Wablikb fbepabations. 
(Vers. 6, 6.) 1. 2%e army mustered. " Amaziah gathered " Judah together ; " i.e. 
collected for review, probably in Jerusalem, all in the southern kingdom who were 
capable of bearing arms. 2. The army organized. "He made them captains over 
thousands, and captains over hundreds, according to the houses of their fathers, through- 
oat all Judah and Benjamin." Compare Samuel's prediction (1 Sam. viii. 12), and 



OH. TXT. 1—28.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHKONICLBS. 807 

Hoses' practice (Numb. xxxi. 14 ; Deut. i. 15). Order and subordination indispensable 
to the efBcieucy of a host. Since the days of Jehoiada (ch. xxiii. 1 ; 2 Kings xi. 15) 
the army had probably become disorganized. 3. The army numlered. "And he 
numbered them from twenty years old and above, and found them three hundred 
thousand choice men — a considerably smaller force than Asa led out against Zerah 
(ch. xiv. 8), or than Jehoshaphat possessed (ch. xvii. 14 — 18). The explanation is, 
either that only the flower of Amaziah's troops, the picked men of the army, were 
numbered, or the force had been diminished by the disastrous wars of the preceding 
reigns. What is next stated renders this probable. 4. The army increased. "He 
hired also an hundred thousand mighty men of valour out of Israel for an hundred 
talents of silver " (£50,000, if the talent be valued at £500). 

II. Pbophbtio warnings. (Vers. 7, 8.) The prophet's name is not given, but his 
admonition is : 1. ^ dissuasive. Against allowing Israel to accompany the army of 
Judah to battle. If the king's recollection of former alliances with the northern 
kingdom did not remind him of the unadvisedness of the course he was contemplating 
(ch. xviii. 28 ; xx. 35 ; xxii. 5 ; 1 Kings xxii. 29 ; 2 Kings iii. 7), the earnestness of 
Jehovah's messenger might have startled him. 2. A reason. Jehovah was not with 
Israel, not with any of the sons of Ephraim, because of their defection into idolatry. 
What had been true of Eehoboam (ch. xii. 5), what had been threatened to Asa (ch. 
XV. 2), what had been the case with Judah in the previous reign (ch. xxiv. 20), was 
the habitual and seemingly permanent condition of the northern people. They had 
forsaken God, and he had in turn forsaken them. To seek the help of Israel, therefore, 
was to seek help in a quarter where no help was, rather whence hurt alone could 
proceed. It is hardly doubtful that the people of God err in asking the assistance of 
God's enemies for their schemes, whether those schemes be material such as church- 
building, or spiritual such as propagating the gospel, and whether that aid be in the 
form of money, influence, or men. The Jews who returned from Babylon would not 
accept assistance from the Samaritans in building their temple (Ezra iv. 3). Should 
the Church of Jesus Christ accept the aid of the unbelieving world? 3. An alterna- 
tive, or an exhortation. " If thou wilt go [i.e. with these northern allies], then go, 
do valiantly, he strong for the battle," i.e. do your best — the language of irony ; or, 
according to another rendering (Ewald, Bertheau, Keil), " If thou wilt go, go alone, do 
valiantly, he strong for the battle." But in this case the force of the first clause is 
lost, as there was no question as to "going" or "not going" put before Amaziah, hut 
merely as to " going with " or " without Israel." 4. A threatening or a promise. 
" God shall cast thee down before the enemy," or " God shall (not) cast thee down 
before the enemy," the word " not " being supplied. If Amaziah went depending on 
the assistance of his mercenaries, he would lose the battle ; if he left them behind and 
went forth with only his own forces, he would prove victorious. The great lesson 
Jehovah was constantly, by means of his prophets (Isa. xxvL 3, 4 ; Ivii. 13 ; Jer. xxxix. 
18 ; xlii. 11 ; Nah. i. 7) and the events of his providence, striving to impress upon 
Israel and Judah was that of exclusive reliance upon himself, as the only means of 
ensuring their safety and continued prosperity (ch. xx. 20) ; the same lesson is urgently 
required by Christians (Rom. xv. 13 ; Eph. ii. 8). 5. An argument. " God hath 
power to help or to cast down" — to help his people without allies, as he helped 
Jehoshaphat (ch. xx. 22), Asa (ch. xiv. 12), and Abijah (ch. xiii. 15); or to cast down his 
people, even in spite of allies, as he did formerly with Joash (ch. xxiv. 24), with 
Jehoshaphat (1 Kings xxii. 36), and with Eehoboam (ch. xiii. 9), and afterwards with 
Ahaz (oh. xxviii. 16 — 19). 

III. Kingly excuses. (Ver. 9.) 1. Proposed. Amaziah felt a difiSculty about 
complying with the prophet's counsel. He might send back his allies to Joash in 
Jezreel or Samaria ; but what about his talents ? These his royal brother would not 
be likely to return. He might go to battle without his hired troops, but who would 
give him his silver moneys ? One hundred talents was a large sum to lose even for a 
king. Amaziah was of Shylock's mind, " You take my house when you do take the 
prop that doth sustain my house " (' Merchant of Venice,' act iv. sc. 1). Like the Jew 
who lamented more over the loss of his ducats — ^his " Christian ducats," " a sealed bag, 
two sealed bRgs of ducats, of double ducats . . . and jewels" — than the flight of his 
daughter, Amaziah mourned less the idea of parting with his mercenaries than the fact 



808 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxv. 1— 28. 

that they would carry with them his precions talents. 2. Answered. The man of 
God might have replied (1) that even if he kept bis allies his hundred talents 
were lost, while he would certainly lose the battle iu addition ; or (2) that if he parted 
with his hirelings be would prove victorious, which would more than compensate for 
the loss of his talents ; but the man of God responded (3) that Jehovah, if he pleased, 
could give him much more than a hundred talent s. He saici not, indeed, that Jehovah 
would give bim more than be would lose, because considerations of money do not enter 
into questions of right and wrong. The moral quality of an action is not determined 
by its financial results. Simply the prophet stated that Jehovah could give the king 
much more than a hundred talents, which was true, since the silver and the gold 
were his (1 Chron. xxix. 11, 12; Hag. ii. 8), and he gave them to whomsoever he 
would (Prov. XXX. 8 ; Bccles. v. 19 ; Ps. cxxvii. 1, 2). 

IV. Field operations. (Vers. 10 — 12.) 1. ITie dismissal of the mercenaries. The 
army out of Ephraim was separated from his own troops and sent home to Israel. 
Whether the king, in discharging them, was actuated by cupidity, the desire of getting 
back his talents with interest, or by fear, the dread of losing the battle, — the step he 
took was right, being such as the man of God demanded, prudent as the issue of the 
campaign showed, and bold as the situation required. It was certain to excite the ire of 
the northern warriors, and according to the Chronicler it did : " they returned home in 
fierce anger." Well-duing on the part of good men may stir the wrath of others, to 
whom it may at times appear insulting ; nevertheless, the path of duty must be adhered 
to, though it should lead to the estrangement of friends no less than to the loss of 
ducats. 2. The advance of the army of Judah. Amaziah took courage, added to his 
faith fortitude, as Christians are exhorted to do in the campaign of life (2 Pet. i. 6), 
and led bis forces out with no ally but Jehovah, as far as the Valley of Salt (2 Sam. 
viii. 13 ; 1 Chron. xviii. 12) — a plain about two miles broad, south of the Dead Sea, 
absolutely devoid of vegetation, now called M-Ohor (Eobinson). There he encountered 
the Edomites, or children of Mount Seir, who had revolted from Judah in the days of 
Jehoram (oh. xxi. 8 ; 2 Kings viii. 20), and whose subjugation was the object of the 
present campaign. 3. The defeat of the Edomites. (1) The destruction of their army. 
Ten thousand soldiers were killed, ten thousand prisoners taken. (2) The capture of 
their capital. Selah, "Eock" (Isa. xvi. 1), the well-known Petra or Rook city, was 
taken, and its name changed to Joktheel, or "conquered by God" (2 Kings xiv. 7). 
This remarkable city was situated in a valley (Es Sik, "the cleft;" called by the 
Arabs Wddy Musa) running; from north to south, about three quarters of a mile long, 
and enclosed on all sides by precipitous sandstone rooks of variegated hues, rising in 
some parts to a height of eight hundred or a thousand feet. (For a description of 
Petra, see Stanley's ' Sinai and Palestine,' pp. 87, etc. ; ' Picturesque Palestine,' vol. iiL 
pp. 214, etc. ; ' Forty Days in the Desert,' p. 128.) (3) The slaughter of their people, 
if Amaziah's prisoners were hurled from the cliffs of Petra, their death must have been 
simply appalling. 

V. Unfeiendlt retaliations. (Ver. 13.) 1. By whomf The soldiers of th« 
Israelitish army sent back by Amaziah. The Samaritans, whose aid Zerubbabel 
declined, " weakened the hands of the people of Judah and troubled ttiem in building " 
(Ezra iv. 4) ; and the unbelieving world would oppose, harass, and hinder the Church 
of Christ even more than it does, were it separated as it should be from the Church's 
midst (John xv. 19). But better the world's opposition, hatred, and revenge, with 
God's help, favour, and blessing, than the world's co-operation, friendship, and approba- 
tion, with God's displeasure, withdrawal, and antagonism. 2. For what .' For not being 
allowed to go to battle with Judah against Edom. An insufBcient cause, since they 
lost nothing of their pay, while they saved their lives. Their honour, it may he 
supposed, was wounded ; and the world holds a wound to one's honour to be a greater 
stroke than a buflfet to one's person or a loss to one's purse. But Christ's followers 
ought not to take their code of morals from the world 1 3. On whom f The cities of 
Judah and their inhabitants, from Samaria unto Beth-boron, now Beit-Ur (ch. viii. 6). 
Though these had no part in the offence, they must nevertheless share in the penalty. 
If Amaziah had done the soldiers wrong, Amaziah should have given them redress in 
his own person. But nations have hardly yet learnt to discriminate between ofiending 
sovereigns and offencelesi subjects. When those quarrel they can only heal their 



<m. xrsr. 1—28.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 808 

fends by setting these to cut each other's throats or blow each other into eternity 
by means of guns and cannons ! 4. How far ? To the taking of three thousand men 
and much spoil. Whether this devastation of the northern cities of Judah occurred 
while the Israelitish soldiers were returning home to Samaria, or, as seems more likely, 
when Amaziah was in Edom (Bertheau, Keil), is uncertain ; that it subsequently led to 
a war between the two kingdoms is undoubted. 

Learn : 1. The folly of entering on any enterprise in which God cannot aid. 2. 
The sin of resorting to means of which Heaven cannot approve. 3. The sufficiency of 
God's help without creature-aids. 4. The duty of withdrawing from wicked schemes, 
even though doing so should entail financial loss. 5. The impossibility of settling 
questions of right and wrong by calculations of profit and loss. 6. The insignificance 
of money loss as compared with loss of Divine help and favour. 7. The immense 
indebtedness of the world to Christianity, even while rejecting it. — ^W. 

Vers. 14 — 16. — The declension of Amaziah, I. The natubb of it. A subsidence 
into idolatry. On returning from the slaughter of the Edomites he brought with him 
the gods of the children of Seir, and, setting them up to be his gods, bowed down him- 
self before them and burned incense unto them (ver. 14). That the Seirites were 
idolaters is confirmed by Moses, who gives Baal-hanan, " Baal is gracious," as one of 
their kings (Gen. xxxvi. 38) ; by Josephus, who mentions that the Idumseans had a god 
named Kotze ('Ant.,' xv. 7. 9); and by the Assyrian inscriptions, which show that one 
of their sovereigns bore the designation Kaus-malaka, <.«. " Kaus or Kotze is king " 
(Schrader, ' Keilinschriften,' p. 150). 

IL The motive of it. Probably political, to enable him to complete the subjuga- 
tion of the Seirites, which, as he imagined, could be best done by winning over their 
gods to bis side (Keil). Compare the conduct of Ahaz in sacrificing to the gods of 
Damascus in order to obtain their assistance (ch. xxviii. 23), and of Cyrus in asking 
the Babylonian divinities to intercede with Bel and Nebo on his behalf (Sayoe, ' Fresh 
Light,' etc., p. 175). At the same time, Amaziah's idolatry just as likely had its roots 
in inherent depravity. If Joash fell away to Baal (ch. xxiv. 18), it is hardly surprising 
that Amaziah his son should have followed his example. The fallen heart gravitates 
towards polytheism, as the history of mankind — of Jews, Egyptians, Assyrians, Phoeni- 
cians — shows. Almost all nations in their infancy were monotheists. 

IIL The ceiminalitt of it. Arising from the time when this declension took 
place. To have lapsed into idolatry at any time would have been wicked — contrary to 
the express commandment of Jehovah (Bxod. xx. 3, 4); to do so immediately after 
having enjoyed such a signal display of Jehovah's kindness in granting him a splendid 
victory over his enemies — to select that moment for his apostasy was surely adding 
insult to injury ; to say the least, was to be guilty of monstrous ingratitude as well as 
open sin. 

IV. The follt of it. Seen in the impotence of the idols to whom he bowed. 
The Edomite gods had not been able to save their devotees, the Seirites : where was 
the guarantee they could assist Amaziah ? One wonders that idolaters do not see the 
absurdity of praying to divinities that cannot save (Isa. adv. 20). The utter helpless- 
ness of idols and the senselessness of such as trust in them are themes of frequent 
illustration in Scripture (Ps. cxv. 4 — 8; Isa. xivi. 1 — 6; Jer. ii, 28; z. 6; 1 Cor. 
Tiii. 4). 

V. The danger of it. 1. It aroused against the king JehovaVs anger. The one 
living and true God can tolerate no rival claimant of man's homage. The worship of 
two gods, besides being impossible (Matt. vi. 24 ; 1 Cor. vi. 16), is provocative of wrath 
(Lev. xxvi. 30; Deut. xxvii. 15; Ps. xyL 4; Ixxix. 6; Isa. xlii. 17). 2. It drew 
down upcn him a prophet's rebuke. The man of God said unto him, " Why hast thou 
sought after the gods of the people," etc. ? The censures of the good may be profitable, 
but are rarely pleasant. Their judgments, besides, when calmly given, are an index 
to QoA's mind concerning man's conduct. 3. It excited the king's own evU disposition. 
Had Amaziah not been a backslider, he would not have answered the prophet bo 
churlishly as he did, practically telling him that nobody asked his opinion, and that 
if he ralued his own skin he had better hold his peace. It was easy, but neither 
raliant nor right, for a king thui to insult or silence Jehovah's messenger ; he would. 



310 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxv. 1— 28- 

by-and-by, find it harder to deal in such fashion with Jehovah himself. " ReproT* 
not a scomer, lest he hate thee : reprove a wise man, and he will love thee " (Prov. 
ix. 8). Amaziah's conduct showed he was a fool (Prov. xiii. 1) — one of those that 
" hate him who reproveth in the gate " (Amos v. 10). 4. It foreshadowed Ms ultimate 
fall. It revealed to the prophet that God had determined to destroy him — more 
especially when it was followed by obstinate refusal of the Divine warning. It is a 
bad sign when faithful admonition is followed by the hardening rather than the soft- 
ening of the admonished — when it confirms in sin rather than leads to repentance. 
Quern deus vult perdere prius dementat. " He, that being often reproved hardeneth 
his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy " (Prov. xxix. 1). 

Learn : 1. The danger of prosperity in turning away the heart from God. 2. The 
need of constantly guarding against temptation. 3. The complete absurdity of idolatry. 
4. The certainty that idol-worshippers and idol-worship shall perish. — W. 

Vers. 17 — 24:.— The hattle of Beth-shemesh ; or, the down/all of a boaster. I. The 
OBJECT OF THE BATTLE. 1. The object of its promoter, Amaziah. (1) Perhaps revenge ; 
to punish the Israelitish sovereign for the sins of his subjects (ver. 13) — a principle of 
action on which man cannot always with safety proceed, though God may. Revenge, 
sweet to the natural heart (Jer. xx. 10), was forbidden under the Law (Lev. xix. 
17, 18), and is absolutely inconsistent with the gospel (Rom. xii. 19). " Men revenge 
themselves out of weakness because they are offended, because they are too much 
influenced by self-love." This was seemingly the case with Amaziah. " A great soul 
overlooks and despises injuries ; a soul enlightened by grace and faith leaves the judg- 
ment and revenge of them to God " (Orudeu). (2) Possibly ambition ; in the hope 
of reducing the northern kingdom to subjection. In this hope (Josephus, ' Ant.,' ix. 
9. 2) he was probably confirmed by his previous success over the Edomites (ver. 14). 
Ambition, easily excited in the breasts of the weak, is always difficult to allay even by 
the wills of the strong. Wherever it exists, it is like the horse-leech's two daughters, 
which cry, " Give, give I " like the grave and the barren womb, the dry earth and the 
fire, which never say, " It is enough " (Prov. xxx. 15, 16). It commonly proves too 
imperious even for men of iron will, while weaklings- like Amaziah it blows to destruc- 
tion with a slight pufi". 2. The object of its Director, Ood. If Amaziah had an aim in 
seeking a pitched battle with Joash King of Israel, so had Jehovah an aim in allowing 
him and Joash to try conclusions on the field nf war. If Amaziah meant to punish 
Joash, Jehovah meant to punish Amaziah : which of the two, the King of Judah or 
the King of kings, was the more likely to succeed in accomplishing his object, it 
required no prophet to foretell. So in mundane affairs, generally, " man proposes," 
but " God disposes." Men, as free agents, are allowed to scheme and plan as they please, 
while God worketh all things according to the counsel of his will. Man often fails in 
his purposes, Jehovah never (Job xxiii. 13; Ps. ex v. 3; Isa. xlvi. 10, 11; Dan. iv. 35; 
Eph. i. 11). 

II. The preliminaries to the battle. 1. AmaziaVs challenge to Joash. (1) 
Deliberately ofl'ered. He acted neither in a hurry nor on his own responsibility, but 
at leisure and after consultation with his privy councillors and field-marshals. This 
only made the matter worse. It shows what wretched advisers the king had, and how 
set the king's heart was upon the war. Jehoshaphat had been too late in calling in 
Jehovah to the council of war at Samaria (ch. xviii. 4) ; Amaziah neglected calling 
him in at all. The last persons a king or parliament should apply to for advice when 
deliberating on the question of peace or war, are the idlers about court and the officer! 
in a barracks. (2) Arrogantly expressed. Euphemistically phrased, "Come, let us 
look one another in the face," meaning " Come, let us measure strength," or •' crosi 
swords with one another ; " this is one of those hypocritical formulas with which the 
world tries to hide from itself the wickedness of its evil deeds. Amaziah's politely 
worded message was an insolent challenge to the King of Israel to meet him on the 
field of war. (3) Fittingly answered. Amaziah's insolence had silenced the prophet 
(ver. 16); he was now to find that Joash would not so meekly submit to his imperti- 
nence. It may be proper for good men not to render railing for railing (1 Pet. iii. 9), 
but it IS not to be lamented when vainglorious boasters are set down and fools answered 
according to theii folly (Prov. xxvi. 6). 2. Joash's response to Amaziah. This, which 



OH. XXV. 1—28.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 811 

Josephus says was delivered in writing, contained two things. (1) A parable or fablt 
(ver. 18), not unlike that of Jotham to the Shechemites (Judg. ix. 8, etc.). It is not 
necessary to understand the thistle or thorn as pointing to Amaziah, in comparison 
with whom Joash claimed to be a tall cedar, though possibly this may have exactly 
expressed Joash's estimate of the relative greatness of their royal persons ; or to sup- 
pose that Amaziah had solicited a daughter of Joash in marriage for his son and been 
refused, and that out of this sprang his present Warlike attitude towards Israel; or to 
find in the wild beast in Lebanon which trod down the thistle an allusion to the 
northern warriors who, should hostilities break out, would overrun and trample down the 
land of Judah. It is sufScient to learn what the fable was designed to teach. (2) The 
inter[>retalion. This consisted of three parts : (a) A contemptuous rebuke. Amaziah, 
lifted up with pride and ambition, was stepping beyond his natural and legitimate 
sphere. He had conquered the Edomites, and now aspired to measure swords with 
the Israelites. It was pure self-conceit that lay at the bottom of his arrogance — a home- 
truth Amaziah might have digested with profit. (6) A condescending admonition. 
Amaziah had better stay at home. To be addressed by Joash as a wilful child might 
be by a wise and prudent father, must have been galling to the untamed spirit of 
Amaziah. (c) A oomminatory prediction. Amaziah was meddling to his hurt, "pro- 
voking calamity " that he should fall, even he and Judah with him. Joash probably 
knew that Amaziah had rashly entered upon a campaign be had neither resources nor 
courage to sustain. Fas est ah hoste doceri ; but Amaziah would not hear. 

III. The scene of the battle. Beth-shemesh (Josh. xv. 10). 1. ITie meaning of 
the term. " The house of the sun." Probably the site of an ancient temple to the 
sun-god. The Egyptian On, or Heliopolis, t.e. " the city of the sun," is probably for the 
same reason styled Beth-shemesh (Jer. xliii. 13). 2. The situation of the place. On 
the southern border of Dan, and within the territory of Judah, about three miles west 
of Jerusalem, represented by the modern Arabian village 'Ain Semes, or " sun-well," 
near the Wady-es-Sur&r, north of which stretches a level plain suitable for a battle 
(Robinson, 'Bib. Bes.,' vol. iii. p. 17; Thomson, 'The Land and the Book,' p. 635). 
Many fragments of old wall-foundations still are visible about the locality, and the 
modern village appears to have been built out of old materials. 3. 2%e historical aeeo- 
ciations of the spot. It was one of the cities given to the Levites by the tribe of Judah 
(Josh. xxi. 16). The ark of the covenant long stood there (1 Sam. vi. 12). One of 
the officers who purveyed for Solomon's court refided there (1 Kings iv. 9). It after- 
wards was taken by the Philistines (oh. xxviii. 18 \ 

IV. The besdlts of the battle. 1. The de^ tat of Jvdah. Joash and Amaziah 
" looked each other in the face." Their armies collided at the spot above described. 
The issue was a total rout for Judah (ver. 22). 2. The captv/re of Amaziah. Joash took 
him prisoner of war at Beth-shemesh. Amaziah's thoughts at this moment would be 
pleasant company for him I Whether Joash exulted over him, taunting him with his 
bravery, and reminding him of the fate of the poor briar who aspired to mate with the 
cedar, is not recorded ; to Joash's credit it should be stated that Amaziah was not put 
to death, or even consigned to a prison, as he deserved and might have expected, but 
was allowed to live and even continue on iiis throne (ver. 25). 3. The destruction 
of a part of the wall of Jeruialem. Approaching the metropolis of Judah with its 
prisoner-king, Joash, not so much perhaps with a view to obtain a triumphal gateway 
(Thenius), or restrain its inhabitants from reprisals in the shape of warlike operations 
(Bertheau), as simply to mark the capital as a conquered city (Bahr), caused abont 
four hundred cubits of the wall to be broken down, from the gate of Ephraim to the 
corner gate, i.e. about half of the north wall. The gate of Ephraim, called also the 
gate of Benjamin (Jer. xxxvii. 13 ; xxxviii. 7 ; Zech. xiv. 10), because the way to 
Ephraim lay through Benjamin, was most likely situated at or near the present-day gate 
of Damascus, the modem Bah-el-Amud, or, " Gate of the Column," In the second wall; 
while the corner gate, called also the first gate (Zech. xiv. 10), was apparently at the 
other end of the wall from that at which the tower of Hananeel stood (Jer. xxxi. 38), 
i.e. at the north-west angle where the wall turned southwards. 4. The despoliation tf 
the temple amd the palace. The pillaging of the former was not complete, but extended 
solely to the carrying off of the gold, silver, and vessels found in that part of the lacred 
building which was under the care of Obed-Edom and his sons (1 Chron. xztL 16), 



812 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxv. 1— 28 

viz. in the house of Asuppim, or, " house of collections or provisions" (Neh. xii. 25)— 
" a building used for the storing of the temple goods, situated in the neighbourhood of 
the southern door of the temple in the external court " (Keil). The plundering of the 
latter does not appear to have been restrained. All the treasures of the king's house 
fell a prey to the royal spoliator. 5. The taking of hostages. These were required in 
consequence of Amaziah's liberation, as a security for his good behaviour, and were 
most likely dravm from the principal families. 6. The return to Samaria. Joash 
acted with becoming moderation. Though he might have kUled, he spared Amaziah, 
and even restored him to his throne. Whereas he might have broken down the entire 
city wall, he overthrew only a part of it. Instead of plundering the whole temple, he 
ravaged merely one of its external buildings. Judah and Jerusalem he might have 
annexed to his empire, but he forbore. Having properly chastised his royal brother, 
he returned to Samaria. 

Lbssonb. 1. A man may wear a crown and yet be a fool — witness Amaziah. 2. 
" Pride goeth before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall." 3. " He that 
girdeth on his armour should not boast as he that putteth it off." 4. The hand that 
lets slip the dogs of war deserves to be devoured by them, 6. Clemency becomes a 
conqueror, and is an ornament of kings. — W. 

Vers. 25 — 28. — The last of Amaziah. I. Spaebd by hib conquekoe. (Ver. 25.) 
Instead of being put to death, he was restored to his crown and capital, where he 
actually survived Joash for fifteen years. This treatment he hardly deserved, con- 
sidering he had aimed at Joash's life and crown. Yet was the mercy of it nothing to 
that of God's treatment of sinful men, whom, though they have raised against him the 
standard of revolt, he nevertheless spares, forgives, and will eventually exalt to a place 
upon the throne with Christ his Son, 

II. Punished fob bib apostasy. (Ver. 27.) This apostasy was committed in the 
earlier part of his reign (ver. 14), and soon began to bear bitter fruit, first in the defeat 
he sustained at the hand of Joash, probably next in the disaffection of his people, and 
finally in the formation of a conspiracy for his overthrow, which came to a head in the 
fifteenth year after Joash's death. One never knows when the evil fruits and penal 
consequences of sin are exhausted. The safe plan is to " have no fellowship with the 
unfruitful works of darkness " (Bph. v. 11). 

III. Driven from his capital. (Ver. 27.) Probably the disaffection began after 
the defeat by Joash and the dismantling of Jerusalem. There is no reason to suppose 
that Amaziah was obliged to flee until towards the end of the fifteen years referred to 
in the text. The immediate occasion of this flight was the discovery of a plot against 
his life. So David had been obliged to flee from Jerusalem when his own son Absalom 
conspired against him (2 Sam. xv. 16). 

IV. Slaqt by his subjects. (Ver, 27.) Lachish, where he sought refuge, was an 
old Canaanitish royal city (Josh. x. 3 — 31 ; xii. 11), south-west of Jerusalem, in the 
lowlands of Judah (Josh. xv. 39). According to Micah (i. 13), it was the first Jewish 
town to be atiecced by Israelitish idolatry, which spread from it towards the capital. 
It would seem also to have been one of Solomon's chariot cities (1 Kings ix. 19 ; x. 
26 — 29). It had been fortified by Eehoboam (ch. xi. 9), and was subsequently captured 
by Sennacherib (ch. xxxii. 9) after a long siege (Jer. xxxiv. 7). It should probably be 
identified with the modern Um-Lakis, a few miles west-south-west of the Eleutheropolis, 
Arrested here, the fallen monarch was despatched by the daggers of assassins, as his 
father before him had been (ch. xxi v. 25), As conspiracy had set the crown on Amaziah's 
head, so conspiracy now took it off. 

V. BuBlED with his FATHERS. (Ver. 28.) Brought to Jerusalem in his own royal 
chariot, he was entombed beside his ancestors in the city of Judah, or of David, thus 
receiving an honour which was not paid to his father. He got a better funeral than he 
deserved, though it is well to forget men's faults at the grave's mouth. Nihil nisi 
honum de mortuis. 

VL Succeeded by his bon. (Ch. xxvi. 1.) The conspirators did not attempt to 
seize the crown for either themselves or any of their faction. They adhered to the 
legitimate succession of the house of David. As it were, this was a posthumous mercy 
eonferred on Amaziah. 



CH. XXVI. 1—23.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



313 



Lessons. 1. Beware of incurring the Divine anger. 3. Envy not kings or great 
men. 3. Prepare for the day of death. 4. Think with kindness on the dead. 5. 
Practise mercy towards the living. — W. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XXVI. 



The twenty-three verses of this chapter, 
entirely occupied with the career of Uzziah, 
have to be content with a, parallel of nine 
verses only, viz. 3 Kings xiv. 21, 32; xv. 
1 — 7. Our chapter first glances at the usual 
prefatory particulars of the age, pedigree, 
length of reign, kind of character, and choice 
between virtue and vice of the new king 
(vers. 1 — 5; butnote the remarkable appear- 
ance of ver. 3, looking as though it had 
strayed). Next, of his good works (vers. 6 — 
15) . Next, of his fall through most gratuitous 
" presumptuous siu, " audits decisive crush- 
ing visitation of punishment (vers. 16—31). 
Lastly, of his death and burial ( vers.22, 23). 
The nine verses of the parallel instanced 
above answer respectively — 21, 22 to our 
vers. 1, 3; 1—3, to our vers. 1, 3, 4; .5, to 
our ver. 21; and 6, 7, to our vers. 22, 23. 
That our chapter should abound in interest, 
and such solemn interest, awakens the more 
thought as to the causes of the absence of 
so much of its most interesting matter in 
the Book of Kings. 

Ver. 1. — TTzziali; Hebrew, n;?^ (signify- 
ing " Stiength of Jehovah "). Onoe in 
Chronicles, and onoe only (1 Chron. iii. 12), 
this kiug's name is given Azariah, Hebrew, 
ryiTp (signifying " Help of Jehovah ") or 
VTHTiJ.; and Isaiah (i. 1, etc.), Hosea (i. 1, 
etc.), and Amos (1. 1, etc.) always use the 
word Uzziah. In the parallel, however, and 
in both the chapters in which the parallel 
clauses lie, the word Azariah is used, as well 
ill otlier clauses as in those (e.g. 2 Kings xt. 
1, 0, 8, 23, 27), yet Uzziah is also used in 
verses intermingled with them (e.g. 13, 30, 
32, 31). It is probable that Azariah was 
the first-used name, that the latter name 
was not a corruption of the former, but that, 
for whatever reason, the king was called by 
both names. Nevertheless, the apt analogy 
that has been pointed out of Uzziel (1 Chron. 
XXV. 4) and Azareel (18) is noteworthy. 
(See Keil and Bertheau on 1 Kings xv. 2 
and 2 Kings xiv. 21 ; and Keil on our present 
passage.) Sixteen years old. Therefore 
Uzziah must have been born just before the 
fatal outside mistake of his father's life in 
th» challenge h* sent to Joash of Israel, and 



after the deadly inner mistake of bii soul is 
turning aside to " the gods of the children 
ofSeir." 

Ver. 2.— Eloth; Hebrew, rtfrg-nK; the 
parallel reads n^'x. This place was at the 
head of the Gulf Akaba (oh. viii. 17; 
1 Kings ix. 26); Judah had lost hold of it 
at a past revolt of Edom, and Uzziah, after 
his father's crippling of Edom, seizes the 
opportunity of making it Judah's again and 
rebuilding it, thus finishing very probably 
a work that he knew had been in his father's 
heart to do. This consideration may ex- 
plain alike the following clause in our verse, 
and the placing of this here. Uzziah charged 
himself to do it the first thing. 

Ver. 3. — Jecoliah. This name is spelt 
Jecholiah in the parallel. The character, 
however, is happa in both texts. The 
meaning of the name is, " Made strong of 
Jehovah." Another unreliable form of the 
name is Jekiliah, the result probably of a 
mere clerical error. 

Ver. 4. — ^Bight . . . aooording to ... his 
father. His father's comparatively long 
reign, sullied by two frightful stains, which 
were fearfully visited with a long punish- 
ment and a fatal end, is graciously recognized 
here for the good that was in it, and appa- 
rently credited even with a "balance to the 
good." 

Ver. 5. — In the days of Zeohaiiah. Twice 
in the foregoing chapter we have read of " a 
man of God " and " a prophet " whose names 
are not given. The chariness of the narra- 
tive in this exact respect is not very expli- 
cable, for if the simple reason be assumed to 
be that they were not of much repute, now 
when the name of Zechariah is given, all 
that we can say is that nothing else is 
known of him. Had understanding; Hebrew, 
I'lan. There seems no reason to divest this 
hiph. conj ugation form of its stricter significa- 
tion, " gave understanding " (see Isa. xl. 14). 
In the visions of God ; Hebrew, n'iKns. Some 
slight discrepancy in the usual fiUler writ- 
ing of the word in some manuscripts lends a 
little ground of preference for the reading, 
which a few manuscripts evidently had (see 
Septuagint Version, iv <p6Pip), of riNTa ; i.e. 
" in the fear of God " (Prov. i. 7 ; Imi. xi. 3); 
either reading in either of these sub-clauses 
leaves an undisturbed good meaning to the 
description of Zechariah. 

Ver. 6.— The Philistines. It has been 
seen how the Philistines, humbled to tribut* 



814 



THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. [<im.xxn.l—2&. 



ander Jehoshaphat (ch. xvii. 10—13), had 

lifted up their heads repeatedly eince, as On 
one occasion in alliance with Arabians (ch. 
xxi. 16, 17) against Jehoram. Brake down 
the wall (see ch. xxv. 23, the first occasion 
of this exact expression). Gath (see the 
parallel to our ch. xxiv. 23, 24 In 2 Kings 
xii. 17). Jahneh. A city on the coast, north- 
west of Judah, now Jebna (see Josh. xv. 10 — 
12). Ashdod. Also ou the coast, about eight 
miles south of Jabneh (Josh. xv. 47). It is 
now a large village in Philistia, called Esdud, 
answering to the Azotus of Acts viii. 40 
(see Topographical Index to Condor's ' Hand- 
book to tlie Bible ; ' and Dr. Smith's ' Bible 
Dictionary,' tub voo., i. 119). Built cities 
about Ashdod ; Revised Version supplies in 
italic type " in the country of Ashdod." How- 
ever, the force of the preposition 3 before 
" Ashdod " in this case speaks for itself; on 
account of the great importance of the place, 
in respect of its situation, on the road to 
Egypt, the strength of its position and 
perhaps the memory of the fact that, allotted 
to Judah, it had never really been appro- 
priated by her, and incorporated with her, 
Uzziah saw it expedient to surround it with 
other fortified cities, or strong forts, which 
should be a watch upon it. 

Ver. 7. — Gur-baal. Though nothing is 
known of this place (the meaning of which 
is "abode of Baal," perhaps from some 
temple of Baal), yet its companion Maon, 
the city of the Mehunim (ch. xxii. 1 ; Judg, 
X. 12), shows whereabouts it was. 

Ver. 8. — The AmmoniteB. This nation 
lay east of Jordan, north-east of Moab. Note 
the interesting references, N\imb. xxi. 24; 
Ueut. ii. 37. Gave gifts. Tbis expression 
was found in our oh. xvii. 1 1 ; 1 Kings iv. 
21 ; X. 25. The reference to tribute-payment 
is evident. The entering iu of Egypt. This, 
of course, marks the breadth of the land, and 
describes the breadth of Uzziah's sway or 
influence. 

Ver. 9. — BuUt towers in Jerusalem. The 
excellent map, above alluded to (ch. xxv. 23), 
in Conder's 'Handbook to the Bible' (2nd 
edit.), facing p. 334, furnishes a very clear 
idea alike of these towers and of the walls 
of Jerusalem, as we can make them out, for 
Uzziah's times. For the comer gate, see 
our note, oh. xxv. 23. Valley gate. This is 
called by some the Gehenna gate. As many 
as three sites, reducible perhaps to two, are 
proposed for this gate: (1) the west gate, 
called somewhile the "Jaffa" gate; or (2) 
a gate over the valley of " Hinnom ; " or, if 
it be not the same, (3) that at the valley of 
Tyropcson. And at the turning; Hebrew, 
y'vtpDn. This word occurs eleven times, viz. 

twice in Exodus, four times in Nehemiah, 
four times iu Bzeldel, and in thia place, and 
is always rendered " corner " or " turning ; " 



the word wanted is angle. The site of this 
gate cannot very certainly be pronounced 
upon. Perhaps the angle that marks the 
gate is that at the south-east corqer of the 
temple plateau. The language of Neh. iii. 
19 is our best clue: "Next to him Ezer 
repaired ... a piece over against the going 
up to the armoury at the turning." 

Ver. 10. — Towers in the desert ; Hebrew, 
l3tQ3; the rendering should be the usual 
one of " wilderuess." This was the cattle- 
pasture west and south-west of the Dead Sea. 
The towers were needed for forts of observa- 
tion against marauding and cattle-robbing in- 
cursions, as well as for shelter in some attacks. 
Many wells ; Hebrew, niia. These were not 
springs, but rather, as in the margin, tanks 
and cisterns. CarmeL It is not probable that 
this is the proper name. The translation of 
Cannel is " fertile field." As a proper name 
it ououra about twenty times, from Josh, xii, 
22 ; XV. 55 ; xix. 26 ; on to Amos i. 2 ; ix. 3 ; 
and perhaps Micah vii. 14; and as not a 
proper name it occurs about twenty times 
also ; the " fruitful field," e.g., of Isa. xxix. 
17 and xxxii. 15 shows in the Hebrew text 
Spnsn. The aspect of this verse is very 
picturesque, and the picturesqueness very 
pleasant, with its low country and pasturing 
cattle, its plains and their herds, its hills and 
their vines, all quickened into life by the 
mention of towers and wells, husbandmen 
and vine-dressers, and finished off by the 
home-touch that this king's partiality looked 
to agricultural and pastoral pursuits. 

Ver. 11. — That went out to war by bands ; 
Hebrew, ynih say 'Nsi'. The last of these 
words occurs thirty-three times, and is 
rendered " troop " ten times, " company " 
four times, " band " fourteen times, and (too 
generically) " army " five times. The middle 
word occurs above four hundred times, is 
rendered " host " an immense preponder- 
ance of these times, and probably should 
have been so rendered without exception. 
The first word is the poel participle kal 
of the familiar verb Ny;, and compels the 
translation (given literally) " the goers out 
of the host by bands." Meantime, if the 
persons here spoken of were leaders, as 
seems possible, the hiph. participle is 
required (which would postulate an initial 
mem for the present initial yod), and a most 
typical example among some thirty others 
essentially similar may be quoted from Isa. 
xl. 26. Their acooont by the hand of Jeiel ; 
i.e. their muster tabulated by Jeiel, whose 
office is mentioned before in our oh. xxv. 11. 
Under the hand of Hananiah. That is, 
Hananiah was head of the whole matter of 
the registering, etc. 

Ver. 12. — Of the mighty men of valour. 
The " of " here is incorrect ; the former sub- 
stantive is not necessarily in eonstruat statt^ 



OH. XXVI. 1—23.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 



816 



and this word has the prefix of the preposi- 
tion ^; nor is the rendering "valour" for 
our Hebrew text b\r} so likely a rendering 
as that found in the foregoing verse, " host." 
Render, The whole number of the chief of the 
fathers in the mighty men of the host was, 
etc. So in the next verse, "with mighty 
power " will be better rendered " with the 
strength of a host." 

Ver. 13. — An army; Hebrew, Kay ^'n. "A 
force of host " would render this expression, 
though by an ambiguous use of tlie word 
^'n, construct state of 7'.n. T%is verse gives 
the number of the body of the army proper, 
which shows it seven thousand five hundred 
more than that of Amaziah in the foregoing 
chapter (ver. 5). 

Ver. 14. — Habergeons . . . slings to cast 
stones. Revised Version right in rendering, 
coats of mail . . . and stones for slinging. 
On the Israelites' employment of the sling, 
note Judg. xx. 16 ; 1 Sam. xvii. 10 ; 2 Kings 
iii. 25. 

Ver. 15. — Engines; Hebrew, n"in?in ; used 
only here and Ecoles. vii. 29 (where it is 
rendered " inventions "), but the related 
word jia^n is found three times : Eccles. viL 
25 (the " reason "), 27 (the " account ") ; ix. 
10 (" device ") ; while the verb root a^n, to 
" devise," occurs about a hundred and thirty 
times, as in next sub-clause a.Knn naK(np. 
A strict rendering of the clause would make 
it read, " He made inventions, the inventing 
of an inventive man ; " and the force of the 
words might be to appraise very highly the 
virtue of the invention or machine, while 
to liimself may have been due the credit 
thereof. The balista which discharged 
stones is depicted on Assyrian sculptures ; 
not so the machine for discharging darts 
and arrows, the catapult. Although, as just 
suggested, it were conceivable that to 
Uzziah himself was due in part the invention 
or the great improving of the machines 
in question, yet the verse may be regarded 
as simply saying that the introduction of 
them into Jerusalem was his work. He 
was marveUoTisly helped (see ver. 7). 

Ver. 16. — To (his) destraotion; Hebrew, 
rmt^rfj-iy), hiph. conjugation infln. of nnE*. 
This conjugation frequently occurs in the 
sense of " destroying," but also as well with- 
out an accusative as with, in the sense 
of "doing corruptly" (Gen. vi. 12 with 
accusative ; but without Deut. It. 16 ; xxxi. 
29 ; Judg. ii. 19 ; Isa. i. 19 ; and next 
chapter, ver. 2). He transgressed. The 
" transgression " of a heart that had waxed 
wanton through prosperity took that pecu- 
liarly aggravated form of sinning against 
holy things and a holy ceremonial. 
Although, in the daily lerrioe ci th« second 



temple, the duty of offering incense attached . 
to one chosen by lot each morning 
and evening of the inferior priests, yet 
originally the high priest was solemnly 
appointed for this office. The following 
are among the most important references to 
the matter of the incense and its offering 
(Exod. XXV. 6; xxx. 1, 7, 8, 34, 37, 38; 
Lev. xvi. 13 ; Luke i. 21 ; Numb. vi. 24— 
26 ; xvi. 1—35 ; xviii. 1 — 7 ; 1 Kings iv. 
20). 

Ver. 17. — Azariah the priest. Ver. 20 
states what was otherwise to be supposed, 
that he was the chief priest (B'Sijl). We 
fail to identify his name with any in the 
typical list of 1 Chron. vi. 4 — 15, where 
the Azariah of ver. 11 is too early, and the 
Azariah of ver. 13 too late, for our present 
Azariah. With him foor score priests. This 
passage suggests to us an idea of how many 
deeply interesting details are wanting, which 
would fill in the interstices of Old Testa- 
ment history. Probably the intention of 
the king, ambitious to simulate the self- 
assumed religious ways of neighbouring 
Gentile kings, was no secret ; and possibly 
the king may have given time for the chief 
priest to collect his auxiliaries, through soma 
ostentatious display on his own part, in the 
very performance of his desecration. The 
number and the character of these helping 
priests (^;ri"'3a) giv£ the idea that tliey had 
their work to do, and purposed doing it 
promptly, or that they would over-awe, and 
obviate the use of actual force, by their 
imposing number. 

Ver. 18. — They withstood. A somewhat 
more forcible rendering would be justified 
by the Hebrew text, such e.g. as, " They con- 
fronted Uzziah to his face," or " They stood 
in the way of Uzziah," since our " with- 
stood" almost always conveys the idea 
of argumentative confronting only. There 
was expostulation here, as we are immedi- 
ately told, but there was somethino; else also, 
as ver. 20 makes Tory plain, " They thrust 
him ov' 

Ver. 19. — Bender, Then Uzziah was 
wrath, and in his hand (at that moment) 
was a censer to bum incense, eto. From the 
most literal rendering of the Hebrew text, 
not unfrequently the most forcible Bible 
English results, from beside; render, at 
the very side of (comp. Numb. xii. 10; 2 
Kings V. 27). 

Ver. 20.— They thmst kirn out This 
hiph. conjugation of kal hn^ doea not point 
to the force adopted, but to the trmibling 
anxiety with which, for horror's ai^ of 
such a monstrous catastrophe, as a leper by 
the altar and with a censer in hii hand, 
etc., the prles^ urged him out. Bvidtntly, 
from the next.clause, no great force in the 
ordinary sens* was needed. Tm, UmmU 



31« 



THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxvi. 1— 23 



hMted. The Hebrew verb is nipb. conjnga- 
tion of ffyf. It is interesting to note that 
this root occurs only here and three times 
in Bsther, viz. iii. 15; vi. 12; vlii. 14. 
Uzziah can scarcely have been ignorant that 
he had been daring the utmost penalty 
of the Law (Numb. xvi. 31, 85 ; xviii. 7). 

Yer. 21. — ^And dwelt in a several honse. 
The Hebrew for " several house" is n'W?r)n : 
the parallel (2 Kings xv. S) showing^oi 
instead of vau in tiie last syllable. The 
verbal root is ^sn, and occurs once (Lev. 
six. 20, with the Anthorized Version ren- 
dering " was free ; " in the same verse is also 
found a feminine noun derived from it, and 
rendered in the Authorized Version "free- 
dom "). The adjective *K'sn occurs sixteen 
times, and is always rendered in the Autho- 
rized Version " free," except onoe " at 
liberty" (Jer. xxxiv. 16). The " freedom" 
conveyed by the word is that of teparation, 
in the use of it as found here. The leper 
and the house in which he lived were kept 
free from contact with others (Lev. xiii. 46). 
Qesenius appears, however, to prefer the 
idea of " infirmity," " sickness," as deter- 
mining the cast of the meaning of the word 
in our text, and goes so far as to translate 
it an " hospital," quoting tlie word of Suidas, 
rh voffoKOfieiov. 

Ver. 22.— Isaiah tlie prophet. Isaiah the 



prophet asserts that his prophetic inspira- 
tion was in Uzziah's time (Isa. i. 1 ; vi. 1), 
or we should have taken for granted tliat, 
as he was alive in the time of Hezekiah, 
grandson to Uzziah, he wrote of Uzziah 
only from hearsay and previous records. It 
must be concluded, accordingly, that Isaiah's 
inspiration as a prophet wafl early in his own 
life, that the beginning of it dated not 
long before the end of Uzziah's career, and 
that his life was a prolonged one, while 
still the most part of the acts first and last 
of Uzziah, which he wrote, must have con- 
sisted of a compilation from other treatises 
and perhaps partly from tradition. 

Ver. 23.— In the field of the burial which 
belonged to the kings. The parallel simply 
says, " with his fathers in the city of David," 
Judging, however, both from the somewhat 
remarkable words in onr text, "the field 
of the burial" (i.e. the burial-field), and 
from the following clause, for they said. He is 
a leper, we may understand that, though it 
was in the "city of David" that he was 
buried, and " with his fathers '' so far forth, 
and also that he lay near them, yet his 
actual sepulchre was not one with theirs, 
any more than his house of late had been 
one with the house he had known so well 
(see Gender's 'Handbook to the Bible,' p. 
341> 



HOMILBTICS, 

Vers. 1 — 23. — Hie reign of fifty-two years spoiled in an hour. Many a reign, indeed, 
was a spoiled reign which had begun well, promised well, and continued well for some 
length of time. But the reign of Uzziah, of all the reigns of Judah and of Israel the 
longest with the one exception of that of Manasseh, and particularly full of prosperity, 
and remarkably varied prosperity within, of success in just foreign wars, and of that 
which led to these things, viz. the most gracious tokens of the Divine approval and 
help — was all to be wrecked in an hour apparently, so far as King Uzziah was con- 
cerned. His people, indeed, were not stricken for his sin. Nor were his priests, whose 
loyal fidelity to their high office and sacred charge and whose faithful courage shone 
out to great advantage ; but for the king himself, whenever his defection occurred, all 
the harvest of many years of a well-spent and hitherto glorious reign was " blown 
quite away " by — surely only such it can have been — »'one cunning bosom sin " I The 
preacher may fix close and detailed attention on — 

I. The varied bekgfioekoe and bucoesb of many teabb of Uzziah's beion. 
AU this left little to Uzziah to desire, and little to be desired for him. They should 
have paved the way for an honourable, peaceful, restful old age, with the blessings of 
a nation and a nation's God upon him. 

II. Thb place m THE kino whebe this bin lodoed. It was not a sin of the 
world, nor a sin of the flesh, and though undoubtedly it was a sin of the devil, it must 
rather be written, the sin of the deviL It was akin to the sin of Korah, Dathan, and 
Abiram (Numb. xvi. 1 — 35). It was akin to the turning sin of the life of the first 
king, Saul. It was, we may perhaps say, akin to the sin of those " angels who lost 
their first estate." It was a sin particularly legislated against (Numb, xviii, 1 — 7). 
It is one, probably in our own days, and through all Christendom's past ages of history, 
more largely at work and more malignant, and of more dire disaster to priests even 
and pMpb, than may be generally imagined. It harbours itself, not in the flesh, and 



OH. xxvL 1— 23.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHB0NICLE3. 817 

not in the heart, but in the spirit. It is ambition ecclesiastical, and unbridled I It la 
a snatching at spiritual function, domination, and claim of authority, unauthorized! 
It is a zeal of self-exaltation and self-display, where selfs very vesture should be the 
vesture of purity and of obedience ! With Uzziah it was technical sacrilege. It none 
the less surely covered real sacrilege, which his spirit desired, sought, and defiantly 
dared. The opportunity here may be well utilized by the preacher for dwelling on 
and explaining the scripturally described triple designation of human nature, " body, 
soul, and spirit." 

III. The cunningnbss and bubtleness of this sin or the spirit. We do not, 
indeed, know the birth of this sin in Uzziah at all — when it was, what favoured it, 
when or how it peeped out first to view. Though it seems, as we read it, as though it 
were absolutely the evil suggestion of an hour in Uzziah, yet the preparation so easily 
matured by Azariah, when he followed " into the temple after Uzziah, and with him 
fourscore priests of the Lord, valiant men," seems to indicate that those true ministers 
of the temple were to some degree forewarned and apprised of what was going to be 
attempted. The cunningness was that this particular disposition and impulse to sin 
had lain doimant for many a year of useful, good, and perhaps holy work. And the 
subtleness of it ranges with the truth that higher intellects and higher intelligences are 
exposed to higher, finer, and more refined forms of temptation, the highest to the highest. 
Let men say what they will in derogation and superficial disparagement of the invio- 
lable sacrednesi of the offices and services and sacraments of the Church — differencing 
them from the older typical dispensation, when they differ not at all, except in demand 
of higher reverence and more spiritual unfeigned observance — it is indisputable that 
the most solemn warnings of apostles and Epistles point in this same direction of pro- 
test against all the offspring and widespread family of sacrilege. It is, indeed, in and 
of the very genius of Christianity to hallow intentions, vows, determinations, and works 
of religion with a sacredness all their own. The rush and rage of modern national life 
may overwhelm and sweep away many an old and many a sacred boundary, but the 
might is not the right. And the might that seejns to usurp successfully, as Uzziah's 
was not given to do, is inflicting only the deadlier blow and more inly wound. 

IV. The condign punishment op Uzziah. The disease of leprosy meant, marked, 
sin's last, typical chastisement for the body. And sin's last daring attempt of the 
spirit is stricken down with this loathsome stroke and scourge. It made the sinner 
hasten away to make if he could his escape; it makes the sinner loathe himself; it is 
the dread earnest of his shut-off, "let-alone," solitary condemnation. And one thing 
only — the blood of Jesus Christ — has efficacy to cleanse that leper. Though the prin- 
ciple cannot safely be allied either by Job's comforters or any modem successors of 
them, yet the nature and severity of a punishment roughly measure the significance of 
the sin, the steps of which it tracks. And Uzziah's sin and punishment, startling as 
they are in their own connection, have been also written as admonition that might be 
greatly needed as the wayward ages should flow onward, even to our own, and perhaps 
to the end. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — Premature responsibility, etc. In these verses we have a picture or a 
suggestion of — 

I. Pkematueb RESP0N8IBILITT. " All the pcople of Judah took Uzziah, who was 
sixteen years old, and made him king." They all agreed to set a lad upon the throne. 
Events seem to have justified their course ; and if Zeohariah the prophet, or, what is 
more likely, some prominent " prince of Judah," acted as prime minister or protector, 
he may have succeeded even in the earUer years of his administration. But it is a 
very great mistake to devolve large responsibilities upon the young. 1. It is bad for 
the estate they have to administer, whatever that may be. " Woe to thee, land, 
when thy king is a child," is a curse which has a wide application. The very young, 
with minds that must be immature, judge without knowledge, are swayed by persona 
rather than governed by principles, fall into serious and often into disastrous mistakes. 
2. It is bad for themselves. It exposes them to several temptations which it is not 
right they should encounter, and it loads them with a weight of duty and difficulty 



818 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxtl 1— 23. 

they are not strong enough to carry. In most cases they hreak down, in some direction, 
under their burden. Besponsibility is not for youth ; it is for prime and for the rips 
experience of later life. 

II. The iKEQxjAiiiTiES or condition which the peovidbnce of God assionb us. 
Uzziah "reigned fifty-two years in Jerusalem." To him God gave more than half a 
century of power and wealth and their attendant advantages. To others he denies 
these larger gratifications altogether, and grants very limited comforts, and these for a 
very brief hour. How do we account for this ? All is plain if we consider : 1. That 
neither justice nor kindness requires that God should give to one man as large a 
heritage as he has given to another; it is no injury to me to whom he has given one 
talent that it has pleased him to bestow ten talents on my neighbour. I had no claim 
to that one talent which, of his pure goodness, he has conferred upon me. 2. That the 
chief value of human life depends neither upon its surroundings nor upon its duration, 
but upon its moral and spiritual characteristics. 3. That if there be any inequalities 
that, in the cause of righteousness, require adjustment, there remains the long future 
for redress. 

III. The influence of motherhood on our ohabacteb and oue course. It is 
not without meaning that we have the record, " his mother's name was Jecoliah." To 
much too large a degree in the East all that the mother contributes is maternity. But 
" woman, beloved of God in old Jerusalem," gave much more than this. She was not a 
cipher in the home ; she was an intelligent, active sharer in the thought and history 
of her country and her time. Jesus Christ owed much to her truer appreciation, and 
to her more faithful ministry. It is likely that Uzziah owed as much to his mother as 
to his father in the way of godly training and good home influence. A very consider- 
able number of the great and good men who have rendered conspicuous services to their 
race became what they were because they grew up in the atmosphere of a mother's 
gentle and beautiful life. " No mother knows who or what she has in her cradle," or 
can tell how great a share she may have, by the training of the little child that is 
slumbering there, in the enrichment or the reformation of the world. 

IV. The influence of the Christian ministry on our character and course. 
" He sought God in the days of Zechariah " (ver. 5). No doubt this seeking of the Lord 
was very largely due to the prophet's influence over him. The true Christian minister 
is, like the Hebrew prophet, " one that speaks for God " to men. And he who speaks 
for his Divine Master with faithfulness, with earnestness of spirit, in true and pure 
affection, speaking " the whole counsel of God " as he is able to learn and utter it, has 
a work to do and an influence to exert second to none in the hearts and lives of men. 
From the court to the cottage-home the gracious power of such ministry is felt in the 
land. 

V. The prosperity of piety. " As long as he sought the Lord, God made him to 
prosper " (ver. 5). (See homily on ch. xxv. 15, " The folly of irreligion.") 1. There is no 
prosperity worthy of the name, or worthy of our ambition and pursuit, outside the fear 
and the favour of God. " Who hath hardened himself against him and prospered ? " 
Many have seemed to do so, and have imagined that they did. But, in the light of 
Divine wisdom, they have miserably failed. 2. There can be no failure in the faithful 
service of the Supreme. What looks like it, there may be, there often is ; but not the 
thing itself. For he who walks with God, and is the friend of Jesus Christ, must be 
what is right and good ; must stand where he is secure from harm ; must be witnessing 
for the truth of God ; must be moving on towards deeper wisdom, purer joy, and a 
glorious estate beyond. — C. 

Ver. 6. — Seeing Ood. Zechariah "had tmderstanding in the seeing of God" (mar- 
ginal reading). In what way did the prophet, and in what respects may we now, bave 
such special " understanding " ? 

I. The prophetic privilege of seeino God. It might seem, at first sight, that 
there would be no degrees in such capacity. If God enabled a man to see him and to 
know his truth by granting him a vision, or by specially enlarging his natural faculty, 
it must be of no consequence (or of very little) what his individual capacities may be. 
But, thus reasoning, we should be wrong. God did not then, as he does not now, grant 
his Divine enlightenment independent of all human conditions. He had regard to : 1, 



OH. XXVI. 1—23.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHEONICLES. 819 

Puiity and sanctity of character. 2. Natural intellectual faculty. 3. Special training. 
We cannot say that God never revealed his mind to any one who did not possess the 
first of these qualifications in a high degree. Bemembering Balaam and Jonah, it 
would be impossible to maintain that view. Yet we may be quite sure that such men 
as Samuel and Elijah were preferred to others because of the elevation of their cha- 
racters. Nor can we suppose that the second qualification was indispensable; but we 
may well believe that Balaam was employed as he was partly because he was a man 
of considerable intellectual endowment, and that Isaiah and An^os were among the 
" chosen " partly for the same reason. We know that there was special training for 
the work of prophecy, for there were " schools of the prophets " in the time of the judges. 
Whether Zechariah had one or all of these three advantages we do not know, but he 
was a man, on some such grounds, peculiarly adapted to receive communication from 
God, and, having received them, to deliver them. 

II. The faculty op all spiritual men. We also, as those who stand among the 
multitude of godly men undistinguished by any office, may have "understanding in 
the seeing of God." What are its conditions ? 1. Docility of spirit. If we would 
" enter the kingdom of God," i.e. if we would see God and know him as he desires to 
be seen and known by us as our forgiving Father, we must " become as little children " 
(Matt, xviii. 3; xix. 14). Much "understanding" in the way of human learning may, 
as in the case of the scribes and lawyers, keep us out of that atmosphere of docility 
without which we shall not learn of Christ, and shall not know God as we urgently 
need to know him (see 1 Cor. i. 26 — 29). It is the man that has come to understand 
his own spiritual ignorance and incapacity who will be willing to learn of God, and thus 
to " have understanding in the seeing of God." 2. Purity of heart. This, we know 
from the great Teacher himself, is an essential (Matt. v. 8). This purity of which 
Christ speaks includes : (1) Simplicity and sincerity of spirit ; that which is not con- 
tent with passing through fleshly rites, but desires to know God himself, to come into 
communion with him, to gain his loving favour. (2) A freedom from degrading affec- 
tions; and therefore from debasing acts and associations — a heart that is not worn 
with selfish ambitions, or worried with corroding cares, or blemished by injurious 
excitements. (3) Consequent elevation of affection and aim — the love of Christ, the 
love of man, the earnest desire to be of service to our generation. 3. Patient con- 
tinuance in well-being and in well-doing. To those who thus " continue in the grace 
of God" will be granted " eternal life." They who are faithful unto death shall wear 
" the crown of life " (see Eom. ii. 7 ; Eev. ii. 10). And we are sure that this life which 
is consummated beyond includes such a vision of God as we do not now enjoy, even 
when it is most true that " the eyes of our understanding are opened," and even when 
we are " blessed with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ." Then, with 
purer heart than we now possess, and with a holiness (Heb. xii. 14) to which we do 
not now attain, we shall " have understanding [and experience] in the seeing of God." 
Surely every one that hath this hope in him will " purify himself, even as Christ the 
Lord is pure." — 0. 

Vers. 6 — 15. — A victorious career. Perhaps it is not well understood that Uzziah 
was one of the strongest of the kings of Judah, and ran a remarkably successful course. 
Had not his sun set in some dark clouds, his name and fame' would probably have 
stood far higher than they do. But when we have made necessary allowances, there 
remains before our eyes the picture of — 

I. A VICT0BI0U8 OABEBB. This, whether we have regard to : 1. The extension of 
his kingdom ; he prevailed against the Edomites, the Philistines, the Arabians (vers. 
2, 6 — 8). Or to : 2. The strengthening of his kingdom by military means — by build- 
ing fortifications (vers. 9, 10), by ordering and equipping his army (vers. 11 — 13), by 
inventing or adopting the latest weapons of warfare (vers. 14, 15). Or to : 3. Hii 
attention to the national produce. It speaks very highly indeed for a monarch of that 
period that he dug wells, that he had much cattle, that he encouraged the vine-dressers, 
that he " loved husbandry." These are things which in that age of the world were too 
often disregarded and even despised by men in high places, especially by monarchs. 
But it was on such things as these that national prosperity very largely rested. Much 
»f the power of a country comes from its wealth ; and its wealth comes from the soil. 



S20 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxvu 1—281 

No wise ruler vrill be indifferent to the question of the produce of the land. The king 
that " loves husbandry " is, other things being present, a king that loves his people, 
and rules for the happiness of their homes. It is probable thkt Judah never spent so 
contented and prosperous a half-century as during the long reign of Uzziah. 

II. Its explanation. (1) It was partly due to the fact that he came under good 
human influence ; that of his father in his better days, that of Zechariah all through 
that prophet's life; (perhaps) that of a godly mother. (2) It was due in part to his own 
capacity and energy. Had he been a weak prince, giving way to base flatteries and to 
corrupt companionship, he could not have played the admirable part he did. (3) It 
was due, chiefly and primarily, to the favour of Jehovah. " God made him to prosper " 
(ver. 5). From the Divine resources came intelligence, strength, sagacity, statesman- 
ship. He might well have said, "Thou art the glory of my strength, and in thy 
favour has my horn been exalted." This is the explanation of every victorious career. 
1. There goes toward it individual character and energy. Every man must " bear hia 
own burden," and " have rejoicing in himself alone " (Gal. vi. 4, 5). In some sense and 
to some degree we must all "fight the good fight" for ourselves, if we would gain the 
victory and win " the prize of our high calling." 2. There is included in it helpful 
influence from without; all kindly human help from the home and from the sanctuary, 
from the father and from the friend, 3. The all-decisive force is the power that works 
from above on our behalf. God must make us to prosper if we are to gain the victory 
in the great strife of life. From him must come the guidance and the guardianship, 
the inspiration and the control, without which we shall faint and fall. And this is to be 
secured by (1) submission to the gracious sway, and (2) living in the holy service of a 
Divine Saviour. — C. 

Vers. 16 — ^21. — A clouded dote. We could have wished that the end of Uzziah'a 
life had answered to the beginning ; that a reign which began so well, which had so 
commendable and even distinguished a record, had closed in light and honour. But it 
was not to be. That powerful temptation which assails the strong and the victorious 
proved too powerful for the Hebrew king; he fell beneath its force, and he paid a heavy 
penalty for his fall. We have — 

I. A PAINFUL SPECTACLE in the person of a leprous king. In Uzziah the leper we 
have one who occupied the highest place in the kingdom brought to an estate which 
the meanest subject in the realm, who had the hue of health in his cheeks, would not have 
accepted in place of his own ; we have one in whose presence it was once an honour to 
stand, and whose face it was a high privilege to behold, reduced to such a condition 
that it was a kindness for any one to be with him, a pain for any eye to regard him, a 
sacrifice and defilement for any one to touch him ; we have a man whose presence one* 
brought highest honour to the home the threshold of which he might condescend to 
cross, now brought so low that no humblest householder in the land could or would 
permit him to pass his door; we have a man who did stand foremost in every religious 
privilege, debarred from entering the outer court of the sanctuary ; we have one who 
had spent his manly energies in all forms of happy and useful activity, shut up in a 
separate house and secluded from affairs ; we have an instance of complete humiliation, 
and we cannot fail to be affected by it if we dwell upon all that it meant to the unhappy 
subject of it. 

n. An apparently heavy sbntenob fob one offence. We inquire — ^Why this 
terrible visitation ? And we find that it was because the king invaded the temple of God 
and attempted to do that which was not permitted by law. To any one judging supeF- 
fioially, the sentence may seem severe and indeed excessive. It may seem unjust to 
visit one day's wrong-doing, one act of guilt, with a heavy penalty for life — a penalty 
that disabled and disqualified, as leprosy did, for all the duties and all the enjoyments 
of human life. But we have not to look far to find — 

III. The explanation op the sbveeity. This is twofold. 1. It was of the first 
importance that the royal power should not presume upon ecclesiastical functions. It 
was not a mere question between king and priest ; that would have been small enough. 
It was a question whether God should continue to rule, through his chosen ofScers, 
over the nation, or whether the king should set aside the divinely given Law, and 
practically make himself supreme. To defy and disobey one of the clearest and one of 



OH. xm. 1—23.] THE SECOND BOOR OF THE CHRONICLES. 821 

the most emphatic precepts in the Law, and to assume a prerogative which God had 
strictly confined to the priestly order, was a step that was revolutionary in its cha- 
racter and tendency, that was calculated to overturn the most sacred traditions, and to 
break up the ancient usage as well as to lessen that sense of the Divine separateness 
and sanctity which it was the first object of the great Lawgiver to fasten on the mind 
of the people. It was a daring and a dangerous innovation, which nothing but over- 
grown presumption would have attempted, and which demanded the most striking and 
impressive rebuke that could be administered. The sentence was Judicial, and was 
intended to warn all others ftom acts that were injurious, and from an ambition that 
was unholy. 2. It was the punishment, not merely of one sinful action, but also of a 
guUty ttate of 'heart. Uzziah would not have done this sacrilegious action if he had 
RoJ fallen fi-om the humility, which is the first condition of true piety, into a state of 
CMidemnable spiritual pride. " His heart was lifted up ; " " his heart was haughty, and 
his eyes were lofty," mnd therefore he wanted to "exercise himself in things too high 
for him " (Fs. cxxxi. 1). Much success had spoiled him, as it spoils so many in every 
land and Church. It had made liim arrogant, and human arrogance is a moral evil of 
the first magnitude, displeasing in a very high degree to the Holy One of Israel, utterly 
unbecoming in any one of the children of men, exposing the soul to other sins, requiring 
a strong and sometimes even a stern discipline that it may be uprooted from the heart 
and life. It may be hoped, and peihaps believed, that in the " several house" (ver. 21) 
in which Uzziah afterwards lived, he learned the lesson which God designed to teach 
him, humbled his heart before his Maker, and came to bless that pruning hand which 
dealt so severe a stroke to save the vine from fruitlessness and death. 1. Shrink from 
intruding where Gud does not call you. But, more particularly : 2. Becognize the fact 
that success in any sphere is a " slippery place," and calls for much self-examination 
and much earnest prayer for humility and simplicity of spirit. — 0. 

Vers. 1 — 15. — Uzxiah the prosperouM. I. A TonTHFUL sovbbbion. (Vers. 1 — 3.) 
1. Ei$ noma. Uzziah, "Might of Jehovah" (2 Kinfjs xv. 13, 30, 32, 34; Isa. i. 1; 
vi. 1; Amos i. 1; Zech. liv. 5); Azariah, "Whom Jehovah aids" (2 Kings xiv. 21; 
XV. 1, 6, 8, 17, 23, 27 ; 1 Chron. iii. 12) ; — the former, the designation taken by or 
conferred upon him at or soon after his accession (Thenius, Bahr) ; the latter, his 
name before that event. But if the two appellations should not be regarded as 
equivalent (Keil), the likelihood is that Uzziah was his personal and Azariah his 
kingly title (Nagelsbach in Herzog, and Kleinert in Biehm), as the latter, Azri-jahu, 
is the name he ordinarily bears on the Assyrian monuments (Schrader, 'Keilin- 
schriften,' p. 217). 2. Eis parents. Amaziah the son of Joash, and Jecoliah of Jeru- 
salem. Of the latter nothing is known beyond her name and residence, except that 
she had been the wife, and was the mother, of a king. That Uzziah was not his 
father's firstborn son has been inferred (Beitheau, Ewald, Bahr), though precariously, 
from the statement that "all the people took him and made him king" (ver. 1). 
3. The date of his accession. After his father's death, in the fifteenth year of Jero- 
boam II. of Israel (2 Kings xiv. 23). The theory that Uzziah's accession should be 
dated from his father's capture by Joash (Sunmer) is not without support from certain 
circumstances stated in the narrative, as e.g. that Amaziah lived (not reigned) after the 
da»th of Joash fifteen years (ch. xxv. 25), and that Uzziah built Eloth after the death 
of hia father (ch. xxvi. 2), as if he had been sovereign before that event. Nevertheless, 
it is not adopted by Joscphus (' Act.,' ix. 9. 3), and does not appear demanded by the 
text (consuft Exposition). 4. The length of his reign. Fifty-two years — with one 
exception (ch. xxxiii. 1) the longest throne-occupancy of any sovereign of Judah. Its 
close synchronized with the accession of Fekah to the throne of Israel by means of con- 
spiracy and assassination (2 Kings xv. 23 — 25). 

II. A PROMISING BULER. (Vers. 4, 5.) 1. A worshipper of Jehovah. " He did that 
which was right in the eyes of Jehovah, according to all that his father Amaziah had 
done," i.e. until he declined into idolatry (ch. xiv. 14). " He was a good man, and by 
nature righteous and magnanimous, and very laborious in taking care of the affairs of 
his kingdom " (Josephus, ' Ant.,' ix. 10. 3) ; but his devotion to religion, while sincere, 
was like his father's, imperfect (ch. xxv. 2). " The high places were not remored : the 
people sacrificed and burnt incense still on the high places " (2 Kings xv. 4). See the 

n. CHBONIOUW. T 



»22 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xxvt. 1—23 

confirmation of this in the minor prophets (Hos. viiL 14 ; lii. 2 ; Amos ii. 4). 2. A 
seeker after God. "And ho sought Qt)d." (1) How? By observing his worship, 
keeping his commandments, honouring his prophets, and studying his Law — the only 
true way of seeking God still. (2) When ? In the days of Zechariah, " who had under- 
standing," or " gave instruction " (Revised Version, margin), " in the vision of God." 
Nobler distinction than the former, better employment than the latter, can no man have. 
(3) How long? Until Zechariah died, after which his fervour declined, the remem- 
brance of his teacher faded, his devotion to Jehovah and the true religion diminished. 
So Joash behaved wisely and religiously while Jehoiada lived (ch. xxiv. 17). Human 
goodness too often short-lived (Hos. vi. 4). (4) With wliat result? Prosperity, which 
kept pace with his piety. "As long as he sought Jehovah, Elohira made him to 
prosper " (ver. 5) — a remarkable combination of words, which perhaps teaches that, 
whilst prosperity or success is from God, the Supreme Being as such, it is never con- 
ferred upon good men except on the ground that they are worshippers of him as the 
covenant God of grace and salvation. 3. A pupil of Zechariah. " Zechariah had 
nnderstanding," and perhaps gave him instruction " in the vision [or, 'seiins'] of God." 
That this Zechariah was neither the priest whom Joash slew (ch. xxiv. 20), nor the 
prophet who hved in the second year of Darius (Zech. i. 1), is ariparent. That he pos- 
sessed that special gift or capacity of beholding God in vision which pertained to the 
prophetic calling cannot be inferred from the Chronicler's statement, " since this 
beholding of God, of which the prophets were conscious only in moments of highest 
inspiration, cannot be thought of as a work of human activity and exercise " (Bertheau). 
Most probably he was one who, like Daniel (i. 17), "had understanding in all visions 
and dreams," and who acted as Uzziah's counsellor and teacher. 

III. A BRILLIANT WARKIOB. (Vers. 2, 6, 7, 8.) 1. The fortification of Eloth. (Ver. 
2.) His father's conquest of Edom (ch. xxv. 11, 12) had either not been pushed as far 
as this important harbour-town upon the Bed Sea (see on ch. viii. 17), or the town, 
though taken, had been given up and not annexed to Judah in consequence of Joash's 
defeat of Amaziah (ch. xxv. 23). On attaining to the throne, Uzziah rectified his 
father's oversight by capturing the town, erecting it into a fortress, and restoring it to 
Judah. Without it Edom was of little consequence to Judah. This exploit, which 
happened in the early part of Uzziah's reign, was probably that from which he derived 
his name Azariah (2 Kings xiv. 21, 22); while its introduction at this stage in the 
narrative, before the chronological statement which follows it (ver. 3), may have been 
due to a desire on the part of the Chronicler to introduce Uzziah to his readers as the 
well-known monarch who had conquered, recovered, and fortified Eloth (Bertheau). 
2. The war against the Philistines and Arabians. (Vers. 6, 7.) These had together 
invaded Judah upwards of eighty years previously (ch. xxi. 16), and Uzziah may have 
purposed to inflict upon them chastisement for that aggression (Keil) ; but the assump- 
tion is as rational that Uzziah either dreaded or experienced a combination against 
himself similar to that which had assailed Jehoram, and that, either (in the former 
case) taking time by the forelock, he fell upon bis enemies ere they could strike at him, 
or (in the latter case), meeting the emergency with courage, he repelled the attacks 
they made upon him. His success in dealing with the Philistines was complete. He 
broke down the walls of Gath (see on oh. xi. 8), which, formerly taken from the Philis- 
tines by David (1 Chron. xviii. 1), had latterly been recovered, most likely in the reign 
of Jehoram ; the wall of Jabneh, here mentioned for the first time, but probably the 
town in Judah named Jabneel in the days of the conquest (Josh. iv. 11), Jamnia in 
the period of the Maccabees, at the present day Jabneh, eighteen miles north-west of 
Gath, " situated on a slight eminence on the west bank of the valley of Sorek {Wddy 
M SQ/rar), about four miles from the sea coast" (Warren, in ' Picturesque Palestine,' iiL 
161); and the wall of Ashdod, one of the principal cities of the Philistines (1 Sam. t. 
1), and now a villn;ze called Esdvd, after which he erected cities in the domain of Aslidod 
and in other parts of Philistia. In like manner, he was entirely victorious over the 
Arabiiins in Gur-baal — not the city Petra (LXX.), but perhaps the town of Gerar (Tar- 
gnm) — and the Meunims, who dwelt in Maan (1 Chron. iv. 41). 3. The submission of 
the Ammonites. These, whose settlements lay east of the Dead Sea, and who, in 
Jehoshaphat's time, had come up against Judah (ch. xx. 1), were now so reduced that 
th«y rendered tnbnte to Judah, as the Moabites did imder David (2 Sam. Tiii. 2), and 



OH. XXVI, 1—23.] THE SECOND BOOK OV THE CnrjJMCL]:;^. 3-3 

the FhiUitines and AraUans under JehoBhaphat(cli. xviL 11). 4. The extension of hit 
fame to Egypt. Not merely the report of his Bplendid Tictories travelled so far as the 
land of the Pharaohs, but the boundaries of his empire reached to its vicinity. An 
inscription of Tiglath-Pileser II. shows that the northern people of Hamath attempted 
to free themselves from the Assyrian yoke by going over to Azariah (' Becords,' etc., 
V. 46 ; Schrader, • Keilinsohriften,' p. 221). 

rV. A GREAT BmiiDEB. (Vcrs. 9, 10.) In addition to the fortress at Eloth and the 
dties in Fhilistia, he erected towers. 1. In Jerusalem. (1) At the comer-gate, i.t, at 
the north-west corner of the city (ch. xxv, 23). (2) At the valley-gate, i.e. on the 
west side, where the Jaffa gate now is. (3) At the turning of the wall, i.e. at a curve 
in the city wall on the east side of Zion, near the horse-gate. This tower commanded 
both the temple hill and Zion against attacks from the south-east. 2. In the desert, or 
u/ildemees The place was " the steppe-lands on the west side of the Dead Sea " (Eeil) ; 
the object, the protection of his flocks and shepherds against attacks from robber-bands, 
whether of Edomites or Arabians. 

V. An enteubiabtio husbahdman. (Ver. 10.) 1. An extensive cattle-breeder, tie 
had much cattle in the region just mentioned, in the lowland between the motmtains 
of Judaea and the Mediterranean, and in the flat district on the east of the Dead Sea, 
from Amon to near Heshbon in the north. For the use of these animals he hewed 
cisterns in each of these localities. 2. An ardent agriculturist He kept farmers and 
vine-dressers upon the mountains and in the fruitful fields. " He took care to cultivate 
the gronnd. He planted it with all sorts of plants, and sowed it with all sorts of seeds " 
(Josephus). 

VI. Ak ablk oenerau (Vers. 11 — 15.) 1. Be organized the army. (1) The 
nnmber of fighting men was reckoned up by Hananiah, one of the king's captains, 
assisted by Jeiel the scribe and Maaseiah the steward, two officials practised in writing 
and the making up of lists. The total force, according to their estimation, was 307,500 

5370,000, Josephus) able-bodied and thoroughly disciplined troops, with 2600 (2000, 
Tosephus) heads of fathers' houses, mighty men of valour, who acted as superior officers 
or divisional commanders. (2) The entire host was arranged into bands, detachments, 
or army corps, each father's house, perhaps, composing a regiment, and a group of these 
a battalion. (3) Whether these army corps served in rotation (Jamieson) is not stated. 
2. ffe armed the soldiers. For all the host he prepared the necessary weapons for 
offensive and defensive warfare — for the first, spears, bows, and slings ; for the second, 
shields, helmets, and coats of mail ; or perhaps, for the heavy-armed troops, shields, 
spears, and helmets; and for the light infantry, bows and sling-stones. The mention 
of " sling-stones," it has been thought (Bertheau), was intended to indicate the com- 
pleteness of his preparations, as in the late Franco-G«rman war Marshal Leboeuf 
declared the French army to be ready for the projected campaign down to the " shoe- 
buckle." Besides furnishing each soldier with a set of weapons, Uzziah collected a 
store of such " that he might have them in readiness to put into the hands of his sub- 
jects on any exigency " (A. Clarke). 3. He fortified the capital. This, which Joash of 
Israel (ch. xxv. 23) had weakened, he strengthened by placing on the towers and battle- 
ments of its walls ingenious machines — "engines invented by cunning men" — to shoot 
arrows and great stones withal, like the eatapultm and ballistce of the Bomans. 

Lessons. 1. The beneficial influence of parental piety — ^it tends to reproduce itself 
in the children. 2. The true Source of all prosperity, whether temporal or spiritual — 
God. 3. The necessary condition of all permanent prosperity for individuals or com- 
munities — ^religion, seeking God. 4. The unspeakable advantage to kings and subjects 
of having as their counsellors men who have understanding in the visions of G-od. 
6. The obvious wisdom of sovereigns and their people devoting attention to the cultiva- 
tion of the soil. 6. The lawfulness, in nations as in individuals, of taking due pre- 
cautions for safety. — ^W. 

Vers. 16 — 23. — Uzziah the leprous. I. Uzziah's tbansobession. (Vers. 16 — 19.) 1. 
The cause of it. (1) Pride. " His heart was lifted up." This the inevitable tendency 
of too much material and temporal prosperity (Deut. viiL 13, 14). Exemplified in 
Amaziah (ch. xxv. 18, 19 ; 2 Kings xiv. 9), Sennacherib (ch. xxxiL 31 ; 2 Kings xviii. 
19 — 36), Nebuchadnezzar (Dan. iv. 30 — 34; v. 20). (2) Ignoimnce. He perceived not 



824 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xxvi. 1—23. 

that his heart was being lifted up "to his destraotion." Had he foreseen the consequences 
of his rash act, he might have paused. But questions of right and wrong must be 
determined without regard to temporal results. Only none need remain in ignorance 
of this, that the path of holiness is the path of safety (Prov. iii. 17), whatever be its 
extemiil issues; and that the way of disobedience, however promising to appearance, is 
and must be the way of peril and doom (Prov. iv. 19). 2. The nature of it. " He 
went into the temple of the Lord to burn incense upon the altar of incense," <.«. he 
ti)ok upon himself the priestly function of ministering before Jehovah in the holy place. 
Whether in doing so he conceived himself to be following in the steps of David and 
Solomon (Thenius, Ewald, Stanley) may be doubted. It is not clear that either of 
these sovereigns ever offered incense in the sanctuary proper, though they frequently 
ofiBciated at the offering of sacrifices in the outer court on the occasion of religious 
festivals (Bertheau, Keil, Bahr). More likely is the view that Uzziah desired to ape the 
potentates of the world generally, as e.g. those of Egypt (Harkness, ' Egyptian Life and 
History,' p. 44), who, as supreme priests (jpontifices maximi), with other priests to aid 
them, conducted temple-worship in honour of the gods. In any case, what he did 
expressly violated the Divine Law, which reserved the privilege of entering the holy 
place and ministering therein exclusively for the priests (Exod. xxx. 7, 8; Lev. xvi. 2, 
12, 13; Numb, xviii. 1 — 10). The statement of Josephus ('Ant.,' is. 10. 4) may well 
be authentic, that the occasion which tempted Uzziah to forget himself was the cele- 
bration of some high national festival. 3. The aggravation! of it. He committed this 
offence : (1) When he was strong ; when his empire was at the height of its splendour, 
and himself at the top of his fame ; when his kingly magnificence was in full bloom, 
and his regal heart had everything it could desire — in short, when he ought to have 
been supremely contented and happy, without aspiring after more. (2) Against that 
God through whose assistance he had climbed to the pedestal of earthly renown on 
which he stuod, thereby furnishing a proof of monstrous ingratitude quite on a level 
with that of his father Amaziah (ch. xxv. 14). (8) In spite of the remonstrance 
of Azariah the priest and eighty colleagues, who, going into the sanctuary after him, 
courageously reminded him of the heinous character of his proposed action, as an 
invasion of the province Jihovah had set apart for the Aaronic priesthood, fearlessly 
commanded him to leave the sacred edifice, and warned him of the peril he incvirred 
in thus defying the ordinance of God. Men who have God upon their side have no 
need to be afraid of kings. Nothing emboldens the human spirit like a conscious- 
ness of right (Ps. xxvii. 1). (4) With ebullitions of kingly rage. According to 
Josephus, he threatened to kill Azariah and his colleagues unless they held their peace 
(Prov. xix. 12 ; xvi. 14). Wrath often leads to murder. 

II. Uzziah's punishment. (Vers. 19 — 23.) 1. Sudden. The Lord smote him 
(2 Rings XV. 5) where be stood, within the holy place, censer in hand, attired in a 
priestly robe, fuming at Azariah and his eighty assistants, ready, in defiance of one and 
all, to go through with the unhallowed project he had in hand. Foolish Uzziah 1 
Jehovah, who all the while was looking on (ch. vii. 16 ; Hab. ii. 20), simply stretched 
forth his invisible finger, and the daringly sacrilegious act was arrested. According to 
Josephus (' Ant.,' ix. 10. 4), at that moment a great earthquake shook the ground, 
splitting the mountain on which the city stood, and making in the temple dome a rent, 
through which the sim's rays, shining, fell upon the king's face, insomuch that the 
leprosy seized on him immediately (cf. Amos i. 1 ; Micah i. 4 ; Zech. liv. 5). 2. Severe. 
The leprosy brake forth (or rose as the sun) in his forehead. (On the nature of this 
disease, consult the Exposition, and see Keil's • Biblische Archaologie,' s. 114.) The 
same punishment inflicted on Miriam for speaking against Moses (Numb. xii. 10), and 
on Gehazi for lying to Elisha (2 Kings v. 27). The severity of the stroke measured 
the greatness of the sin for which it fell. 3. Conspicvout. " The chief priest, and all the 
priests, looked upon him, and, behold, he was leprous." The signs and tokens of this 
plague had been laid down in the Law of Moses (Lev. xiii.). Like the mark upon Cain's 
brow (Gen. iv. 15), the spot upon Uzziah's forehead proclaimed him an object of Divine 
wrath. Many suffer on account of their transgressions whose chastisement is not visible 
to their fellow-men ; that Uzziah's was perceptible to Azariah and his colleagues wa* 
a proof of the heinous character of his offence, while it served as a warning to others. 
One of Jehovah's purposes in inflicting punishment on evil-doers is to convince beholden 



OK. ixvn. 1— 9.J THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 



325 



of the horrible Iniquity of sin, and deter them through " the terror of the Lord" (2 Cor. 
V. 11.) from its commission. 4. Humiliating. The priests thrust the stricken king from 
the sacred dwelling; yea, the king himself "hasted to go out." Moreover, he was 
henceforth as an unclean person, cut off from the congregation of Jehovah (Lev. xiii. 45, 
46 ; Numb. v. 2), and, because of the infectious nature of his malady, lodged ia a 
" several house," i.e. a lazar-house, or infirmary. As the leprosy, in its spreading, 
wasting, corrupting, loathsomoj contagious, incurable character, was a hideous emblem 
of sin, so the exclusion of the leper from the congregation, and bis isolation from the 
society of his fellows, was an impressive picture of the fate reserved for unpardoned 
sinners (Ps. i. 5, 6). It must not, however, be assumed that Uzziah died in impenitence. 
6. Fat(d. It ended in death, as all sin does (Ezek. xviii. 4; Bom. vi. 23). Yet sin is 
not incurable by Divine power any more than leprosy was. As Miriam, Naaman, and 
the man who came to Christ (Matt. viii. 2) were cleansed, so may the sinful soul be 
renewed (1 John i. 7). 6. Poithumou$. Uzziah's punishment followed him after 
death. His people buried him, indeed, but not in the royal mausoleum, only in its 
neighbourhood, in the field of burial which belonged to the kings, lest his leprous dust 
should defile tliat of his fathers. 

LeboONS, 1. The danger of prosperity. 2. The sin of pride. 8. The unlawfulness 
of will-worship. 4. The certainty that Ood can punish sin. 6. The hopelessueai of 
those who die in sin. — W. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XXVn. 
This chapter of nine verses is paralleled by 
the seven verses of 2 Kings xv. 32—38. It 
consists of personal particulars respecting 
Jotham (vers. 1, 2) ; his building and Lis 
wars(vers. 3— 6); a reference to his further 
doings (ver. 7) ; an exact repetition of a part 
of the first verse (ver. 8) ; his death, burial, 
and successor (ver. 9). 

Ver. 1. — Jemshah. This name in the 
parallel is spelt with a final ale-ph instead 
of he. Nothing else is known of Jerushah, 
nor of her father Zadok. 

Ver. 2. — Howbeit. This word purports to 
render the Hebrew pi, which might find 

a more telling reproduction in such a phrase 
as "and moreover." It has been said, 
wherein his father did right, so did he ; and 
to his clear advantage, where his father went 
wrong, he did not. Ilie people did yet 
corruptly. Tlie parallel, in its ver. 35, speci- 
fies in what this consisted, viz. that they 
continued the high places, burning incense 
and sacrificing at them. The early chapters 
of Isaiah depict forcibly the extent of this 
national apostasy, and the heinous ofien- 
riveness sf it in the Divine sight. 

Ver. 3. — The high gate. In the parallel, 
rendered in the Authorized Tersion the 
"higher" gate, the Hebrew (.ph)).!}) being 
the same in both places. The Bevised Ver- 
sion shows " upper gate " in both places. 
It was probably the gate which led from 
the palace to the temple's outer court (see 
ch. xxiii. 20, and note there). On the wall 
of Ophel; Hebrew, hivT); i.». the opliel, 



which may be Englished "the swelling 
ground." It was the extreme south end of 
the spur which gradually narrowed south- 
ward, and which was the continuation of 
the Bezetha hill, bounded by the brook 
Kedrou on the east, and the Tyropoeon on 
the we»t. This extreme south part called 
the Ophol sank into the bounding valleys 
to the Kedrou precipitously and to the 
Tyropoeon gradually. Pp. 328 — 335 of 
Conder's ' Handbook ' (2nd edit.), and spe- 
cially pp. 332 — 334, well repay a thorough 
study. A ditch was cut across the narrowest 
part of the ridge, which separated the 
temple hill itself from the Bezetha hill. In 
these parts fortifications were built, and no 
doubt to such it is our text calls attention. 

Ver. 4. — The mountains of Judah; He- 
brew, "na ; Bevised Version, hill eountry of 
Judah, the Hebrew text being in the singular 
number (compare particularly Josh. ix. 1, 
where the Ear is evidently placed in con- 
trast with the Shefelah'). Castles ; Hebrew, 
nvoi'a (so ch. xvii. 12). The meaning is 
that he built /oris (Isa. ii. 15 ; Hos. viii. 14). 

Ver. 5. — He fought . . . the King of the 
Ammonites. No allusion ia made to the 
matter of this verse in the parallel, which 
contains a statement of the Syrian Bezin'i 
attack or threatened invasion of Judah, as 
well as Pekah's, son of Bemaliah King of 
Israel. Of the Ammonites' defeat by Uzziah 
we have just heard (foregoing chapter, ver. 
8). A general statement is all that is made 
there of the gifts or tribute they then had 
to pay. The present tribute was a heavy 
payment, and enforced for three years. The 
" wheat " and " barley," in which payment 
was largely made bespeak the fertile arable 



82« 



THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONIOLBS. [oh. xxth. 1— ». 



quality of the Ammonite land, and thin la 
noticed by travelleTS to tike present day. 

Ver. 6. — The virtue of the leflection of 
this Terse is apparent. Erepared ; Hebiew, 
pST); Bevised Version, ordered; with some 
others (saoh as " set straight," etc.), a good 
Tendering in keeping with other Old Testa- 
ment renderings of words betokening mortU 
haJntude. 

Yer. 7. — All his wars (see note on ver. 5, 
and parallel, Ter. 87). Ihe book of the kings 



of Israel and Jndah. Note oarefnlly tha 
parallel, ver. 36, and also ver. 6 of sama 
chapter, entries of Judah kings, and comp. 
vers. 11, 15, 21, 26, 31 of same chapter (2 
Kings XV.), entries of Israel kings. 

Ver. 8. — This verse is identical with go 
much of ver. 1 as hag to do with same sub- 
ject; that it is no mere careless repeated 
insertion, however, is evidenced by the name 
Jotham in that verse, in the place occupied 
by was in this versa. 



HOMILETICS. 

Ten. 1—9. — The Homeless reign of a son who followed all that was good in afath«i'» 
example, and took warning of what was wrong in it. The preacher may take occasion, 
from the apparently scant contents of this chapter, io enlarge on the general subject 
of example as a force in human life, pointing out its strong points and its weaker side; 
what is requisite to give it a steady and equable influence, and how there is only one 
perfect Example — an Example always and in all things and by all worthy to be followed. 
Point may be given to the subject, as based on this chapter, by observing how it reminds 
ua that— • 

L No HUUAN EXAMPLE OAH BB WORTHY TO BE FOLLOWED AHD COPIED IN ETEBT 

BBSPSox, The most filial son may not look to the wisest, kindest, and most religioua 
father as an absolutely safe guide and model in everything; and so, through the whole 
range and operation of the relationships, and the influences in them for good even, 
which afiect our character and are prone to dominate our life. 
IL The examples or those whom we best love — of gbeat men, of the saint- 

LIBST-KNOWN OHABAOTERS, OF THOSE WHOM WB DESERVEDLY ADMIRE AND VENEEATB — 
HnST NOT BE HADE ANY SLAVISH MODEL, MUCH LESS FEBVEBIED INTO AN IDOLATBOnS 

ONE. Nay, how very common it is, in such cases, to see that errors, defects, peculiari- 
ties, mannerisms, are what are copied first, while the weightier qualities and objects of 
imitation are overlooked! As if we imitate perfectly our human model, much is still 
wanting of Divine perfection, and which in our measure it is quite possible to incorpo- 
rate ; so, if we imitate slavishly, we are putting in what had better be left out, and are 
often caught putting it in, even at the expense of omitting the worthier things. 
IIL Human example gives the help of warmth, sympathy, and an ENcoxmAaiNa 

INDUOBMBNT TO ATTEMPT WHAT WB KNOW FROM IT THAT OTHERS HAVE DONE OS 

ATTAINED. It offers our thought and our moral nature a stepping-stone ; it leads us on 
by the analogy to take the advantage of higher endeavour and of a higher model. 
IV. Foe the disobimotation absoldtely needed, when we abe following humax 

EXAMPLES, BIKCEBE ENDEAVOUB, CONSCIBNTIOHS THOnOHT, AND HUMBLE FBAYEB WILL 

DO TBBY MUCH TO FIT US. As in SO much else these three moderating and directing 
forces reap God's blessing and gain safe practical results, so assuredly they will here, 
in what is a delicate grace to bloom and flourish in any circumstances, viz. that of 
discrimination. Jotham was made wise in this respect above many others, and hi* 
brief but very expressive and unique biography is therefore written without one single 
reproach oi blot. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS, 

Vers. 1, 2. — Uzziah and Jotham, father and son. From the alight materials wa 
have here, and those still more scanty in the Book of Kings, we may glean — 

L That the best part of Uzzlih'b foetunb was dj his fatherhood. He did, 
indeed, enjoy a very good estate ; the " lines fell to him in pleasant places, and he 
had a goodly heritage." He had the highest position in the land, power, wealth, a 
large and noUe sphere for great natural ability and honourable ambition (ch. xxvL 
6 — 16). But more precious than all of these to the king's heart, we may be sure, waa 
tha poasasaion of a tnu, loyal, godly sou and auccessor. That whieh touches ua in oar 



CH. XXVII. 1—9.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHEONIOLES. 827 

home affections either stirs within us the deepest and purest joy or awakens tha 
profoundest and most poignant grief. An unworthy son, a " thankless child," an heir 
who is likely to overturn all that we have laboriously built up, will make the very 
sweetest enjoyments and the fairest earthly possessions to lose all their charm and be 
of no account to us. But such a son as Jotham is to his father the crown of pros- 
perity and the comfort of adversity. Prom royal cares the king goes home to find, in 
conjugal and in filial affection, a contentment and a peace, an exhilaration and a joy, 
which no glittering gewgaws and no obsequious attentions are able to command. We 
do not know how highly Uzziah prized the virtue and the attachment of his son during 
his earlier and happier years, but we may be well assured that, when the hand of God 
was upon him, and he was separated from the society of men, he found in Jotham's 
regency and in his filial sympathy a priceless mitigation to his loss, an invaluable 
treasure in his loneliness and his decline. Parents may think that their professional 
or household duties make it impossible for them to afford time for the teaching and 
training of their children, for the culture of their Christian character ; but they ought 
to know that, whatever their other claims may be, they cannot afford to neglect their 
parental duty. If they do neglect it, they will leave undone that which will make 
them immeasurably poorer than they might become a few years further on. 

II. That thk best part of Jotham's succession was his father's ohabaotbb. 
lie inherited great things from his father, the king ; but from his father, the servant 
of Jehovah, he gained one that outweighed them all — the influence for good of a godly 
man. He " did what was right . . . according to all that his father did." It was very 
largely, indeed, to his father's example that he owed his own character for piety and 
purity. And what is there in the most splendid surroundings, or in the most attractive 
positions, that is to be compared with that ? They will perish, but that will endure ; 
they will soon lose their charm, but it will always be precious beyond all price ; they 
are relatively, but that is intrinsically and eternally, valuable. We may not have to 
thank our parents for a fortune or a dowry — it matters little ; we may have to thank 
them for a bright and beautiful example — that matters mvxih. Indeed everything. 

III. That Jotham miarnt the lesson which the Divine Patheb taught. 
" Howbeit he entered not [profanely and intrusively] into the temple of the Lord." 
God rebuked his father, Uzziah, for this flagrant transgression, rebuking at the same 
time his pride of heart, his spiritual decline (see homily on ch. xxvi. 16 — 21, " A clouded 
close"). Doubtless Uzziah himself understood the meaning of that heavy blow, 
and bowed his heart beneath it; he "was in subjection to the Father of spiriis, and 
lived." In that lingering death of leprosy he found life in penitence and in return to 
God. Jotham, his son, also learnt the lesson; and, instead of giving way to haughti- 
ness of heart in the days when he was " mighty " (ver. 6), he retained his integrity 
before the Lord. 1. We may not plead our father's deficiencies, excesses, or disobedi- 
ences as an excuse for our own. If they erred or sinned, they also suffered for their 
error, for their guilt. And their experience should be a warning which we should heed, 
and not an example which we foolishly follow. 2. We should give God heartfelt thanks 
for all the gracious influences which come to us in our home-life, and regard them as of 
the very best gifts that come from his Divine hand. 3. We should have it as a sacred 
and honourable ambition to confirm (and not to destroy) the work of those who went 
before us. If we do thus live, our fathers will be living on in us and through us, and 
if we cannot immortalize their name, we can perpetuate their influence. 4. We may 
hope that such filial devotedness will be rewarded by parental rejoicing in those whom 
we shall leave behind, to whom we shall commit the fruit of our labour. — C. 

Vers. 1 — ^.—Features of an honourable life : Jotham. But little of Jotham's reign 
is racorded in Scripture, and his name is seldom on our lips. But he was a man of 
worth and wisdom ; and, considering the comparative brevity of his life, we may say 
that he contributed much to bis country. We learn from the account in the Second 
Book of Kings (xv. 5) — 

I. That he served a useful apfbentioebbif. We find that, for some time during 
his father's illness, he, " the king's son, was over the house, judging the people of the 
land." This was an admirable arrangement for the country and lor the young prince ; 
for it had the advantage (which the son could not fail to obtain) of tha experience of 



828 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE OHBONICLES. [oh. xxvn. 1— ». 



Uzziah ; and he was learning the great art of ruling, while his responsibility was shared 
by one much wiser and stronger than he. It is an excellent thing for the young, in 
every sphere, to be placed where they can be gathering wisdom before they carry the 
heavy burden of a weighty responsibility. 

n. That he followed in the footsteps op a wise and good man. (Ver. 2.) (See 
previous homily on " Uzziah and Jotham, father and son.") 

III. That he worked in a wise direction — from within outwabd. First, "he 
built the high gate " of the temple (ver. 3) ; that was beginni ng at the very centre, at 
* the house of the Lord," which was morally, if not geographically, the central spot in 
the kingdom. Then he made some additions to the wall of Jerusalem (ver. 3). Then, 
moving outward, he built fortified cities in the mountains, and castles in the forests of 
Judah. And then, going further afield, he warred with Ammon, and compelled 
it to pay tribute (ver. 5). This is the true order. Let solicitude and activity begin 
at the centre; let them begin at the very centre — at a man's own heart and character; 
let them move outward — to those in the home circle, to the kindred, to the Church ; 
and then to those still further away — to fellow-countrymen, to fellow-men everywhere. 
A circumscribed activity is altogether a mistake ; but we must begin with ourselves, 
becoming right at heart, and then we may and should move outward in our sympathiM 
and our endeavours. 

IV. That he attained great power by maintaining his godly oharactes 
(Ver. 6.) (See succeeding homily.) 

V. That his life was darkened by many shadows ab well as brightened bt 
MANY blessings. 1. He could not effect all the reforms he would have liked to carry 
out, and he had to witness some evil-doings whiph must have grieved his spirit. "The 
people did yet corruptly" (ver. 2). 2. Foreign invasion began to threaten the king- 
dom (1 Kings XV. 37). 3. He found himself sick unto death at an age (forty-one) 
when he might have expect( d to do great things, and to be much to the people whom 
he ruled. It was an honourable and useful life that Jotham lived; one tio be remem- 
bered and to be followed in its salient features. Like him (1) we should see that we 
inherit that which is the hest from our fathers ; (2) pursue the right steadfastly, with- 
out swerving, even to the eud; (3) begiuning at home, we should extend our influ- 
ence as far as we can send it ; (4) be prepared to lay down our weapons in the midst 
of eur days. And how much better to die, as Jotham did, leading all men to wish that 
he had lived longer, than, as so many others have done, compelling their best friend* 
to wish that they had died sooner ! It matters little when the night of death comes ; 
but it matters much that, during the day of life, we do our work well and bear our 
burden with a brave and patient heart. — 0. 

Ver. 6. — The accumulation of spiritual power. " So Jotham became mighty, because 
he prepared his ways before the Lord his Q-od ; '' or, because " he made his ways firm 
before Jahveh." Whatever may be the exact rendering of the passage, and whatever 
may be the precise shade of thought intended to be conveyed, it is clear that Jotham'i 
might or his strenj^th in the kingdom is referred to his continuance in the service of 
the Lord. And thence we gain the truth that true power is to be sought and found 
in permanent piety, in walking with an unfaltering step in the ways of Divine wisdom 
and of human obedience. Power of the truest and highest kind is not the endowment 
of a moment ; it is not a suddenly acquired possession ; it is a growth, an accumula- 
tion ; it is the " long result " of a faithful service. It is — 

I. The COMBINATION OF MANY CHRISTIAN VIRTUES. As the " mighty " swordsman 
is the man who is strong at all points of attack and defence ; as the " mighty " speaker 
is he who has all possible qualifications for interesting, convincing, and persuading 
men; so the " mighty " man of God is he who has acquired all the various excellences 
which we are able to secure. " Giving all diligence," we are " to add to our faith virtue ; 
and to virtue knowledge ; and to knowledge teuiperance," etc. (2 Pet. i. 5, 6). " What- 
soever things are true, honest, just, pure, lovely, and of good report," we are to think 
upon and, of course, to pursue and to acquire. We are to " build ourselves up on our 
holy faith." And building up is a work that is not done in a day nor in a year. It is 
a work of time. And the strong character thus formed is the accumulated result of 
many spiritual activities, protracted ever many years. 



OH, xxTO. 1— 9.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 829 

n. The wobk of tihb in many fartiodIiAbb. No num can be a mighty man, in 
a spiritual sense, who is not : 1. A large possessor of Divine wisdom. A superficial 
knowledge of Divine truth may serve for a while in simpler and subordinate positions ; 
but he who occupieB an important post, to which large responsibilities and delicate 
duties belong, must be furnished with a large measure of spiritual sagacity. And this 
can only be gained by serving the Lord for many years and in many ways. It is the 
acquisition of one whose " ways have been firm before Jehovah ; " who has been living 
before God, and learning of him from year to year, from period to period. 2. A man of 
much ielf-command. A hasty or impulsive mau is necessarily a weak man. Only 
those who can control themselves can command their fellows or direct affairs. Patience, 
self-possession, the ruling of our own spirit — this is an essential condition of all real 
strength; and this, again, is the work of long-continued struggle and discipline. It is 
the harvest of strenuous effort and of earnest prayer ; it is a steady, spiritual accumu- 
lation. 3. One that has acquired skill and strength in exercise and activity. No man 
can do a thing really well till he has first done it imperfectly and tentatively. Excel- 
lency is always the fruit of practice, of patient, continuous endeavour. And here, 
again, is gradual acquisition or accumulation. 4. One that enjoys a good measure of 
esteem. It is the man of whom we say, " We know the proof of him ; " the man who 
has approved himself in many a field of labour and in many a flood of trial ; to whose 
words we listen, whose will we obey, whom we permit to guide and rule us. And, of 
all things, esteem is the product of consistency and beauty in life, of much walking 
"in the ways of Jehovah." 

III. A GOAL TO BE PUBBDED AND ATTAINED. It is true that powcr, Or might, is, to 
some extent, an endowment ; it is a direct gift of God. But it is far from being wholly 
so. In the kingdom, large or small, over which we are placed, we may "become 
mighty ; " we may rise to influence ; we may make our mark, which will not soon, if 
ever, be erased. (1) By a thorough consecration of ourselves to Jesus Christ and his 
cause ; (2) by consistency and excellency — by blamelessnesB and beauty of life and 
spirit ; (3) by earnestness of purpose and endeavour ; (4) by prayer for Divine com- 
munications (Eph. iii. 16 ; Col. i. 11) ; — we also may " become mighty " to bear onr 
witness, to overcome our foes, to do our work before we die. — 0. 

Vers. 1 — 9. — A hrief record of a bright reign. L Jotham, a oood uan. 1. 0/ 
honourahle parentage. (1) His father Uzziah, though guilty in hiB lifetime of a 
great sin (ch. xxvi. 16), and dying under a cloud (ch. xxvL 21), was essentially a 
sincere worshipper of Jehovah. Good men may commit acts of wickedness, from the 
temporal consequences of which they cannot, in their lifetime, shake themselves free 
(e.g. Moses, Jacob, David) ; yet are their characters and standing before God not to be 
judged by these, but by the whole course of their earthly careers. (2) His mother 
Jerushab, a native of Jerusalem (Josephus, ' Ant.,' ix. 11. 2), and the daughter of 
Zadok — if this was the high priest mentioned in 1 Chron. vi. 53 (Bertheau) — was 
probably a woman of piety. Incalculable is the influence of mothers in determining 
the characters of sons (e.g. Jochebed, Eunice, Monica, Susanna Wesley). 2. Of excel- 
lent cltaracter. (1) He followed in his father's steps in so far as these were good (ver. 
2), which was all he was warranted to do (Acts iv. 19). Eeligion doubly influential 
upon the young when recommended by the exaniple of devout fathers and mothers. 
Who would make others good, himself must be good. Irreligious parents not likely to 
succeed in the godly upbringing of their children. (2) He avoided the mistake hia 
father had committed (ver. 2). Mistakes of ourselves or others not actions to be 
repeated or patterns to be copied, but beacons to be observed and paths to be shunned. 
Whether, had Uzziah not been " stricken of the Lord," but permitted to assume the 
priest's ofSce, Jotham would have discontinued the practice as an unwarrantable mtru- 
sion into a province that belonged not to kings, may be doubtful ; it was to his credit 
that he was able to interpret the lesson of God's judgment on his parent, and meekly 
acquiesce in the same (Ps. cxix. 75, 120). (3) He persevered in the right way in spite 
of the sinful practices of his people. These " did corruptly " (ver, 2), i.e. worshipped 
Idols, sacrificed, and burnt incense in the high places (2 Kings xv, 32) ; and it' the 
representations of the prophets may be credited, were sunk in deplorable immorality 
(Isa. iL 6, etc. ; t. 7, etc. ; Micah i. 5 ; ii. 1, etc.). Cf. the phrase used of the Babylo- 



830 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHB0NICLE8. [oh. xxvn. 1— a 

nian tower-builders on the monuments : " Babylon corruptly to sin went " (' Becords/ 
etc., Tii. 131). Jotham stood alone, or nearly so, in an extremely degenerate age ; like 
Noah in the antediluvian world (Gen. vii. 1), Lot in Sodom (2 Pet. ii. 8), and Daniel 
in Babylon (Dan. vi. 13) ; which heightens one's idea of both the nobility of bis 
character and the strength of his piety. It requires a strong man, intellectually and 
morally, to be singular, and especially to be good, when goodness is unpopular and 
immorality with irreligion holds the field. " This king was not defective in any virtue, 
but was religiou.s towards Grod and righteous towards men " (Josephus). 

II. Jotham, a successful kino. 1. The duration of his success. Throughout his 
entire reign of sixteen yeais. If his father's reign was longer and more brilliant, his 
was more symmetrical and complete. If he was a more obscure monarch than his 
father, he was probably as good a man. 2. The nature of his success. (1) His build- 
ings were important, (a) He restored and beautified the upper gate of the temple 
(vur. 3), i.e. the northern gate, which led into the inner court (Ezek. viii. 3, 5, 14), 
and was callud " upper " probably because it stood upon higher ground than the gates 
upon the bouth (Ezek. ix. 2). His reason for such architectural ornamentation most 
likely was, either that it formed the principal entrance to the temple (Bertheau), or 
that there the burnt offerings were washed ; cf. Ezek. xl. 38 (Bahr). In beginning 
with the temple, Jotham observed the right order ; first the things of God, and then 
those of man ; first religion, and then business ; first the claims of Heaven, and then 
those of earth. (6) He added to the city fortifications. " On the wall of Ophel," 
which ran along the southern slope of the temple hill and joined the temple wall at the 
south-eastern comer, at the turning of the wall (ch. xxvi. 9), where his father before him 
had raised erections, " he built much." As Solomon's palace, on the southern slope, 
was considerably lower than the temple, Jotham may have had a good deal of building. 
(c) "In the mountains of Judah," on the military roads, he erected fortified cities or 
garrisons ; and in the forests or wooded hills, where such " cities " could not be placed, 
he constructed " castles and towers " (ver. 4). Thus, while like a good man he honoured 
God, like a prudent sovereign he looked well to the safety of his kingdom. (2) His wars 
were victorious. " He fought with the Ammonites, and prevailed against them " (ver. 5), 
compelling them to resume payment of the tribute which Uzziah had imposed upon 
them (ch. xxvi. 8), but which they had discontinued. If, after two payments, the 
tribute (" a hundred talents of silver," equal to £50,000, with " ten thousand measures 
of wheat, and ten thousand of barley ") ceased, this was probably due to the ii iisions 
of Rezin of Syria and Pekah of Israel (2 Kings xv. 37) having enabled them to suc- 
cessfully assert their independence. Probably in close connection with this subjection 
of the Ammonites was his annexation to the kingdom of Judah of the trans-Jordanio 
tribe of Gad, of whose population he made a registration according to their genealogies, 
doubtless for the purpose of imposing an assessment (1 Ghron. v. 17). (3) His reputa- 
tion was high. If barely realizing the ideal of uprightness or perfection contained in his 
name (Jotham, equivalent to " Jehovah is upright,' or " perfect)," he yet maintained an 
untarnished escutcheon. Though a man's funeral cannot always be accepted as an index 
to his moral excellence (Luke xvi. 22), yet the circumstance that when Jotham died he 
was interred in the royal mausoleum, " in the city of David," was a proof he had done 
nothing to forfeit the good opinion of his subject*. Contrast the burials of Joash (ch. 
xxiv. 25), of Uzziah (ch. xxvi. 23), and of Ahaz (ch. xxvii. 27). 3. The explanation 
of his success. Neither the wealth of his kingdom, which was " fall of silver and gold" 
(Isa. ii. 7), nor the size of his army, " The land [in his day] was also full of horses, 
neither was there any end of chariots " (Isa. ii. 7), nor the splendour of his merchant 
navy, which consisted of ships of Tarshish (Isa. ii. 16), accounted for the remarkable 
prosperity of this sovereign's reign. If, on the one hand, these were rather signs and 
results of the flourishing condition of the nation ; on the other hand, they were ominous 
of, and contributory to, the nation's decay. Not only did these in no way diminish, 
but, on the contrary, fostered and increased the worst characteristics of the people — a 
love of luxury, which evinced itself amongst the women in a passion for finery and 
dress (Isa. iii. 16 — 24), amongst the men in licentiousness and oppression, witchcraft 
and soothsaying (Isa. ii. 6 ; iii. 9), amongst both in haughtiness and self-conceit (Isa. 
ii. 17), a thirst for war (Isa. ii. 7), and an infatuation for idolatry (Isa. ii. 8). The real 
secret of the kingdom's prosperity lay in the piety of its king. Judah was blessed 



«H. xxTOL 1—27.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHKONI0LE8. 



881 



becsuae Jotliam "prepared [or, 'ordered*] his ways before the Lord " — a clear case ol 
imputation of merit and of vicarioue blessing. Jotbam systematically and studiously 
guided his personal and official actions by a regard to the Divine Law, and Jehovan 
caused him to become " mighty." " Them that honour me I will honour " (1 Sam. U. 
30). No piety likely to be either deep or permanent that does not spring from well- 
considered choice and lead to scrupulous obedience. A good man may pray, " Order 
my steps in thy Word" (Ps. cxix. 133), knowing that " it is not in man that walketh to 
direct his steps " (Jer. x. 23), and that a good man's steps are ordered by the Lord (Pt. 
xxxvii. 23) ; if a truly good man, he will try to answer his own prayer (Ps. oi. 2), in 
doing which he has God's encouragement (Ps. 1. 23). Behoboam prepared neither hia 
heart nor his way, and consequently went astray (ch. xii. 14). 

Lessons. 1. The best men are often the least known. 2. A life short in year* 
may be long in influence. 8. The danger of inferring inward stability from outward 
prosperity. — W. 



EXPOSITION. 



OHAPTBB XXVm. 



This chapter is paralleled by 2 Kings xtI. 
There ia a great deal gained in this case by 
addition on the two accounts, however. Our 
chapter contains the wickedness by idolatry 
of Ahaz, the severe punishment thereof by 
tUe King of Syria, the Syrian captivity of 
Judah, and the release of the latter so unex- 
pectedly (vers. 1 — 15); other punishments 
by war of Ahaz, his hardened heart, greater 
Bins, and end (vers. 16 — 27). The united 
unsuccessful attaolsa of Syria and Israel, 
under Bezin and Fekah respectively, on 
Jerusalem, and attempt at the siege of Ahaz 
there; the Syrian recovery of Elath, and 
expulsion of the Jews thence, and the 
Assyrian taking of Damasoua (2 Kings xvi 
5—9), are, though so full of interest, all 
omitted from our chapter. 

Ver. 1. — Ahaz. The signification of this 
word is "grasping." Isaiah (viul; xxxviii. 
8), Hosea, and Mioah were contemporaries 
of Ahaz, whose reign may be set down at 
B.C. 744—728. His name shows in the As- 
syrian tablets, Jahukhazi, or Jehoahaz. 

Ver. 2. — Molten images; Hebrew, ntaDD. 
This was a characteristic sin of Israel, but 
Judah had not been guilty of making molten 
images during late reigns. 

Ver. 3. — Burnt incensa . . . Hinnom. 
The sin of Solomon (1 Kings xi. 7, 8) is re- 
m-oduced. For the valley of the son of 
Hinnom, which curved round the south-west 
and west of Jerusalem (Gs Ben-Hinnom), 
see Conder^a ' Handbook,' ch. vii. pp. 330 — 
332. Burnt his children (see Lev. xviii. 21) ; 
but tliere cannot be any doubt that Ahaz'a 

Sraotice here stated was an incident of the 
[oloch-auperstition and horrible cruelty 
(see the parallel in its vera. 3, 4). 
Ver. 6. — ^Ihe King of Syria. The tuim« 



of this king (Bezin) does not appear tn thla 
chapter, but it does in the parallel, vers. 5, 6, 9. 
They smote him. A previons unsuccessful 
attempt of Bezin and Fekah is apparently 
passed over in our chapter (2 Kings xvi. 5), 
while the contents of our present verse must 
be understood to have its place just befors 
the last clause of ver. 5 in the parallel, and 
to be significantly confirmed by the contenta 
of ita following verse. They smote . . . 
carried away . . . brought. These pluralt 
strongly indicate the dislocation of sen- 
tences in compiled matter. They probably 
came from original sources, where the con- 
joined names of Bezin and Fekah had been 
the antecedents (see on this history, Isa, 
vii., viii., ix.). Brought them to Damascus. 
The mode of the first introduction of tha 
name of Ahaz in connection with Damascua 
in the parallel (ver. 10) ia a auggestiva 
illustration of bow these parallel but very 
various narratives proffer to piece themselves, 
and in a wonderful manner clear their whola 
subject of any possible taint of the "cun- 
ningly devised fable." A great multitnda 
of Judah's people hnd been carried oaptivsa 
and "brought to Damascus." AVhen tha 
King of Assyria (parallel, ver. 9) came to tha 
help of Ahaz, he struck a fierce and evi- 
dently decisive blow against Damascus and 
Bezin, and to Damascus, " to meet " Assyria'a 
king, Tiglath-Pileser, the very next versa 
tells us, Ahaz went — little doubt to pay hia 
bills, over which a decent veil of silence ia 
thrown. He was also delivered into tha 
hand, etc. The form of this sentence, with 
its " also," and with its evidently tacked-on 
appearance, coupled with the conjunction 
"for" with which the following verse ia 
dragged in, seems to give great probability 
to the idea, first, that the latter half of ver. 
5 and all of ver. 6 find their real plana 
before (say) the word " Damascus ; " and 
tecondly, that they are strictly and oonter> 
minously paralleled by the former part of 
vei. 5 paralleli 



832 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxvm. 1— 27. 



Ver. 6.— <SeefoTegoiDgnote.) Anhondred 
and twenty thousand. The nnmber is large, 
bnt, the uncertainty of very many of these 
figures notwithstanding, it is impossible 
absolutely to pronounce it incredible. Be- 
oause they had forsaken. The now frequent 
refrain of the writer. 

Ver. 7. — The king's son. This can scarcely 
me«n the child of Ahaz, oonsidering Ahaz'g 
■ge; some think a brother of the present 
king, son of Jotham, may be intended. We 
have also to fall back upon the use of the 
phrase, " king's son," for some special official 
of the king or court (see note on ch. 
ZTiiL 25 ; and its parallel, 1 Kings xxii. 26). 
The governor of the house; Eevised Ver- 
sion, ruler. We have probably a suffleient 
clue to this designation in 1 Kings iv. 6; 
and the designation itself, ch. zviii. 3; 2 
Kings zviii. 18 ; ch. xix. 11. Next to the 
king ; Hebrew, "ij^n nj^o ; literally, there- 
fore, the next of the king, the general mean- 
ing of which expression cannot be doubtful 
(comp. 1 Chron. xvl. 5; Esth. x. 3; Neh. 
xi. 9), bnt the exacter scope and functions 
of the person under the kings of the divided 
kingdom thus designated is less certain. It 
is naturally to be supposed his place may 
have been king's deputy in councils in his 
absence, or in and over the city itself, when 
he was at a distance with au army. 

Ver. 8. — To Samaria. While the Syrian 
king carried his captives to Damascus (ver. 
5), the Israel king carried his to Samaria. 
The numbers in this verse, with tlie added 
hundred and twenty thousand whom Pekah 
•lew (ver. 6), may he compared with the 
military strength of the kingdom in Uzziah'a 
time, as given in ch. xxvi. 13. 

Ver. 9. — The very interesting contents of 
this and the following six verses are not 
found in the parallel. A prophet of the 
Lord . . . Oded. We do not know any par- 
ticulars of this prophet; for his name and 
its possible identity with the name Iddo, 
see notes on ch. ix. 29 ; xv. 1, 8. The ^w- 
ingly frequent references to the interposition 
of the prophets is much to be noticed, and 
their dignity, courage, fidelity, are brought 
into grand relief. They are very typical of 
the moral presence of which no national 
history, as centuries solemnly flow on, gives 
the slightest symptom of • slackening need. 
The very same may be said alike of the 
truth and those qualified and commissioned 
to bear it, of the message and the messenger. 
Before the host; t.e. in very face of the 
host, somewhat too mildly rendered "to 
meet " the host, in ch. xv. 2, etc. In a rage 
that reaoheth up unto heaven. To the won- 
derful life of this figure, that must strike 
every reader, must be added the force that 
somes of its moral rather than merely 
material luggestion — • moral suggestion that 



reminds ns of that of the sentence of far 
greater antiquity, and from the sacred lip of 
the Inspirer of all prophets, " The voice of 
thy brother's blood orieth unto me from the 
ground." The rage had ru>t been that on 
which the sun did not go down ; it had been 
so fieroe that upon it the sun ought never 
to have been required to look. See for 
interesting particulars and then more general 
references, Jer. li. 9 ; Ezra ix. 6 ; Fs. xxxviii. 
4 : Gen. xviii. 21 ; xxviii. 12 ; Job xx. 6. 
The expression of the text, however, " reach- 
eth," or " toucheth," cannot be nnderstood 
to reproduce as a perfect equivalent the 
older above-quoted one of "crieth." In 
other words, the magnitude of the rage is 
the first thing set forth, and the particular 
language in which it is set forth well postu- 
lates the inference of its abominableness in 
God's sight. 

Ver. 10. — For bondmen and bondwomen 
unto you. The denunciation of Dent. xxviiL 
68 may be Instructively compared with the 
emphatic prohibition of Lev. xxv. 46. The 
moral thread of ordinance that runs every- 
where through the divinely established 
economy of the Old Testajnent Judaism 
should be devoutly observed. The verse, in 
the position of its words, furnishes an ex- 
ample of almost classical pattern: And now 
pertont who are children of Judah and Jeru- 
salem, ye are resolving within yourselves 
(literally, saying) to subdtte into bondmen 
and hondwomen for yoursdvet. 

Ver. 11. — The fieroe wrath; «.«. not un- 
announced, for Oded means to say, " You are 
doing contrary to the Law and the Prophet 
Meses," as just quoted. 

Ver. 12. — Oded's appeal, and forcible but 
most temperate and pertinent argument of 
the previous verses, was addressed to those 
who led the returning army, flushed with 
victory and haughty with their captives led 
in triumph, and, as ver. 15 shows, cruelly, 
and with every deprivation of clothes and 
of shoes, etc. It now, however, fortunately 
meets with most welcome practical support 
from those (certain of the heads of the 
children of Ephraim) who had not had a hand 
in what had been done, and now stood by, 
in some measure like tunpires. They, at 
any rate, are convinced, partly perhaps in 
that their blood was not hot witii the battles 
that had been. We do not know particulars 
of these four worthier men, whose names, 
with their fathers', are here "expressed" 
(ver. 15). They were evidently conscious of 
their past sins, had fear toward God, were 
not of those who, sinning, hastened to sin 
yet more ; but they wished to flee from the 
wrath to come, the " fierce wrath," already 
impending. .£p%raim(seenoteonoh.zxv.7). 

Ver. 13. — Hither. The retnming army 
was, no doubt, on the outsklrta of Saumnii, 



OH. xxviu. 1— 27.J THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHBONIOLEB. 



533 



thongh the exact site of this interesting 
■cene is not written. Pot whereas we have 
offended e^gainst the Lord ; Hebrew, <3 
wjjj; njn; mp^h. Translate, For to the just 
cause of offence on the part of Jehovah with 
us, ye propose to add to our sins, and to the 
offence existing already with us ; for great it 
that offence, etc. The genius of the word 
here rendered " offence," seems, from careful 
comparison of the eighteen times of its 
occurrence, to point to "guilt," "sin," or 
" trespass," as the causes awakening offence 
in any one against those who do them. The 
repentant temper of these "heads of the 
children of Epiiraim" was admirable, and 
indicated their distance from many, many 
others of their people and day, and of Judah, 
who were either oalloui or reckless. 

Yer. 14. — Before the princes and all the 
congregation; «'.«. the four and those who 
were now congregated round them. 

Yei. 15. — The men which were expressed 
by name ; Eevised Version, which have been 
expretsed by name. This is the probable, yet 
hardly certain, meaning of the clause. By 
name should be "by names." And the 
meaning may be that " the men who were 
now ipecified by names for tlie work rose 
up," etc. Under any aspect, it was likely 
enough these would embrace the four who 
had already spoken so piously and season- 
ably (ch. xxxi. 19; 1 Chron. xii. 31; xvi. 
41). The captives; Hebrew, n;??'; lite- 
rally, the captivity; i.e. of course, the body 
of captives (Deut. xxi. 11 ; xxxii. 42). 
Clothed . . . arrayed. These two render- 
ings are both the same verb (ti'^y, and even 
the same (hiph.) conjugation. The undis- 
guised, apparent repetition in the Hebrew 
text, veiled and disguised in both the Autho- 
rized and Revised Versions, may perhaps 
be owing to the intentness of the narrative 
on saying, fin-t, that all who were literally 
naked were clothed from their own captive 
spoil ; and then, secondly, that aU whosoever 
(dusty, dirty, tired, footsore) were clothed, 
in the sense of being fresh dressed. The 
eleven particulars of this verse are uncom- 
monly graphic in the Hebrew text brevity 
of description. The verse may read thus: 
Aitd the men appointed by their names rose 
up, and took the captives by the hand, and 
all of the naked of them they dressed from the 
very spoil, and dressed them (all), and shod 
them, and fed them, and gave them drink, 
and anointed them, and carried upon asses 
all the feeble ones, and brought them to 
Jericho, city of palTns, to the very tide of 
their brethren, and . . . returned to Samaria. 
These made their own so far the blessedness 
of them of Matt. xxv. 34 — 36. Jericho ; i.e. 
well within their own land, to a fertile and 
■haded spot of it, with plenty of water, and 



whence probably all might most easily wend 
their ways to their own district and town. 
Jericho lay on the border of Benjamin. Sea 
Stanley's most interesting account ('Sinai 
and Palestine,' p. 805). 

Ver. 16. — At that time did King Ahaz . , , 
kings of Assyria. The vagueness of thii 
common formula, "at that time," would 
doubtless not have been apparent in the 
original sources. In the present instance 
we may fall back on our vers. 5, 6 to give 
it distinctness; but see vers. 5, 6, 7 of the 
parallel, which involve their own formula 
and the present in some little uncertainty. 
The kings of Assyria. The Septuagint and 
other versions show the singular number. 
Our plural may perhaps find an explanation 
in ch. XXX. 6 ; xxxii. 4. 

Ver. 17. — The Edomites. So the work of 
Aniaziali (ch. xxv. 11, 14; 2 Kings xiv. 7) 
in reducing Edom was again undone (see 
also 2 Kings xvi. 7, where " Edom " should 
be read for " Aram "). 

Ver. 18.— The Philistines. These also had 
been subjugated again and again, and of 
late by IJzziah (ch. xxvi. 6, 7), work that 
was now undone. The exultant relief to 
the Philistines, short-lived though it was, 
is referred to elsewhere, as in the Book of 
Isaiah (xiv. 29, 31), the Psalms (Ix. 8). 
Beth-shemesh; On the border of Judah (oh. 
xxv. 23, and our note there; 1 Chron. vi. 
44). Ajalon. This was also on the border 
(1 Chron. vi. 54; ch. xi. 10). Gederoth. 
This was in the Shefelah (Josh. xv. 41). 
Shocho ; or, Soclio, one of Eehoboam's cities, 
near tlie Philistines, and therefore selected 
for fortification (ch. xi. 7). Timnah. This 
bordered on Dan (Josh. xv. 10). Oimzo. 
Not elsewhere mentioned, but well known 
in the modem village Jimzu, its site on 
what would have been the border of Dan. 
They dwelt there. This expression is, of 
course, designed to indicate that the Philis- 
tines obtained successfully some foothold. 

Ver. 19. — Ahaz King of Israel. So Jeho- 
shaphat nas called iu ch. xxi. 2 "King of 
Israel." If these two occasions are not merely 
cases of the vniter's or of a copyist's easily 
imaginable mistake, they must be regarded 
as naming the king of the chief divided 
kingdom by the title of the whole kingdom 
or people. He made Judah naked ; Bevised 
Version, had dealt wantonly in Judah} or 
margin, Revised Version, had cast auay r»- 
straint in Judah ; Hebrew, ynsn. 

Ver. 20.— Tilgath-Pilneser .(see 1 Chron. 
V. 6, 26; 2 Kings xv. 29; xvi. 10, our 
parallel. See our notes in full on 1 Chron. 
V. 6, 26). Gresenius dates his reign as King 
of Assyria as b.o. 753—734; others as about 
B.0. 747 — 728. Distressed him, but strength- 
ened him not. This is in our writer's usnal 
deeper moral and leligiona vein, and wm 



334 



THB SECOND BOOK OF THB OHBONIOLBS. [oh. xxnn. 1— 27. 



nn doubt most tme. For all Ah«i paid and 
bribed out of the mcrilegionBly employed 
treasure of the temple, out of the deprecia- 
ting and partial dismantling of " the honse 
of the king," and out of the begged contri- 
butions or taxes extortionately wrung "of 
the princes" (see the succinct account of 
next verse, and compare the parallel in its 
vers. 8, 18), he bought a master for himself, 
servitude, tributariness, and the humilia- 
tion of disgrace itself. The temporary relief 
lie obtained (and which the ■writer of Chro- 
nicles in no way means to deny) from one 
enemy rivetted round his neck the yoke of 
anotlier and greater. And worse than this, 
be secured in his own heart the greatest 
adversary of all — a restlesB, implacable foe, 
which ever goaded him on to worse folly 
and deeper sin. 

Ver. 21. — Add to references of last Terse 
ch. xvi. 2 ; 2 Kings xii. 18 ; xviii. 15. But 
he helped him not. See the parallel in its 
ver. 9 (2 Kings xvi.), and note on our fore- 
going verse. 

Ver. 22.— This is that King Ahaz. Ex- 
punge the words in italic type. Eevised 
version, this tame King Ahat, But the most 
literal rendering will be the most forcible : 
He, the King Ahaz. 

Ver. 23. — He sacrificed unto the gods of 
SamascuB, which smote him. ' The writer 
must be understood to speak from the point 
of view of Ahaz, in putting it, that it was 
" the gods of Damascus who smote." The 
formula, all Israel, is a clear instance of how 
the name " Israel " is used as " Judah." The 
fodi of Damaieui were, of oonrse, the same 



with those of Syria, of which Damascus was 
capitaL Tbeir names were Bimmon, Tabrim- 
mon, Hadad, and some others. Perhaps 
no verse in Chronicles is more typical of 
the special moral aspects and aims of the 
writer. 

Ver. 24. — ^Thie verse (completed, indeed, 
by the verse following) heightens to its 
climax the description of the guilt of Ahaz, 
which grew to madness. Vers. 17, 18 of the 
parallel enlarge our view of what Ahaz did 
in the way of destmction, relating hiB 
mutilation of the bases and laver and sea, 
after also the displacement of the brtkzen 
altar in favour of that the pattern of which 
he had sent from Damascus to Urijah the 
priest, who must have been a consenting 
party to the iniquity. Our oh. xxz. 14 
speaks of the time that came when these 
wicked steps of king and priest began to be 
retraced, and, with the previous verses of 
same chapter, are the sad but interesting 
reverse of the present passage. The modern 
Jews commemorate, by the observance of a 
fast, this mournful crisis of Judah's history. 

Ver. 26.— The book of the kings of Judah 
and Israel. Parallel (ver. 19), "the book 
of the chronicles of the kings of Judah." 

Ver. 27. — Slept with his fathers . . . buried 
... in the oity, . . . Jerusalem . . . not 
brought into the sepulchres of the kings. 
Parallel (ver. 20), "slept with his fathers 
. . . buried with his fathers in the city of 
David." See our notes on ch. xxvi. 23 
(parallel, 2 Eings xv. 7) ; xxiv. 25 (parallel, 
2 Eings xii. 21); xxi. 20 (parallel, 2 Eings 
Tiii.24) 



H0MILBTIC8. 

Ters. 1—27. — " Uiis King Ahaz : " the "progress " of a king UterdHy devoid of 
religion. In such words, the significance of which no one can mistake, is the royi 
person who is the chief subject of this chapter pointed to (ver. 22). Ahaz is the bad 
son of a good father. He is a type of those who begin badly, who are untaught by 
experience, who grow worse by suffering and adversity, and who end by maddening 
themselves, to their own destruction! The career of his father Jotham is written, 
apparently, without a fault, and without a reflection to be cast on him ; the career of 
this son is written, apparently, without one redeeming feature to be put to his account. 
The contents of this chapter look like a series of pictures, marking a royal progress in 
wrongness, and which, in the issue, led to a very insanity of irreligion ! In tms pro- 
gress notice how the king — 

I. FoBsooK THB BiQHT MoDBL. To be Hot " Uko his father David" was at once to 
want the stamp of a true royalty. To be " like the kings of Israel," the schismatic 
line, was to be stamped with the stamp of a base and ungenuine royalty. This 
description (ver. 2) of "the ways" in which Judah's king "walked" was, indeed, on 
the other hand, a fearful characterization for that same schismatic line of Israel For 
Ahaz, however, thus to be, and be described, as at the beginning of his reign, when ha 
was already arrived at the twenty-fifth year of his age, was an evil, anyway, of that 
worit calamity, viz. hope for an altered future almost hopelessly shut out I The 
augury proved too true. Ahaz counts for nothing Moses, as well as " his father David.' 
He systematically " framed mischief by " his own "law," and the law of heathendom. 



nvml— 27.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 8« 

He flagrantly breaks, and teaches the breaking of, the first two of the ever-venerable 
ten commandments — that vital Heaven-graven fonndation-code of legislatian of his 
kingdom. Sacrilege, idolatry, and each most heathenish practice and rite of 
«n--" natural religion " he honours and follows. He gets as far as it is possible to get 
from " fearing " and " loving " and " serving " the Lord God of his fathers " with all 
the heart, and mind, and soul, and strength." For a young man, for any man to forsake 
the right model, the one Example, is to leave himself to pick among many, uncertain 
in every direction, except in the one certainty of all being wrong 1 One only safe right 
rule is ours to follow; " If tht Lord be Ood, follow him" (1 Kings xviii. 21). 
Examples abound, but absolute safety and rightness can be found in one only. 

IL Neglected wabning. The warning which Ahaz neglected, with a long succes- 
sion, to say nothing of all those who may have gone before, was not merely warning 
written, preached loudly and earnestly and with prophets voice proclaimed, but it was 
that practical warning, the ultimatum of all, the warning of consequences. Defeat, and 
the captivity of many of his people at the hand of the King of Syria; defeat, and the 
captivity of many of his people at the hand of the King of Israel ; the slaying of his 
son, of the governor of his house, and of the man that was " the second to him in the 
kingdom ; " — all these judgments, offering to bring closer and closer home to him and to 
his conscience the facts of the case, of his own sins, and of the consequences of those 
sins, he is blind to, or, not blind, he nevertheless disregards them to the very point of 
infatuation. But, again, not only are the practical warnings of " wrath " thus set at 
nought. Providences of mercy compete with those of "wrath." In one of the most 
remarkable and pathetic passages of all history, startling us by its lifelike and more 
than dramatic reality — a very monograph of pathos — seven verses (9 — 15) here record 
this providence. They tell us how, by the side of Judah's king, who refuses to give 
ear, to repent, or to learn, "certain of the heads of the children of Ephraim in 
Samaria," listen attentively to the remonstrance and teaching of the Prophet Oded, 
are open to the impression of the justness of what he says, see in a moment the truth 
of things for themselves, and reason without delay with the people, producing salutary 
convictions in them ; and. then, even with the atoning; addition of all tenderest ministra- 
tions (ver. 15), lead back their captives of Judah to Jericho, to the shade of that " city 
of palm trees," and to the yet kinder shelter of " their brethren." What a practical 
message that was for a hardened heart like that of Ahazl What an appeal and 
luggestion for the better feelings, if any, of Judah's king ! But this too, thit species 
of warning was in vain I 

III. Improved adveksitt to the greateb nnQtnTT, aitd to the beaping of 

6KBATEB PUNISHMENT AND DEEPER DEGEADATION FOB HIMSELF AND NATION. The 

Edomites have successfully " smitten " him ; the harrying incursions of the Philistines 
are ever on him ; they take village after village, and also so take them, that they are 
safe in taking up their abode in them, for " they dwelt there " (ver. 18). Ahaz does 
not repent, and does not for a moment " seek to the Lord." The strickenness of sin is 
on him ; the persistence in evil is his disease ; the fatal aggravation of folly and infatua- 
tion of obstinacy cloud his brain, eclipse his reason, " make gross " his heart. He seeks 
to the King of Assyria, and bribes him with the sacred things of the house of the 
Lord, with the precious things of his own palace, with the robbed things of his princes. 
And that king takes all, but gives no help — " he helped him not " (ver. 21) ; mocks hii 
defencelessness ; makes sport of his supplications to him ! To one deeper depth, in hii 
deafened despair, he descends. Ahaz vows for his own the gods of those who " smoti 
him " (ver. 23). His logic is that the house too of " the gods of the kings of Syria ' 
may possibly prove a house divided against itself! It was a last, cruel, hapless resort \ 
The refuge was the refuge of rvdn — " the ruin of him, and of all Israel " (ver. 23). H» 
ends all by entreating for his memory loathing unqualified. He hacks to pieces the 
collected " vessels of the house of God ; " but shuts up (by just so much too late) 
"the doors of the house" itself; rears every wild altar; profanes with "high places 
every several city of Judah " to bum there the " incense of abomination ; " excludes 
his own bones from the septilchres of the best of his ancestors ; and leaves us one more 
fearful lesson, that none and nothing make so sure a mock as sin itself makes of the 
" fppl, whp makes a mock " at it I 



83* THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxrin. 1— 87. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORa 

Vers. 1 — 4. — Spiritual rebound. Prom Jotham to Abaz, from the king who " made 
his ways firm before Jehovah" to the king who "made molten images for Baalim," 
and " burnt incense in the valley of the son of Hinnom, and burnt his children in the 
fire, after the abominations of the heathen," what a terrible rebound, what a deplorable 
reaction ! We may regard this as — 

I. An event which frequently occtjbs. 1. Sometimes to the nation. We have a 
notable instance of this in the reaction from the Puritan strictness of the Common- 
wealth to the unbounded licence of the Restoration. 2. Sometimes to the Church. A 
sudden passing from the ardour of some fervent enthusiasm to the rigour of utter 
indifference and inactivity. 3. Sometimes to the family. When a godly, devoted, 
and useful parent is succeeded by a dissolute and mischief- working son (as in the text). 
4. Sometimes in the individual. A man is led to the appearance (if not the reality) 
of piety and zeal ; he worships regularly in the house of the Lord, and takes a pro- 
minent part in the activities of the Church ; then with more or less of suddenness he 
declines ; he abandons his religious convictions and his moral principles, and stands 
before society as a spiritual renegade, living to injure and destroy all he had appeared 
to love and had busied himself to promote. 

II. Its explanation. 1. Not in any law of human change. It may be contended 
that there is in the mind and in the history of man a constant ebb and flow as in the 
tides of the sea ; that when a mental or moral movement has proceeded long and far 
in one direction, the time has come for a counter-movement in the opposite direction. 
But there is no reason, in the nature of things, why we should not move steadily on 
in the direction of wisdom and virtue. Such a tendency as this is not properly a law ; 
it is only a generalization from a comparatively small number of particulars. Hence 
we also say : 2. Not in any inherent human fickleness. !Man is more or less fickle ; 
i.e. many men are very fickle, and some men are seriously so, and others slightly so. 
But other men are constant, faithful, loyal to the last. Man, as man, is under no 
necessity to change his course, to reverse his direction, to pursue what he has shunned, 
to pull down what he has built up. We find the explanation we seek : 3. Partly in 
the unwisdom of the good. Possibly Jotham may have been an unwise father in some 
material respects ; he may have so acted, so ruled his royal household, as to present to 
his son an unattractive aspect of godlitiess ; he may have failed to distinguish between 
the requirements of manhood and of youth. Certainly, if A« did not, very many parents 
do, and this their folly is the account of the departure and defection of their sons. It 
is clear that the unwise austerity of the Puritans had much to do with the excesses ot 
the following generatiim. Very often, indeed, the intemperate heats of some body of 
Christian or philanthropic men account, in a large degree, for the repugnance and 
retrogression of the community. Unwisdom in the good may be as mischievous in its 
results as the very transgressions of the wicked. 4. Partly in the shallowness of the 
piety or morality in question. When this is nothing more than mere habit, especially 
when that habit is of the body rather than of the mind, is fleshly rather than spiritual, 
it is not to he expected that loyalty will last ; it ts to be expected that the first strong 
wind of inclination, or of worldly interest, or of social pressure, will carry such a one 
away and bear him whithersoever it wills. The great lesson for parents, teachers, 
pastors, reformers, patriots, is this — ilig deep if you would have your house stand. If 
you would not see your sons and daughters, your fellow-members or fellow-citizena 
swept round with the current, facing the wrong goal, exerting their influence for evil 
instead of for good, then do not be cuntent with scattering seed anyhow and anywhere. 
Dig the deep furrow, sow the seed well ; plant living convictions in the judgment and 
in the conscience of men. Get the whole nature on the side of truth and righteousness. 
If the man himself, and not only his external habits, not only his feelings and inclina- 
tions — if he himself, through his whole spiritual nature, gives himself to the service of 
Christ and of man, you need not fear the coming of an adverse tide ; you need not fret 
about the fickleness of our kind ; you will witness no painful and pitiable reaction ; tk« 
path of those you serve will be one of continuous ascent ; it wiU be " the path of th« 
just, shining brighter and brighter unto the perfect day."— C. 



CH. XXVIII. 1—27.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 337 

Vers. 9 — 15. — Divine and human pity. A very striking and a most unusual 
incident is here related ; it has very few parallels in the page of ancient history. The 
hand that struck down the enemy very rarely failed to strike him when he was down. 
Here we have a refreshing picture of human relenting ; of men who had just presented 
the cup of woe putting to the lips of the suffering a cup of mercy. But first we have 
a picture of — 

I. DiviNB PITT IN THE MIDST OP DiviNE PENALTY. It is clear that the people of 
Judah owed their defeat entirely to the fact that they had grievously sinned against 
the Lord (see ver. 9). But there was a point beyond which justice did not demand 
that penalty shouLi go. And at that point Divine pity might appear. There it did 
appear, and it arrested the hand of the cruel smiter. God sends judgment, but 
in wrath he " remembers mercy '' (Hab. iii. 2). He sends the serious sickness 
which brings pain and weakness, but at a certain point he sends the remedy and 
restoration. He brings down upon the guilty the strong indignation of their kind, 
but he raises up the compassionate and the considerate who visit the prisoner or the 
lonely with words of friendly sympathy and cheer. He brings the strong but rebellious 
kingdom to defeat and humiliation, but he causes it to grow up again to competence 
and power. He bruises, but he does not shatter ; he lays low, but he raises up. 

II. Official faithfulness. Oded had a difficult and dangerous part to play on 
this occasion, but he bore himself right nobly (vers. 9 — 11). He did not flinch from 
words of energetic condemnation (vers. 9, 10), or from words of unpalatable advice 
(ver. 11). If God puts us iuto any responsible position, whether in the family, or in 
the Church, or in the city, or in the councils of the nation, we are most sacredly bound 
to play our part courageously. No man is fitted to occupy a post of trust and honour 
unless he is prepared, at times, to say and do that which is likely to be resented. 
Though we may not be called upon to face a triumphant army with words of remon- 
strance and command, as Oded did now, yet we are sure to be under obligation to say 
that which is unacceptable and to confront the dislike and disapproval of men. If we 
are not prepared to do that, we had better stand down at once, and take a lower place. 
Certainly we are not qualified to speak for God. 

III. Human influence. We have two instances of human influence being exercised 
with remarkable success. The outspoken prophet persuades the princes, and they in 
their turn persuade the soldiers to release the captives and to abandou the spoil which 
they had taken. This was a truly remarkable success. To induce men who are 
flushed with victory to forego the advantages they have won with the sword is to 
accomplish a great feat. It shows what man can do with man; what influence a 
strong voice can exert upon the human heart. 1. It is always well worth while to inter- 
pose between men and the wrong they are meditating; we may save them from great 
guilt and others from great suffering. 2. We must be in downright earnest, and speak 
with entire fearlessness and frankness, as both prophet and princes did now, or we 
shall not succeed. We must speak as those who are perfectly convinced, as those 
who know what is right, and have no hesitation at all as to the course which should 
be taken. 

IV. Human pttt. Instead of slaughtering their prisoners, which in that age might 
have been done without pity or remorse, we have these soldiers of Israel showing all 
possible kindness to them (ver. 15). It is a common thing now for men to show a 
magnanimous kindness to their fallen enemy even on the battle-field. But the teach- 
ini< of the Lord of love has done its work to some considerable extent, and has merci- 
fully modified the cruelties of war. The scene of the text was something of an 
anticipation of the' injunction, " If thine enemy hunger, feed him ; if he thirst, give 
him drink." It is for us to illustrate the spirit then shown, on every opjxjrtunity. 
We should spare those who are in our power; it may be in the domain of business; it 
may be in the social circle ; it may be round the domestic table ; it may be in some- 
thing so simple as a debate, so common as an ordinary argument. But wherever or 
whatever it be, to spare our opponent when he is down, to save him from the miseries 
of defeat, to put him in the way of return to self-respect and honour, to " take back 
our captives to Jericho," is to do no more than these Israelites did on this particular 
occasion ; it is to do no le*s than our Master requires of us at all times and under 
every circumstance (Matt. v. 43 — 48). — 0. 

II. CHRONIOT.KS. g 



838 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE OHRONICLBa [tM. xxnn. 1— 27, 

Ven. 17 — 19. — Blow upon hlcw. Alias was a very great transgressor, and he was 

SM we might expect he would be) a very great sufferer. He received blow upon blow 
rom the righteous hand of that holy Buler who by present and temporal visitations 
was educating his people in the ways of heavenly wisdom. First Bezin King of 
Syria defeated him, and carried away many captives to Damascus (ver. 5). Then 
Pekah King of Israel slew his army with a great and pitiless slaughter (ver. 6). Then 
the Edomites smote Judah, and went away with the usual spoil (ver. 17). Then the 
Philistines " invaded the cities of the low country," and took several important places 
(ver. 18). Thus " the Lord brought Judah low because of Ahaz," One blow fell after 
another, until the land was thoroughly smitten and stripped, left "naked to its 
enemies " (ver. 19). We are reminded by these successive inflictions of — 

I. The aooumulatino penalty which bin always pays. 1. This often comes in 
the form of obvious and apparent losses. The trangressor who " fears not God, neither 
regiirds man," finds himself subjected to a series of adversities, which he regards as 
misfortunes, but which we recognize as penalties. He loses the confidence and esteem 
of his worthier neighbours ; then he loses custom, trade, support, and then and thus 
he loses money; then he loses his substance by extravagance and, it may be, by one 
or more expensive vices — and vice is a very expensive thing; then he loses health 
and spirit and hope ; then he loses the regard of his neighbours generally. So, step 
by step, he goes down, until "the Lord brings Judah low," until he has "made the 
land naked." 2. Or penalty may come in the way of inward and spiritual deteriora- 
tion. We cannot pretend to say in what order this proceeds ; it varies with individual 
souls ; but blow upon blow descends ; bruise upon bruise is suffered by the soul ; one 
defence after another is taken away from the citadel until the land is " naked." It 
may be that the fine sense of truthfulness goes first; then, perhaps, the spirit of 
reverence ; then the loss of thorough rectitude ; then the loss of purity ; then may 
come an indifference to the judgment of the good and wise ; then the decay of self- 
respect ; — and what then is left? Let the man who, like Ahaz, hardens himself against 
Ood understand this, that as he goes on his guilty way, even if outward prosperity 
remains to him, there is descending upon his spiritual nature, upon himself il not upon 
his circumstances, blow upon blow of righteous penalty — blows which are bruising and 
slaying him, beneath which he is surely perishing. 

IL The multiplied bobeows which biqhteousness bomrtimes endukes. " Many 
are the afflictions (even) of the righteous " (Ps. xxxiv. 19). To the patient Job, to 
the faithful Jeremiah, to the devoted Paul, they come in large number and in great 
strength. Even to the purest and loveliest of the sons and daughters of Grod there 
sometimes falls a sad succession of trials; it may be in the heart and on the lips of 
the most worthy to say, " All thy waves and thy billows are gone over me." Blow 
upon blow descends upon their head. What does it mean ? It simply means that the 
branch which is bearing fruit the Lord of the vineyard is pruning, " that it may bring 
forth more fruit ; " it means that " whom the Lord loveth he ohasteneth," in order that 
he may make them to be " partakers of his holiness ; " it means that the Divine 
Master is refining and cultivating his servant, to prepare him for a far broader and 
nobler sphere and for higher and heavenlier work hereafter; it means that afdiction is 
working out an " exceeding weight of glory." — 0. 

Vers. 21 — 27. — Sin in its issues. To what will sin lead us? What, when It near* 
its end and when it is finished, will it bring forth? We have the answer in this 
portion of Ahaz's life. 

1. Infatuation. He robbed the palace and even plundered the temple in order to 
bribe the King of Assyria to help him, instead of going to the house of the Lord as a 
servant and suppliant of Jehovah, to seek and find his help. That is to say, he 
committed robbery and sacrilege in order to secure the succour of a man who after- 
wards deceived and defrauded him (ver. 21), when, by simple piety and integrity, he 
might have secured the aid of Omnipotence, the help of One that never fails his people. 
His course was one of utter infatuation. He neglected the one way that was quite 
open to him, and that would certainly have succeeded ; he adopted a measure that wai 
full of iniquity, and that was likely to end, as it did, in failure. He put the finishing 
stroke to his fatuity when he worshipped "the gods which smote him" (ver. 23). 



OH. xxTm. 1— 27.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 839 



Sin does lead down to infatuation. It leads men to seek their J07 and their heritage 
in the poorest and most unsatisfying springs, to pursue wisdom and wealth in direc- 
tions where emptiness and poverty are alone to be obtained ; it leads men to neglect 
the Fountain of living waters, the Source of all truth and wisdom, of all excellency and 
joy. It strews the path of the guilty with melancholy failures. 

U. Defiance. Ahaz could hardly go further in defying the Lord God of his 
fathers, the Divine One whom he was taught and trained to worship, than he did hj 
his conduct as here described (vers. 24, 25). It was an act of unholy hardihood, of 
almost desperate defiance, that could only be the outcome of a guilty obduracy of 
spirit. He must have resented the action of Jehovah and determined to go all possible 
lengths in defying his authority. Well might the spirit of Isaiah be aroused as he 
witnessed this profanalion, this open and daring rebellion against the living Qod. 
When men have long given way to their folly and to their sinlul inclinations they do 
sometimes go to this awful lenc;th. They defy the God that made them, in whose 
power they stand. They may deny his existence ; they may mock at his judgments, 
and at his final condemnation of their course; they may speak arrogantly and 
impiously of his power and of his rule : " How doth God know ? and is there knowledge 
in the Most High?" (Ps. Ixxiii. 11). 

ni. Death. Ahaz went down to an early and a dishonoured death (ver. 27), We 
do not wonder that he died before he reached the age of forty. The disasters he 
brought upon his country, and the mental strain which he must have undergone to 
proceed to such lengths of impiety, are enough to account for a premature decline and 
death. And all the better instincts of that instructed people led them to refuse the 
funereal honour they usually paid to their kings. " Sin, when it is finished, bringeth 
forth death." The issue of all sin is death — physical, spiritual, eternal. This is its 
wages. Let those who are moving down its sad decline take note of the end to which 
they move. But let us realize that to all who will turn from its enticements and 
break from its evil power, to all who will accept the supreme gift of Qod in Jesus 
Christ, "eternal life" is open (Rom. tL 23). — C. 

Vers. 1 — 27, — " This is that King Ahaz." I. A deqbnbbatk soh. Ahaz, " Grasper " 
or "Possessor." In the Tiglath-Pileser inscriptions, which probably confounded him 
with the son of Jehoram (ch. xxi. 17), he is called Jehoahaz, " Whom Jehovah 
grasps," though the Scripture writers may have dropped the prefix " Jeho- " on account 
of his wickedness (Schrader, ' Die Keilinschriften/ p. 264). 1. He possessed his father's 
nature. Of necessity, as his father's son (Gen. v. 3). Yet he improved not upon that 
nature, but rather deteriorated and corrupted it. Heredity in him took a downward 
direction. Some knowledge of who his mother was might shed important light upon 
the question of how he came by his peculiarities of character and <Usposition. 2. Be 
enjoyed his father's exampk. Jotham " prepared his ways before the Lord his God " 
(ch. zxvii. 6), yet his pious conduct seemingly exerted no beneficial influence upon his 
son. Abac followed not his father's footsteps, but carved out a path of his own. 
Example, especially when good, may be potent, but is not omnipotent. 3. He obtained 
hisfathei's throne. Yet he rather tarnished it than added to its lustre. New dignities 
do not give new hearts or new powers. At the age of twenty — five years younger 
than his father (ch. xxvii. 1), and only four years older than his grandfather (ch. xxvL 
1) — he assumed the crown of Judah. If the reading " twenty-five " years (Vatican text 
of the LXX., Arabic, Syriac) be preferred (Ewald, Thenius, Bertheau, Keil, Bahr), on 
the ground that otherwise he must have married in his tenth or eleventh year, in order, 
after sixteen years, to be succeeded by a son as old as Hezekiah, who was twenty-five 
on ascending the throne (ch. xxii. 1), he was still but a youth when crowned, 
which may suggest that early promotion is not the same thing as early conversion. 
i. Se lacked, i.e. did not possess, his father's goodness. Grace runs not in the blood 
(John i. 13), though corruption does (Job xiv. 4 ; Ps. li. 5). A man may communicate 
to his son wealth, learnin°:, fame, power ; he cannot, certainly, impart either grace or 
eoodness, 6. Se attained not to his father's grave. When he died his people buried 
bim in Jerusalem, but not in the sepulchi:es of the kings of Israel. He who in his 
lifetime had been no true Israelite, though ne wore a crown, must not in his death 
be laid among the sovereigns who ware Liraelites indeed. Deatii, whioh dectroyi all 



840 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxvni. 1— 27 

time's distinctions between man and man (Josh, xxxiii. 14 ; Jobiii. 19 ; Eccles. viil. 8), 
nevertheless effectually distinguishes between the righteous and the wicked (FroT. 
xlv. 32 ; Luke xvi. 22 ; Rev. xiv. 13). 

n. As APOSTATE KINO. Immediately he reached the crown, Ahaz discovered what 
manner of spirit he was of. With a perfect passion for idolatry — " a mania for foreign 
religious practices" (Stanley) — he soon outstripped his people, if not the heathen 
themselves, in his misdevotion, becoming their Coiyphseus in superstitious rites, show- 
ing himself to be the idolater par excdlence in Judah, and by his regal example leading 
his subjects down into unknown depths of infamy (ver. 19). 1. Be renounced the true 
rdigion of Jehovah. Not merely as it had been practised by David (ver. 1), Am 
(ch. XV. 17), and Jehoshaphat (oh. xvii. 3), but as it had been observed by his imme- 
diate predecessors, Jotham, Uzziah, and Amaziah. If not discontinued at once as to 
outward form, it was kept up for a season merely as a form ; it was from the first 
abandoned in heart. He began his reign by practising the arts of a hypocrite. 2. He 
adopted the false worship of Baal, which had long held sway in the northern kingdom 
(ver. 2). Whether he introduced the calf-worship of Jeroboam (Keil), or restricted 
himself to the manufacture of images of Baal (Bahr), in either case he followed in the 
way of the Israelitish kings (1 Kings xii. 28 ; xvi. 32 ; 2 Kings iii. 2). " It is hard 
not to be infected by a contagious neighbourhood : whoever read that the kingdom of 
Israel was seasoned with the vicinity of the true religion of Judah ? " (Bishop Hall). 
3. He utilized all the idol-sanctuaries already existing in the land. " He sacrificed 
and burnt incense in the high places, and on the hills, and under every green tree" 
(ver. 4). In so doing he copied bad masters, reproducing the slate of matters which 
had existed in Judah under Behoboam (1 Kings xiv. 23), and at the moment flourished 
in Samaria under Hoshea (2 Kings xvii. 10) — a state of matters which from the first 
had prevailed among the heathen inhabitants of the land (Dent. xii. 2), but which they 
had been commanded ruthlessly to destroy. On the nature of this worship consult the 
Exposition. 4. Se introduced the worship of Moloch, " the savage god of the Ammon- 
ites" (Stanley), as Solomon had done before him (1 Kings xi. 7), in open defiance of 
Divine Law (Lev. xviii. 21 ; Deut. xviii. 10), setting up an image of that idol — a 
human figure with a bull's head and outstretched arms — in the valley of Hinnom, a 
" narrow waterless ravine bounding the site of Jerusalem, and commencing on the 
west as a shallow dell " (ponder, ' Handbook to the Bible,' p. 330), and even sacrificing 
to it one (2 Kings xvi. 3; or more (ch. xxviii. 3) of his own sons, as Manasseh after- 
wards did (ch. xxxiii. 6). " The image of metal was made hot by a fire kindled within 
it, and the children, laid in its arms, rolled from thence into the fiery lap below. 
Voluntary offering on the part of the parents was essential to the success of the sacri- 
fice. Even the firstborn, nay, the only child of the family, was given up. The parents 
stopped the cries of their children by fondling and kissing them, for the victim ought 
not to weep, and the sound of complaint was drowned in the din of flutes and kettle- 
drums " (Dr. Dollinger, ' Heidenthum und Judenthura,' quoted by Bawlinson, ' Story 
of Phoenicia,' pp. 112 — 114). That the children were not merely passed through the 
fire as an act of purgation, but actually burned, seems indisputable ; it is not certain 
that the children were thrown alive into the idol's glowing arms, the opinion that they 
were first slain (Keil, Bahr, Schiirer) appearing to be warranted by certain passages in 
Scripture (Ezek. xvi. 20, 21 ; xxiii. 39 ; Isa. Ivii. 5 ; Jer. vii. 31 ; xix. 5 ; of. 2 Kings 
iii. 27). 5. Ee sacrificed to the gods of Damascus. (1) He did this when the Syrians 
were inflicting on him military reverses, i.e. in the time of his distress (Keil), not 
after it (Bertheau). Strange that just then, when men most need the help of God, in 
the hour of afiSiotion and season of calamity, they usually manifest a tendency to run 
from him, looking for assistance from every quarter but the right one (Jer. iii. 23) — 
exemplified in Ahaziah (2 Kings i. 2, 3). (2) The reason of his doing this was that 
he imagined his ill success upon the field of battle had been due, not at all to the hand 
of God who thereby punished his wickedness, but to the assistance derived by the 
Syrians from their divinities (ver. 23), and conceived that, by paying them respect in 
sacrificing to them, he would win their favour to himself instead of them (ch. xxv. 14). 
Wicked men seldom ascribe their misfortunes or adversities to the right cause, their 
own ill deserts and God's hand in punishing the same, but mostly attribute them to 
the " scientific idols," called " chance," " circumstances," " ill luck," etc., which deities 



CH. xxvm. 1—27.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHBGNIOLBS. 341 

they hope to propitiate in a manner hardly less foolish than that of Ahaz, by sacri- 
ficing at their unhallowed shrines. (3) The specific mode in which he served the 
Syrian gods is not stated, as the diyinities themselves are not named, and indeed in 
Scripture never are (Judg. x. 6). The incident of the altar seen by Ahaz at Damascus, 
and reproduced in Jerusalem (2 Kings ivi. 10 — 16), is not referred to by the Chronicler. 
Tlie altar incident occurred when Ahaz was attending- Tiglath-Pileser's durbar at 
Damascus; " the sacrifices " were performed while Ahaz was fighting with the Syrians. 
(4) The result of his appeal to the gods of Syria was ruin to himself and to all IsraeL 
So all that forsake God shall be ashamed (Jer. xvii. 13), while " their sorrows shall 
be multiplied that hasten after other gods " (Ps. xvi. 4), and " they that observe lying 
vanities forsake their own mercies" (Jonah ii. 8); for " idolaters shall have their part 
in the lake," etc. (Rev. xxi. 8). 6. He shut up the doors of the house of the Lord. 
(Ver. 24.) It was high time. The man who could displace the brazen altar made by 
Solomon after patterns furnished by Jehovah (Exod. xxv. 40 ; xxvi. 30 ; xxvii. 1 ; 
1 Chron. xxviii. 19), to make room for a new shrine, no matter of wliat costly material, 
copied from a heathen temple at Damascus, and fashioned by a servile priest in Jeru- 
salem ; the monster who could erect an image of Moloch in his capital and sacrifice to 
it his own child ; the devotee who was so mad upon foreign gods, that the very sight 
of a heathen temple, altar, or idol caused him to fall a-worshipping ; — had obviously no 
excuse for longer affecting to be a worshipper of Jehovah. Accordingly, he smashed 
up the vessels and closed the doors of the temple. There should be no more wor- 
shipping of Jehovah, if he could help it. It was horrible sacrilege, but it was at least 
honest. 7. Se did his utmost to provoke Jehovah to anger. Building altars in every 
comer of Jerusalem, till, like Athens in the days of Paul, it was wholly giien to 
idolatry, literally stuffed full of idols (Acts xvii. 16), and erecting besides in every city 
of Judah high places to burn incense unto other gods (vers. 24, 25); he did his best 
to pour contempt upon the God of his fathers ; in his outrageous, fanatical, and sense- 
less idolatry eclipsing all his predecessors, leaving behind him in the race to perdition 
experts in heathen worship like Eehoboam and Jehoram in Judah, like Jerobnam and 
Ahab in Israel. It was no wonder that Jehovah at length bestirred himself to take 
vengeance on this nonpareil idolater. 

III. An unstjccbssfdl warrioe. For the wickedness of himself and people, he and 
they were "brought low," diminished in numbers, weakened in power, humbled in 
spirit, by Jehovah, who raised up against them three foreign foes. 1. The Syrian* 
and Israelites. (Vers. 5 — 7.) (1) The leaders of the allied forces were — of the Syrians, 
Bezin, or Eezon — in the inscriptions, Eazinu, King of Syria, whose capital was Damascus ; 
of the Israelites, Pekah, the son of Remaliah — ^in the inscriptions, Pakaha, a usurper; 
whose metropolis was Samaria (' Records,' etc., v. 48 — 52). (2) The time selected for 
their assault upon Judah wns the beginning of the reign of Ahaz, although for some 
years previous to Jotham's death similar attacks had not been wantinj; (:i Kings xv. 
37). (3) The object contemplated by the expedition was to overturn the Davidic 
dynasty, and place upon the throne of Judah " a vassal king, whose father's name, 
Tabeel, shows that he must have been a Syrian" (Sayce) ; the Hauran inscriptions 
exhibiting several names, like Tab'el, compounded with k, and the Syrian Tab'- 
rimmon forming an exact parallel (Delitzsch, on Isa. yii. 6). It is supposed that a 
party in Jerusalena favoured the contemplated revolution (Isa. viii. 6). (4) The plan 
of campaign appears to have been that Eezin should invade Judah from the south, 
capturing Bloth on the Red Sea, which Uzziah had restored to Judah (ch. xxvi. 2), 
that Pekah should send a force directly from the noitti across the holders of the 
southern kingdom, and that both armies should meet in front of Jerusalem, to reduce 
it, if possible, by a siege. (5) The result of the invasion, so far as Ahaz and his 
people were concerned, was disastrous in the extreme. The capital, as Isaiah had pre- 
dicted, was not taken. It may be questioned if the programme was carried out to the 
extent of besieging the city. There is ground for thinking this was prevented by the 
appearance upon the scene of Tiglath-Pileser II. of Assyria (ver. 16 ; 2 Kings xvi. 7) 
But (a) Bezin of Damascus, besides recovering Eloth (2 Kings xvi. 6), defeated Ahaa 
ill :i pitched battle, and carried away a multitude of his subjects captive' to Damascug. 
(6) I'l-kah also routed him with great slaughter in one day's fight, slaying a hundred 
and twenty thousand of his veteran troops. In particular, Zicliri, au Ejjhraimite her& 



342 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHE0NICLB8. [oh. xxvni. 1— 27. 

struck down three warriors closely related to Ahaz — Maaseiab the king's son, i.e, consin 
or uncle, as in ch. xviii. 25 and xxii. 11, since Ahaz could hardly at the commencement 
of his reign have had a son capable of bearing arms; Aziikam, the ruler of the house, 
not of the temple (ch. ixxi. 13 ; 1 Chron. Ix. 11), but of the palace, hence a high official 
in the royal household; and Elkanah, that was next or second to the king, t'.e. his 
prime minister. In addition, two hundred thousand women, sons and daughters, with 
much spoil, were carried captive to Samaria. The great number of the slain and of the 
captives may be accounted for by rememberins; that it was practically a war for the 
existence of the southern kingdom, which would require Ahaa to call out all his able- 
bodied population ; that the Israelites were accustomed to act with great cruelty in 
war (2 Kings xv. 16), and probably did so on this occasion (ver. 9); and that Jehovah 
had delivered Ahaz and his people into the hands of their enemies on account of their 
apostasy, as by the lips of Moses (Lev. xxvi. 17, 37) he had threatened he would 
in such cases do. 2. The Edomites. These, whom Uzziah had reduced to subjection 
(ch, xxvi. 2), were probably emboldened by Eezin's successful attack upon Eloth 
(2 Kings xvi. 6) to throw off the yoke of Judah, and even attempt reprisals in the 
shape of an invasion of Judsean territory. This they executed with such military skill, 
that they carried off, as the Syrians and Israelites had done, a number of prisoners. 
3. The Philistines. During the previous reign these also had been conquered, and 
their country occupied by garrisons of Judsean soldiers (ch. xxvi. 6) ; but, embraciag 
the opportunity afforded by the simultaneous attacks directed upon their ancient 
enemy and present suzerain, they asserted their independence, made an irruption into 
the low land and south country of Judah, captured and occupied a number of cities, 
with their dependent villages : Beth-shemesh (see on ch. xxv. 21) ; Ajalon, the modem 
Jalo (ch. xi. 10) ; Gederoth, in the hill country of Judah (Josh. xv. 36) ; " the Gedor 
of the ' Onomasticon,' ten miles from Eleutheropolis, on the road to Diospolis, now the 
ruin Jedireh" (Conder, 'Handbook,' p. 411); Shocho (ch. xi. 7), the Shuweike of 
to-day ; Timnah, the present Tihneh, on the frontier of Judah three quarters of an hour 
from Ain-shems ; Gimzo, now Jimsu, a large village between Lydda and Jerusalem. 

Lessons. 1. The degeneracy of human nature — a good Jotham begets a wicked 
Ahaz. 2. The madness of idolatry, exemplified in the career of Ahaz. 3. The cer- 
tainty of retribution, illustrated by the " bringing low " of Judah, — W. 

Vers. 8 — ^15. — The sending hack of the captives — an incident of the Israditith war. 
I. The warbiokb of Iskabl and the captives of Judah. (Ver. 8.) 1. The nwmher 
of the captives. Two hundred thousand persons. (1) This, following upon a slaughter 
of one hundred and twenty thousand soldiers, showed the crushing nature of the blow 
which had fallen upon Judah. (2) It exemplified the horrors of war, especially 
amongst ancient peoples, with whom the deportation of vast hordes of a country's 
population was a familiar phenomenon. Cf. among the Jews the twenty thousand 
footmen taken by David from Hadadezer of Zobah (2 Sam. viii. 4 ; 1 Chron. xviii. 4), 
and the ten thousand Edomites captured by Amaziah (ch. xxv. 12); amongst the 
Assyrians the carrying away of the inhabitants of Samaria to Assyria by Tiglath- 
Pileser II. (2 Kings xv. 29 ; cf. ' Records,' etc., v. 52) — '« the population, the goodi 
of its people (and the furniture) to the land of Assyria I sent," and the removal b5 
Sargon II. of 27,280 of the leading inhabitants of Samaria to Gozan and Media (' Records,' 
etc., vii. 28) ; and amongst the Egyptians the number of foreign peoples transported to 
the Nile valley as the result of successful campaigns, a number so great as with their 
descendants to compose in the time of Eameses Sesostris " a third, and probably still 
more, of all the families of Egypt " (Brugsch, ' Egypt under the Pharaohs,' iL 104). (3) 
It illustrated the ease with which, when God willed it, a nation could be " minished and 
brought low " (Job xii. 23 ; Ps. cvii. 39). (4) It attested the certainty and severity of 
God's judgments on account of sin, whether upon nations or individuals (Lev. xxvi. 17; 
Deut. xxxii. 30 ; ch. xv. 6). 2. The persons of the captives. (1) The brethren of the 
Israelites, t.e. their kinsmen ; hence the wickedness of their conduct in enslaving not 
merely human beings, which was bad, but their own flesh and blood, which was worse, 
yea, was unnatural ; and (2) of these, not the men who had fought against them, which 
m^ht have been in some sort excusable, but, which was wholly indefensible, the women, 
with their aons and daughteri, who were all alike innocent of offence in either cauaing 



CH. xxTHi. 1— «.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE OHEONICJUSa 848 

or •nBtainiag the war, and therefore should have been exempted from experiencing iti 
mlBeries, 3. The destinaticm of the captives. Samaria, in the Assyrian monuments 
Sa-mir-i-na (Schrader, 'Die Keilinschriften,' p, 191), the capital of the northern 
kingdom, built by Omri (1 Kings xvi. 24). 

IL The warbioes of Israel and thk pkophet of Jehovah. (Vers. 9 — ^11.) 1. 
ITie prophet's name. Oded, " Setting up." The name of the father of Azariah who 
went out to meet Asa (ch. XT. 2), 2. 7^ prophefs designation, A prophet of Jehovah, 
not of the false Jehovah worshipped in Samaria under the image of a calf (Hob. Tiii. 
6, 6), but of the true Jehovah, which shows that, apostate as the northern kingdom 
had become, it was not entirely destitute of true religion — even there Jehovah having 
at least prophets who witnessed for him, like Hosea [(L 1) and Oded, if not also 
adherents who worshipped him. 3. The prophet's cowrage. He went out to meet the 
hosts of Israel as they returned from their successful campaign, and warned them of 
the wickedness of which they had been guilty ; as Jehu, the son of Hanani, had met 
Jehoshaphat returning from Ramoth-Gilead (eh. xix. 2), and a prophet of Jehovah had 
confronted Amaziah coming from the slaughter of the Edomites (eh. xxv. 16). 4. 
The prophet's address. (1) A reminder that the victory they had obtained had been 
due not so much (if at all) to their superior military skill or bravery, as to the fact 
that Jehovah had been angry with Judah, and had delivered her armies into their 
hands (ver. 9 ; cf. Neh. ix. 27). (2) A rebuke for the want of pity they had ■hewn 
towards their brethren upon whom the anger of God had fallen — a circumstance which 
should have moved their hearts to clemency (Job xix. 21), but which had rather lent 
intensity to their rage. (3) An accusation that they purposed to make bondmen and 
bondwomen of the sons and daughters of Judah and Jerusalem — which, besides being 
an act of cruelty, was likewise an act of folly, since it could not be supposed Jehovah's 
favour was finally withdrawn from Judah ; and an act of presumption, inasmuch as they 
themselves had not been blameless in the matter of apostatizing from Jehovah, and, if 
the truth were told, were as much deserving to be punished as their southern brethren 
and sisters. (4) An appeal to their conscience to say whether what he now affirmed 
was not correct : " Are there not with you, even with you, sins against the Lord your 
God ? " Their idolatry was as great as that of Judah had been. Their pitiless butchery 
of their brethren was crying up against them to heaven. Their bringing away of these 
innocent women and children was an iniquity which filled up the measure of their 
guilt (ver. 10). (6) An exhortation to desist from their criminal intention to enslave 
their brethren, and to send back the captives they had brought, with all convenient 
gpeed and with due expressions of regret (ver. 11). (6) An argument to quicken their 
movements in the path of duty ; if they did not, the fierce wrath of Jehovah, which 
was already on them, would engulf them. The speech, which was a model in respect 
of compact brevity, lofty eloquence, clear statement, pathetic appeal, resistless logic, 
and which must have been delivered with combined boldness and persuasiveness, made 
a deep impression. 

III. The wakbioes of Isbaei. and the pbinoes of Ephbaih. (Vers. 12 — 14.) 1. 
The names of the princes, Azariah (ch. xv. 2 ; xxii. 6), the son of Johanan, " Jehovah 
is gracious;" Berechiah, "Whom Jehovah hath blessed "(1 Ohron. vi. 39), son of 
Meshillemoth, " Retribution ; " Jehizkiah, the same as Hezekiah, " The might of Jeho- 
vah," son of Shallum, " Retribution " (2 Kings xv. 10) ; and Amasa, " Burden," the 
name of one of Absalom's captains (2 Sam. xvii. 25), the son of Hadlai, " Rest." These 
princes were obviously at the head of the Israelitish congregation (ver. 14). 2. The 
action of the princes. They joined the Prophet Oded in resisting the introduction by 
the soldiers of the captives into the city. That people is fortunate whose leaders are 
courageous to oppose them in evil-doing, and to point out to them the path of duty. 
3. The speech of the princes, (1) A refusal to admit the captives into the city (ver. 
13) ; (2) a confession that already they, as a people, had transgressed against Jehovah, 
and incurred his wrath ; and (3) an intimation that the course the soldiers were pur- 
suing was snch as would increase their sin and trespass, and expose them to a heavier 
charge of guilt. 4. The success of the princes, " The armed men left the captives and 
the spoil before the princes and all the congregation " (ver. 14). Happy is that oom- 
Dunity in which the wise and good counsels of its leaders prevajL 

lY. The pbinoes of Isbaei. and the captives of Judah. (Ver. 16.) 1. Th» 



»44 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE OHEONICLES. [oh. xxvni. 1—21 

kindness of the princes. The above-nnmed (ver. 12), with other famous and distinguished 
leaders, to whom a similar designation was customarily applied (1 Ohroo. xii. 31; xvi. 
41 ; ch. xxxi. 19), rose up from their seats of honour in the niidst of the assembly, 
stood forth as the representatives of the people and received at the hands of the sol- 
diers the crowd of captives ; out of the spoil, which, as usual, consisted in garments, 
flocks, and herds, with other articles of value (ch. xv. 14, 15 ; xx. 25), clothed and shod 
all amongst them who were naked, giving them to eat and drink (2 Kings vi. 22, 23) ; 
anointed with oil such of them as had wounds (Luke x. 34) ; set the feeble upon asses, 
of which animals there was a plentiful supply (1 Chron. xxvii. 30 ; Ezra ii. 67) — a 
lively picture of the pity and compassion which should ever be .shown towards the 
unfortunate, suffering, and miserable, esiiecially iiy the people of God (Isa. Iviii. 6, 7; 
Job XXX. 25 ; Luke x. 37 ; xiv. 12 ; 1 Tim. v. 10 ; 1 John iii. 11 j. 2. The return of 
the captives. Thus generously treated by the princes, they were sent back, those able 
to travel by themselves, those requiring to ride accompanied by conductors, who 
journeyed with them as far as Jericho, the city of palm trees (Judg. iii. 13), distant 
from Jerusalem about five and a half hours' walk, situated in the tribe of Benjamin, 
and belonging to the kingdom of Judah. Arrived thither, they were handed over to 
their brethren, after which their conductors returned to Samaria. 

Lessons. 1. The sin of slavery. 2. The function of prophecy. 3. The beauty of 
charity. — W. 

Vers. 16, 20, 21. — An unfortunate embassy. I. The pebson appboaohed. Tiglath- 
Pilneser (ver. 20), Tiglath-Pileser (2 Kings xvi. 7); in Assyrian, 2'ai«Z-tt-(Tukeal)- 
hah'd-i-sar-ra, meaning " He who puts his trust in Adar," or, " Adar is my confidence ; " 
in the LXX. @aXya9-<psKaaaap\ the same person as Pul King of Assyria (Schrader, 
' Die Keilinschriften,' pp. 223 — 240), to whom Menahem of Israel gave a thousand talents 
of silver as a bribe for aid to keep tlie throne he had usurped (2 Kings xv. 17). Origin- 
ally a gardener (according to Greek tradition), Pul rose to eminence as a soldier, and 
eventually seized the crown of Assyria in b.o. 745, as Tiglath-Pileser II. 

II. The invitation oiven. To assist Ahaz against Rezin of Damascus and Fekah 
of Israel. Already the power of Tiglath-Pileser II. had been felt in numerous expe- 
ditions towards the West. Syria, Palestine, and Phcenicia had each resounded at the 
tread of his conquering legions. In particular, Rezin (' Records,' etc., v. 48), and 
Menahem, one of Pekah's predecessors on the throne of Israel, had acknowledged his 
supremacy by paying him tribute (2 Kings xv. 29 ; ' Records,' etc., v. 48). Accordingly, 
Ahaz had no doubt that the mighty Assyrian could by a word call off the two royal 
bandits that, like terriers, had sprung at his throat. Despatching ambassadors to 
Tiglath-Pileser, he requested aid against his foes firom the north and east. To render 
his application successful, he sent with his plenipotentiaries a heavy largess, in the 
shape of presents of gold and silver taken from the temple, the palace, and the princes' 
mansions (2 Kings xvi. 7, 8). An inscription, composed Lu the last or year before last 
year of Tiglath-PUeser s reign, speaks of the Assyrian monarch as having received 
tribute from Mitinti of Askalon, Joachaz of Juda, and Kosmalak of Bdom (Schrader, 
' Die Keilinschriften,' p. 263). Though this tribute was probably that which Ahaz 
paid on visiting Tiglath-Pileser at Damascus (2 Kings xvi. 10), it will serve to illustrate 
and confirm the fact here mentioned, that Ahaz sent a present with his plenipotentiaries 
when they went to solicit Tiglath-Pileser's assistance. 

III. The answer hetubned. Tiglath-Pileser came unto him. 1. He marched 
against Eezin. (2 Kings xvL 9.) The King of Syria was defeated in a pitched battle, 
and retreated to his capital. "He, to save his life, fled away alone and like a deer, 
and into the great gate of his city he entered. His generals alive in hand I captured, 
and on crosses I raised them. His country I subdued " (Inscription of Tiglath-Pileser, 
No. 10). " Damascus was closely invested ; the trees in its neighbourhood were cut 
down ; the districts dependent on it were ravaged, and forces were despatched to punish 
the Israelites, Ammonites, Moabites, and Philistiues, who had been the allies of Reson. 
... At last, in B.O. 732, after a siege of two years, Damascus was forced by famine to 
surrender. Reson was slain, Damascus given over to plunder and ruin, and its inhabi'. 
tants transported to Kir " (Sayce, ' Assyria, its Princes,' etc., pp. 36, 37 ; cf. Smith, 
•Assyrian Discoveries,' p. 282; Schrader, 'Die KeiliusehrifteD,' pp. 258, 259). 2. H» 



OH. XXIX. 1-36.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHEONICLES. 



345 



twmed upon Israel. (2 Kings xt. 29.) As above stated, this occurred while the siege 
of Damascus was beiug pressed forward. The towns of Ijoq, Abel-beth-maachah, 
Janoah, Kedesh, Hazur, with the districts of Grilead, Galilee, and all the land of 
Naphtali, were captured, and their populations carried away to Syria, while Pekah, 
their sovereign, perished at the hands of a conspirator, Hoshea, who forthwith seized 
upon the throne. These details likewise receive confifmalioa from the monuments. 
Fragment No. 2 of Tiglath-Pileser's inscription, narrating his war in Palestine, men- 
tions " the city Gaal . . . [probably Gilead] and Abil [Abel-beth-maachah] . . . with 
the land of Humri throughout its whole extent as having been joined to the borders of 
Assyria; the entire population of the district as having been sent to Assyria., and their 
king, Pakaha, as having been slain" (Smith, 'Assyrian Discoveiies,' pp.284:, 285; 
'Eeeords,' etc., v. 51, 52; Schrader, 'Die Keilinsohriften,' pp. 255, 256). 3. He 
subjected Judah. This the obvious meaning of the Chronicler's statement, that 
Tigiath-Pileser " distressed Ahaz, but strengthened him not." Instead of helping him 
to become an independent sovereign, Tigiath-Pileser made him a tributary to the 
Assyrian crown ; and exactly in harmony with this, Joachaz of Juda appears, along 
with Mitinti of Askalon, Kosmalak of Edom, and Ha mo of G-asa, among the tributary 
princes who, in the seventeenth or eighteenth year of his reign, did homage to the 
great king (see above). — W. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XXIX. 



The important reign of Hezekiah extends 
over this and the following three chapters, 
counting in all ninety-seven verses. The 
parallel, for the contents of the first three of 
these chapters, with their sixty-four verses, 
is limited to the small number of six verses 
(2 Kings xviii. 1 — 6), which in its turn is 
very much fuller (2 Kings xviii. 7 — xx.) in 
the subject of our eh. xxxii. The reason of 
this so various disposition of matter is by 
no means wrapt in mystery, our writer's 
main object being clearly best subserved in 
exhibiting the moral and religious aspects 
of the inner history of Judah, as distin- 
guished from its foreign politics — so, for 
brevity's sake, to denominate them. The 
chapter contains Hezekiah s pious inaugu- 
ration of reign and appeal to priests and 
Levites (vers. 1 — 11); the cleansing (vers. 
12 — 19), reconseeration (vers. 20 — 30), and 
thank offerings (vers. 31 — 37) of the temple. 

Ver. 1. — Hezekiah. The Ezekias (as by 
margin) of Matt, i 9. Five and twenty 
years old. We have been told (eh. xxviii. 1) 
that Ahaz was twenty years old when he 
began to reign, and reigned sixteen years. 
So that, if these numbers be correct, ami the 
numbers of our verse correct, Huzekiah 
must have been born when his father was 
only eleven years old. Of which all that 
can be said is, with Keil, that such a thing 
was not impossible and not unknown. It is 
fax more probable, however, that one of the 



determining figures is wrong, but we have 
nothing to guide us to say which. Abijah. 
The parallel spel Is this name " Abi," omit- 
ting the final he, and dagesh in yod. 
Zechariah. This may, perhaps, have been 
the Zechariah whose name accompanies the 
mention of the name of " Uriah the priest " 
in Isa, viii. 2, where we may be surprised 
to find Uriah called a "faithful witness," 
when we remember his associations with 
Ahaz, as told in our foregoing chapter. 
Scnne refer our Zechariah, however, to him 
of ch. xxvi. 5. 

Ver. 3. — In the first month ; i.e. Nisan, 
the first month of the calendar year (see 
vers. 2, 13, 15 of next chapter), not simply 
the first month of the new king's reign. 
And repaired them. This repairing of Heze- 
kiah was, unhappily, subsequently undone 
of his own hands (2 Kings xviii. 14 — 16). 

Ver. 4. — The east street; Hebrew, yrrh 
nnjan. This word, rendered here " •treet," 
occurs forty-two times, and is always ren- 
dered by the same English word, except 
three times, when it appears as "broad 
places," or "ways." Probably it should 
always be translated thus, its meaning and 
its manifest preponderant use being " an 
open space" (oh. xxxii. 6). So Kevised 
Version : Into the broad place on the eaet, 
i.e. an open area east of the temple. 

Ver. 5.— Sanctify . . . yourselves; He- 
brew, i(!'7p^n. Note the absence of any ludi 
direction in 1 Chron. xiii., and see ch. xt. 
11 — 14, with our note on ver. 12 in par- 
ticular. The filthiness; Hebrew, niarrnN. 
This word occurs twenty-seven times, and 
is rendered " separation " fifteen times, 
"flowers" twice, "put apart" three timet^ 



S46 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxn. 1-S6. 



"nneleannesa" or ••fllthiness" rix timeB, 
•Bd " menstruons" onoe. The term, there- 
fore, ia among the strongest that could be 
Med, and glances probably at the abomina- 
tions, of whatsoever sort, that Ahaz's idol»- 
tries had entailed (oomp. ver. 16). 

Ver. 7. — This veise ia the answering echo 
of oh. xxviii. 24. 

Ver. 8.— Wherefore the wrath. As illus- 
trated by the defeats and humiliations suf- 
fered at the hands of Pekah and Hazael, the 
Philistines and Edomites, and the Assyrians 
under Tiglath-Pileser. To trouble, to as- 
tonishment, and to hissing. Three words, 
carrying each a Tolume of meaning, and 
eharged with the most powerful and pain- 
ful of reminiaoenoe (Dent, xxviii. 25, 28, 32 
[observe our ver. 9], 37, 46, 65, 66). The 
Hebrew word for "hissing" (njrxf) occurs, 
besides, five times in Jeremiah (xii. 8 ; xxv. 
9, 18; xxix. 18; li. 87), and once in the 
eontemporary Prophet Micah (vL 16 ; oomp. 
Jer. xxvi. 18). 

Ver. 9.— (See oh. xxviii. 5, 8, 17.) 

Ver. 10. — To make a covenant ; Hebrew, 
Tf^ riiij^ («ee oh. xv. 12, and our note 
there). 

Ver. 11. — Be not now negligent ; Hebrew, 
'hfirhn. This verb in kal (supposing it 
the same verb) occurs but five times (Job 
iii. 26; xii. 6; Pa. cxxii. 6; Jer. xii. 1; 
Lam. i. 5), the radical idea of it being the 
safety of ease or security rather than any 
absolute safety. In niph. it is found only 
in this place and in 2 Kings iv. 28, where 
the rendering of the Authorized Version, 
**Do not deceive me," will easily yield 
the same essential idea. The derivative 
adjective (iW) occurs eight times, and 
always has the same flavour about it (1 
Chron. iv. 40 ; Job xvi. 12 ; xx. 20 ; xxi. 23 ; 
Ps. Ixxiii. 12; Jer. xlix. 81; Ezek. xxiii. 
42 ; Zech. vii. 7). And the derivative nouns 
(lW and njw) occur nine times, and, at any 
rate, in atmost every instance evidently 
carrying the same fundamental idea (Ps. 
XXX. 6 ; cxxii. 7 ; Prov. i. 32 ; xvii. 1 ; Jer. 
xxii. 21 ; Ezek. xvi. 49 ; Dan. viii. 25 ; xi. 
21, 24). Our Authorized Version, therefore, 
•ufBciently reproduces the thought of Heze- 
kiah, though perhaps this would more ex- 
actly come out of the rendering, " Be not 
now at ease," t.e. sacrifice ease and self-iudul- 
gence, etc To serve him . . . that ye should 
minister. The same verb ia used in both 
these places; so Bevised Version, To minitter 
unto him, and that ye should be hit ministers. 

Ver. 12. — Then the Levitea arose. This 
verse gives two apiece of the three divisiona 
or"famlliea" — OerBhon,Kohath,and Merari, 
-aona of Levi" (1 Chron. vi. 1, 2, 16—20; 
xxiii. 6, 7, 12, 21, 24 ; eomp. Oen. xlvL 11 ; 
Exod. vt 16). Thongh aome of the namea 



of thia and the following two versea are 
known, they do not designate, of course, the 
same persons. Through many a generation 
of Levites, the same namea were, no doubt 
intentioniilly, reproduced. 

Ver. 13.— Elizaphan (Exod. vi 22). He 
was chief of the Kohathites in the time 
of Moses (Numb. iii. SO; comp. 1 Chron. 
XV. 8). This family, though we do not 
read why, seems always to have retained a 
separate existence. 

Ver. 14. — Asaph (former verse), Heman, 
Jeduthun. These were the chiefs of the 
singers and musicians (see, again, 1 Chron. 
tL 31—33, 39; xxv. 1—7; ch. v. 12). 

Ver. 15.— By the words of the lord. The 
Hebrew here (njn; 'Tana) may possibly 
mean, " in the business oif Jehovah," upon 
which King Hezekiah was now intent. But 
it is not by any means needful so to under- 
stand it. The words or commands of the 
Lord are such as are written in Exod. xix 
22; Lev. xL44. 

Ver. 16.— The inner part. That is to say, 
only the priests were warranted to enter 
inside the temple, whUe the Levites' sphere 
of work and service lay in the courts and 
round about the temple. Kidron, as we 
have seen (note ch. xxvii. 3), lay on the pnst 
of the temple mount. 

Ver. 17. — They oegan ... to sanCvx-y 
This is not the hithp. conjugation (ver. 5), 
and the whole verse probably purports to 
speak only of the sanctification of things, nn 
of the self-sanctifying of the official per8on^, 
which, whether it occupied longer or shortei 
time, had been already done. The sanc- 
tifying of all outside, then, to the threshold, 
or poroh, took eight days. So, manifestly, 
should be rendered, in the vau here found, 
and. The sanctifying of the interior occu- 
pied another eight days, and the legitimate 
feast-day of the Passover, viz. the fourteenth 
day of Nisan, became overlapped by two 
days. Xevertheless, many may have ob- 
served the Passover on its strict date. 

Ver. 18. — This and the following verse 
purport to say that, while all " filthiness " 
had been swept out and away to Kidron'a 
dark waters, all that had been polluted of 
the proper furniture of the temple and its 
worship had now been cleansed and sanc- 
tified by those who had been entrusted with 
the work, and likewise that things mis- 
placed and removed had been replaced, also 
after cleansing and sanctifying. This ia 
the happy report that the priests bring now 
to Hezekiah (ch. xxviii. 24 ; 2 Kings xvi. 

"^ 
Ver. 20. — ^The mlers of the dty are its 

chief citizens — Hebrew, Tjp »^1^ (ch. xiiv. 

17 ; XXX. 1 — 4) — who bring contributions of 

sacrificial victims, the word being generally 

rendered " princes." 



K. 1— 36.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 



M7 



Ver. 21.— There is diTenity of opinion, 
whether ths seven bnlloolcs (citj), seven 
rams (d'^'!J)i seven lambs (Q'E'3?) were 
lurnt offering (n^iV), or, with the seven he- 
goats (n»jy 'T?¥)> ^6re tin offering (nK^n). 
Some think (as, for instance, Canon Eaw- 
linson) that they were sin offering, as the ac- 
count of the offering of them (ver. 22) takes 
priority for them over the he-goats ; others 
(as Bertheau, Professor J. G. Murphy, etc.), 
that they were certainly burnt offering. It 
scarcely appears as though much stress can 
be laid upon what is apparently the chief 
reason of Canon Bawlinson's opinion, in face 
of the immediate language of the last sen- 
tence of our ver. 24, "for the king com- 
mended the burnt offering and the sin 
offering for all Israel." The fact of no men- 
tion of burnt offering in our present verse, 
and of the natural construction of the de- 
scription, " for a sin offering for the king- 
dom," etc., as applying to all that liad 
preceded, seems the better argument, and 
all that is necessary, unless something 
moderately decisive be forthcoming to rebut 
it. The solution of all, however, is pro- 
bably to our hand in Ezra viii. 35, which is 
a very close and significant parallel to our 
present verse. The first mention of the sacri- 
fice of Dng, or " young bullocks," is found 
in Eiod. xxiv. 5, and afterwards in Exod. 
xxix. 1, 3 ; Lev. iv. 3, etc. ; viii. 2, 14, eto. 
The first mention of the sacrifice of 0<^K 
is Gen. xxii. 13 ; and, after, Exod. xxix. 15 — 
18, 19—21, eto. ; Lev. v. 15 ; viii. 2, 22, eto. 
The first mention of the sacrifices of the 
adss is Exod. xii. 8 — 7, and, after, Exod. 
xxix. 38, eto. The first mention of the 
sacrifice of D'tJ? 'Tds is the present pas- 
sage; and, after, Ezra viii. 25. But the 
mention of sacrifices of goats is found in 
Lev. i. 10; iii. 12, and often besides. 7or 
the kingdom ; i.e. probably for " all that 
are in autliority," viz. the king and rulers, 
the Hebrew word (nsSap) designating here 
those exercising dominion (1 Kings xi. 11; 
xiv. 8 ; 1 Sam. xxviii. 17) rather than the 
country under dominion (Josh. x. 2 ; 1 Sam. 
xxvii. 5). It is, however, possible that allu- 
sion to the whole kingdom of Judah and 
Israel is made here. For the sanctuary ; i.e. 
those who officiated in holy things. Tor 
Judah ; i.e. for all the people. 

Ver. 22. — Beoeived . . . sprinkled. The 
sprinkling of the blood marked tlie expia- 
tion (Lev. iv. 7, 18, 30; v. 9; viii. 14, 15; 
Heb. ix. 12—14, 19—22). 

Ver. 23. — The he-goats for the sin offering. 
No preposition " for " is found in the Hebrew 
text, and the previoni noun is in the con- 
struct state, "j;'^. Laid theii hands. This 
signified the tappoMd lAjring of ain* — the 



sins of the people— on the head of tha 
animal (Lev. i. 4 ; iv. 4, etc.). 

Ver. 24. — They made reconoiliation with 
their blood upon the altar; Revised Version, 
and they made a ain offering with their blood, 
eto. ; Hebrew, piel future of Nljn. The pid 
conjugation occurs in all fourteen times- 
seven times rendered " cleanse ; " twice, 
"purify;" twice, "offer for sin;" once, 
"purge; " once, as here, "make reooncilia- 
tion;" and once (Gen. xxxi. 39, "I bare 
the loss of it"), to "hear loss." This last 
instance, being the very first ooonrrence of 
the word in this conjugation, beautifully 
harmonizes with the simple and most ele- 
mentary idea of the doctrine or facts undei^ 
lying the word. To make . . . atonement; 
Hebrew, 1S3^, piel infinitive. Tliis word, 
which in the one kal occurrence of it (Gen. 
vi, 14) means " to pitch, or cover with pitch," 
occurs in piel eighty-six times, and is 
rendeied " atone " or " make atonement " 
sixty-six times, seven times * reconcile" 
or " make reconoiliation," the other render- 
ings being such as " pacify," " purge," " for- 
give," "cleanse," "be merciful," "pnt it 
off," I.e. "expiate" (margin). We are so 
distinctly twice told that these sacrifices 
were for all Israel, that it may be taken 
for granted that the desire of Hezekiah was 
to include the northern kingdom — with 
which, under Hoshea, in subjection to tha 
Assyrian king, times were now very hard 
and ominous of the end — in the benefits 
of the expiatory offerings now made (so see 
vers. 5, 6, 10 — 12 of next chapter). 

Ver. 25. — (See 1 Chron. xvL 4; xxi.; 
xxiii. 5; xxv. ], 6; xxix. 29; oh. v. 12.) 

Ver. 26. — To references of foregoing versa 
may be added Numb. x. 8 ; 1 Chron. xv. 24. 

Ver. 27. — Hezekiah commanded to offer 
the burnt offering. This verse and the 
following, with graphic brevity, purport to 
describe the actual consummating of the 
preparations rehearsed before, and, as seems 
most probable, in the significance of ,the 
last clause of Ezra viii. 35, already referred 
to. The whole of the burnt offering was 
burnt on the altar, but of the sin offering 
the " fat " alone (Lev. iv. 19). 

Ver. 29.— Bowed ; Hebrew, wi^. Of the 
force and forclbleness of the verb here 
employed an idea may be obtained from 
comparison of Gen. xlix. 9 ; Numb. xxiv. 9 ; 
Judg. V. 27 ; viL 6 ; 1 Kings xix. 18. Wor- 
shipped; Hebrew, nnpiE^. This verb, on 
the other hand, proclaims the force, not 
of the posture of the body merely, but 
rather of the mind, in the rising degrees of 
respect, reverence, allegiance, and the uior- 
thip of profound adoration paid to him, who 
is "God over all, blessed for evermora." 
The scene imaged in this description is 
indeed spiiit-stirring in ■ high da|^M, 



848 



THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxix. 1— 36. 



Ver. 30. — With the wordi of David, and of 
Asaph. We can Boarculy exclude from our 
thought the impressioD that loving human 
reverence for their own past religious helpers 
of song and music, and enthusiasm for the 
memory of them, were here glanced at. The 
king's and the piinoes' supplementary (more- 
over) injunction and instruction to the 
Levites as to what words they should put 
on their lips. Asaph the seer. This is the 
only place in which Asaph is thus distinctly 
named seer, but it is contained virtually in 
1 Chron. xxv. 2; and for the rabstantive 
title given to two colleagues, see 1 Chron. 
xxT. 5 ; ch. XXXV. 15. The prineee (see their 
growing prominence in ch. xxiv. 17 ; xxviii. 
21; XXX 2, 6, 12, 24; xxxii. 3). 

Ver. 31. — Ye have consecrated yourselves. 
The Hebrew text is (with the margin of 
both Authorized and Bevised Versions), 
" have filled your hands to Jehovah." Our 
somewhat awkward and somewhat mislead- 
ing reproduction in English of the Hebrew 
text is, nevertheless, on the whole defensible. 
The phrase occurs some seventeen times 
(Exod. xxviii. 41 ; xxix. 9, 29, 33, 3.5 ; xxxii. 
29; Lev. viii. 33; xvi. 32; xxi. 10; Numb, 
iii. 3 ; Judg. xvii. 5, 12 ; 1 Kings xiii. 33 ; 
1 Chron. xxix. 5; ch. xiii. 9; Ezek. xliii. 
26), and in some of these instances is most 
conveniently represented by the rendering 
"consecrate." The plural noun d^h^qh, or 
D'sAiiin, is found thirteen times, in three 
of which places it is spoken of " stones to be 
set," as e.g. " for " or " in the ephod " (Exod. 
xxv. 7; XXXV. 9, 27; 1 Chron. xxix. 2); 
and in the other ten, of "consecration," as 
e.g. " a ram of consecration," " the ram of 
Aaron's consecration" (Exod. xxix. 22, 26, 
27, 81, 34; Lev. vii. 37; viii. 22, 28, 29, 31, 
33). Some think our text, "Now ye have 
consecrated yourselves," glances at the sacri- 
fices of a propitiatory sort, which had just 
been completed; others, that the reference 
is by anticipation — to the fact that the people 
invited to draw near had, in an honourable, 
holy, and sincerely devoted way, armed 
themselves with worthy oflTerings. The sacri- 
fices and thank offerings were sarrificeB " of 
thank offerings," in the nature of the peaea 
offering! (Lev. vii. 11—21, 29—36). The 
burnt offerings marked the "free heart," 
inasmuch as there wfis nothing of them 
reserved from the consuming oLtbe altar 
for use. As many as were of a free heart ; 
Hebrew, 3^ anj-^l- Among some sixty 
occnrjences of tliis word, in its verb, noun, 
or (as here) adjective form, perhaps the 
most tonching and beautifully expressive is 
that of Ps. Ix. 12, " Uphold me with thy free 
Spirit" Sacrifloei; Hebrew, d'pi^t. This 
U the plural uf raj — • word that expreisei 



the generic idea, as e.g. the feast of sacri- 
fice ; again, the act of slaying and sacrificing 
a victim ; again, the victim itself; again, 
those kinde of stMjrifices that were expiatory 
or eucharistio, but not holooaustio (Lev. 
vii. 12). Thank offerings; Hebrew, rtnin. 
This word occurs about thirty-two times ; in 
about two-thirds of that number denoting 
the spiritual acts of giving of thanks, even 
when accompanied by the JSgurative idea of 
"sacrifices " (Ps. IvL 13; ovii. 22 ; oxvi. 17), 
the genuine adoring praise or thanksgiving 
constituting the sacrifice ; and in the other 
thiril denoting strictly sacrificial offerings, as 
several limes in Leviticus (vii. 12 ; xxii. 29) 
and here. Our ch. xxxiii. 16 classifies these 
with "peace offerings" (□'B^?'), as do many 
other passages with "burnt offerings" gene- 
rally (Judg. XX. 26 ; xxi. 4 ; 1 Sam. xiii. 9 ; 
2 Sam. vi. 17; 1 Chron. xvi 1 ; xxi. 26). 

Ver. 32. — This verse manifestly purport* 
to gauge in some degree the amount of/ree- 
heartednese present in the nation. 

Ver. 33. — The consecrated things; Hebrew, 
D'B'npjl. Not the word just discussed in 
ver. 31 ; these are the thank offering sacrifices. 

Ver. 34. — Originally, the worshipper who 
was moved to sacrifice was enjoined to slay, 
fiay, and cut in pieces the victim (Lev. i. 2 
— 6). Later the Levites performed these 
duties, and on great public occasions, at any 
rate, the priests themselves. The simple 
tale of this verse speaks volumes of the 
statu of the ecclesiastical profession and of 
the eoolebiastioal heart at this very time. 
Into the dishonoured sepulchre already two 
or three unsuspected and apparently un- 
acknowledged chinks had let in reproving 
light as to this, and very lately the almost 
unavoidable inferences respecting Urijah 
(see note on our ver. 1, and on oh. xxviii. 
24, compared with 2 Kings xvi. 10 — 16) 
served the same purpose. How true to 
nature and io history, both secular and 
ecclesiastical also, the superiority, in sincerity 
and life and preparation for work, of the 
subordinates (the Levites), to those who fed 
on dignity rather than maintained it, in the 
higbi'st sense, by religious life and con- 
scientious practice I 

Ver. 35. — And the drink offerings for 
every burnt offering. The "drink offer- 
ings " (D<sp:) have not been mentioned be- 
fore in this chapter. Of these libations of 
wine and oil, the most particular account is 
given in Numb. xv. 5—10, 24). The first 
scriptural mention of them occurs in Gen. 
XXXV. 14 ; followed by Exod. xxix. 40. 41 ; 
XXX. 9; Lev. xziii. 13, 18, 87; Numb, vi 
15, 17, etc 

Ver. 86.— (Oomp. Prov. xvL l.> 



OH. XXIX. 1—36.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 34» 



H0MILETIC8. 

Vers. 1 — 36. — The reformation of Eezekidh — " the thing done suddenli/." Hezekiah 
was the thirteenth of the twenty kings of the line of Judah ; but when his reign of 
tweuty-nine years had run to its end, as many as two hundred and eighty-two years 
had sped away of the three hundred and ninety-two of the duration of the line up to 
the date of the Captivity. It may also he remembered that, of the seven reigns follow- 
ing upon that of Hezekiah, two (those of Jehoahaz and Jehoiachin) lasted only three 
months each. Something, no doubt, is to be learned from the comparative lengths of 
the lives of individuals, of kings with their reigns, and of nations. Some solemn law, no 
doubt, obtains, which, however, especially as regards the first, is to a very great degree 
simply inscrutable. We can only think with wonder, awe, and the resignation of 
adoting submission, of the young, the beautiful, the useful, and the most jjiumisiug and 
loved being so often taken away, while so many all the reverse remain. We never less 
dogmatize than when our thought dwells with this mysterious and veiled theme. We 
are especially helpless to pursue it, to any detail, or in its minutiie and its individual 
examples. We know that we are even then in the presence of the sovereign Arbiter of 
life and, what we call, death. One profoundest truth is rather afresh brought to our 
recollection, than by any means for the first time taught us hereby, viz. that all life 
and all things here are but a part — ay, and that a small part — of a vaster scene, vaster 
scheme, and one measureless for the ken of our present mental horizon. Another 
probably reliable impression made on us is, not only that time makes for goodness, even 
in the present shorter and sharper coniiicts of good and evil, but that the slower growth 
of goodness, as compared with the frequently gigantic strides of evil, is providentially 
calculated for, where often it is simply impossible to us to trace it. The unredeemed 
evil of Ahaz and his sixteen years, while these lasted, is reduced in its proportions, 
when viewed as the work of sixteen out of forty-five years, the balance of which was 
made up of the twenty-nine of Hezekiah. The present chapter, however, of the reign 
and work of Hezekiah, is itself the account of — 

L Swift wokk. " The thing that was done suddenly," i.e. promptly, and with the 
promptness that indicated that the doer of it felt it to be such as could not permit nor 
brook delay. The "suddenness" was no doubt praiseworthy on the part of Hezekiah, 
and it was a testimony to this, and an encouragement to all imitators of it, that Grod 
sanctioned the suddenness, and let nothing fall to the ground because of it, in that he 
directly contributed to the work and soundness of the whole result by "preparing the 
people," i.e. disposing their hearts to every good word and work required. Swift and 
slight work for God is the very last to secure his approval and help; but swift and 
earnett work, because the "days are few and evil," will have his gracious pardon in 
respect of many a too probable defect, and with pardon his assisting and preventing 
help. 

II. The fbaotioal wobk of CLEANSiNa. Priests and Levites cleanse themselves ; and 
then the house of G-od, the altar and all its vessels, the table of shewbread and all its 
vessels. This was outer work, but not only such ; for with an urgency and zeal which 
proved it but the expression of deep inner conviction, it was pressed on priests and 
Levites, and also executed by them. King Hezekiah, for the time preacher and 
prophet, takes the right means to influence those to whom he speaks, that their out- 
ward work may go on right motives, and spring from depth of conviction, and be the 
likelier to be continuous and sustained. He calls their attention plainly to the evil of 
the ways that had been the ways of the kingdom now these sixteen years, and calls 
that evil by its right name. It it evil, and it is trespass ; and it is " forsaking " God ; 
and it is "turning the face from his habitation, and tmrning the back" to it; it has 
involved the criminality and horror of "tetople doors shut," of the " perpetual lamp" 
being made a lie to its own most sacred name, of " incense " refusing its fragrant ascending 
to heaven, and " altar of burnt offering " a pitiable blank 1 Hezekiah challenges them 
to deny that all the suffering of these years past ia punishment — ^plain punishment from 
the just " wrath of the Lord." And punishment it was, as e.g. the being " delivered over 
to trouble, and astonishment, and hissing ; " and with the fresh memories of " fathers 
&llen by the sword, and of sons, daughters, and wives " being at this time " in captivity.' 



860 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE OHKONICLES. [oh. xxix. 1— 36. 

Hezekiah leads the way in lifting the courage, which the terrible retrospect might well 
go to quench ; he tells them of the covenant that he, for his part, purposes " in his 
heart" and proposes; and, with warm, loving exhortation, entreats their hearty and 
diligent assent and consent, their "not negligent" co-operation, with solemn record of 
their election and, so to say, ordination vows. This, at all events, looks like an earnest 
endeavour to repair in the " sixteen days " the evUs of the past " sixteen y«ars." For 
Hezekiah remembers that 

" Delay is dangerous, sleep disease ; 
And few that slumber, wake." 

III. The devout bemembbanob and rehbabsino cblbbbation op atonino blood 
AND THE SPBINKLINQ THEREOF. Call attention to vers. 21 — 24 ; and (in ver. 24) especially 
to the doctrine couched in the words, " to make reconciliation; " and to the stress laid 
upon the " atonement " and the " sin offering," being said to be for " all Israel," as 
signifying, probably, that Hezekiah's heart yearned again over the schismatic kingdom, 
and would foin comprehend it within the compass of the blessing of the sacrificial 
blood. 

IV. The devout remembrance and euchabistio celebration of the burnt 

OFFEBINQ, WITH ALL DUE ACCOMPANIMENTS OF PRAISE, SINGING, MUSIO, AND THE FULL 

PROFESSIONAL CHOIR. The sin offerings must, with all their significance of penitence 
and humiliation, and confession of punishment deserved, precede. And it appears that, 
in full number and with faithfulness, they were offered. But after them, with what 
surrender of themselves, with what abandon of true and " free heart," did the Israelite 
who was an Israelite indeed take his burnt offering to the altar and the priest ! Now, 
in particular, when the holy worship of the olden and happier times recommenced to 
the sound of " the song of the Lord . . . with the trumpets and the instruments of 
David," it was the inspiration of a blessed service indeed. " All the congregation 
worshipped . . . the king and all that were present with him bowed themselves, 
and worshipped. . . . And they sang praises with gladness, and they bowed their heads 
and worshipped." " The service of the house of the Lord was set in order," and " God 
was in the midst of his people." 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 11. — The height oj opportimiti/. To Hezekiah as he ascended the throne 
ot Judah there was presented a very noble opportunity. His father had brought the 
nation down very low, had left it " naked " to its various enemies, had caused it to incur 
the sore displeasure of the Lord, had suffered it to reach the very verge of destruction. 
But he himself was young and strong ; he knew what was the secret and what the 
source of prosperity ; he indulged the hope that everything might yet be restored if 
determination and energy were shown at the right hour. He resolved that, with the 
help of God, he would be equal to this great emergency, would rise to the height of this 
noble opportunity ; and so he was, and so he did. Hi^ had what he needed for it — 

L All due pbbpabation in godly training. For, although his father was an 
apostate from the true faith, and his example was everything that he should avoid, 
Hezekiah was not without home influences of another and a very different kind. It is 
a happy inconsistency we often find in bad men that they are willing for their children 
to receive the good counsel which themselves disregard and perhaps even despise. 
Whether due to a contem|ituous indifference or to a covert fear, they are willing, some- 
times even wishful, that their children should receive a godly education. It is highly 
probable that from his mother, Abijah, he learnt tho^e truths and received those 
influences which led him to choose the service of God. Probably Isaiah had access to 
him ; and if so, we may be sure he made use of his opportunity. Whoever did teach 
and train him must have felt amply rewarded in after-years, when Hezekiah rendered 
such splendid service to his country. There is sometimes done at the mother's knee 
or in the schoolroom a work for God the full fruits of which are never revealed on 
earth. 

IL Skkbibilitt. As wa read the address which Hezekiah delivered to the priests 



1— 86.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THB OHBONIOLBa «61 

and the Levites (yerg. 6 — 11), we are impressed with the fact that the speaker was a 
man of no ordinary sensitility. The things which had happened of late had cut him 
to the heart. His nation's dishonour, the domestic sorrows of the people (ver. 9), the 
OTershadowing of the high displeasure of the Almighty, — all this moved him to pure and 
deep emotion. He was a man of strong and profound feeling (see also Isa. xxxviii). 

III. Bgsoluteness. There is reason to think that the ecclesiastical ofBcials were 
far from being keenly sympathetic with the king in his work of reformation. The 
priests were quite in the background, and the Levites needed to be exhorted "not to 
he negligent" (ver. 11). The king himself not only took the initiative, but he brought 
to the work a firm resoluteness which carried everything before it. "It is in my heart 
to make a coyenant," he said (ver. 10) ; and it was clear that the young king, although 
his elders were before him, and although the reins of government were only just in his 
hand, intended to carry out his purpose. Ooe strong will, especially when it holds a 
high place and has a right to speak authoritatively, will drive indecision and even half- 
heartednesB before it. 

lY. Saoacity. Eezekiah showed a sagacity which may be said to have been 
" beyond his years." 1, He recognized the right order of procedure. He felt that the 
first thing to be done was to set the nation right with the God whom they had ao 
■eriously offended; and he perceived that the first thing to be done to attain this great 
end was to purify the profaned house of the Lord. 2. He took the leaden of religion 
into counsel and co-operation. He called the Levites and the priests together, and 
energetically addressed them ; he appealed to them in the language of piety and of 
affection (ver. 11). 3. He understood that all reformation must begin with our own 
hearts. "Sanctify yourselves" he said (ver. 6). It must be the dean hands of the pure 
heart that cleanse and purify the sanctuary of the Lord. 

If we would rise to the height of our opportunity we must do these things. 1. Realize 
the greatness of the work before us; be impressed and afiected by it; be seriously 
solemnized by it. It is not the cold or the chill heart that will carry a great work 
through all obstacles and over all toils to a successful issue. 2. Qive the first place to 
the sacnd side of the matter ; feel that we must have God with us in our work ; con- 
sider well what are its relations to him, and in what way his favour is to be secured. 
3. Make a heginning with owrselves — " sanctify ourselves " for the work in hand, by 
self-examination, by a sincere repentance and return unto God, by a solemn and deliberate 
rededication of ourselves to our Lord and to hii service, by earnest and believing prayer, 
cleanse our own heart and thus be ready for the part we are to take. 4. Co-operate 
with our fellows to the utmost of our power ; not proudly consider that we alone are 
sufBcient, nor selfishly desire to reserve sacred duty and opportunity for our own hand, 
nor contentiously make it difficult for others to work with iis ; but gladly and graciously 
enter into fellowship with our friends and neighbours. — 0. 

Vers. 12 — 19. — Doing duty. The way in which these Levites received and executed 
the commission of the king may indicate to us the way in which we should enter upon 
and discharge our duty. 

I. Undeetake it in a bight bmkit. These men " arose " and went forth to do 
what Hezckiah called upon them to execute. It will not be presuming much if, judg- 
ing from the account which follows, we conclude that they undertook their work in a 
spirit of (1) obedience to the 1< ing, and (2) devotion to their God. Certainly that woiild 
have become them and have honoured them. And that is, undoubtedly, the spirit in 
which we should go forth to any duty with which we are charged ; we should (1) 
realize our obligation to man — to do what is just and fair toward him ; (2) our responsi- 
bility to God ; for in diligence and fidelity we may do everything unto him also (Col. 
iii. 23). 

IL Bb undibtubbed by its unfleabastnebs. This duty laid upon the Levites and 
upon the priests was not inviting work. To " bring out all the uncleanness " from the 
temple, and to " carry it out into the brook Eidron," could not be very agreeable 
occupation. But they did not hesitate to do it. And, indeed, they could not possibly 
have been better occupied. In that act they were carrying forth a curse ; they ware 
bearing away the wrath of their God. They were not merely cleanging an edifice ; they 
wwe clearing their iM>nscience ; they were righting their record in the books of heaven 



352 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHEONICLBS. [oh. xxix. 1— 36. 

No fair hand was doing that week in Jerusalem any work of refinement that more 
graced its owner than did the hands of those Levites as they stripped the false altar of 
Its clothing, or as they swept the accumulated dust from the courts of the sanctuary. 
Let us not despise any true work of any kind. Even if it is not of a kind that answers 
to our taste or to our training; even if it should be uncongenial to our spirit. If it be 
that work which the emergency requires of us, or if it be that which Divine providence 
assigns us at the time ; if it be that which our Master himself asks of us in order to 
serve his cause or to help one of his little ones, it is honourable employment, it should 
be accounted holy in our esteem. 

" Do thy little; though it be 
Dreariness and drudgery. 
They whom Christ apostles made 
Gathered fragments when be bade." 

The twelve apostles gathering broken bits of bread and fish, or Paul going about the 
island of Malta gathering sticks, — in these incidents we have illustrations of the truth 
that all work which is timely and helpful is work that is honourable and excellent. 

III. Call to oub aid evert willing worker. It may be taken that those whose 
names are given (vers. 12 — 14) were the foremost in offering themselves for the work 
required. But they did not propose to do it by themselves ; they called in all who 
would join them (ver. 15), and then, as a strong unifed band, they set about theirtask. 
In the work of the Lord we should engage all who have a heart and a hand to help. 
We should do so : 1. For the worWs sake ; that it may be more rapidly and more 
effectually done. 2. For their sake ; because they will be blessed in their deed, and 
after it. 3. For our own sake ; that we may not be overburdened, and may do all 
that we do more carefully and thoroughly. 

IV. Know when to stop, and when to proceed ; when to draw a boundary-line, and 
when to cross it. These dutiful Levites understood their duty well. 1. They did not 
intrude into the priests' domain; they stopped short "at the inner part of the house" 
(ver. 16). 2. At the same time, they went beyond the actual letter of instruction by 
" preparing and sanctifying the vessels which Ahaz had cast away," and by bringing 
these " before the altar of the Lord." It is a great thing to know what are the limits 
beyond which it is not right or wise for us to go. But it is a still greater thing to have 
so deep an interest in our work and so fervent a love for our Lord that we are not to be 

' confined to any limits by literal instructions ; that we gladly and eagerly go beyond 
these, if we can only render a larger and fuller service to our Master and to his cause. 

V. Do ouB WORK THOROuanLY AND SPEEDILY. " They sanctified the house of the 
Lord in eight days" (ver. 17). "We have cleansed all the house of the Lord, . . . 
with all the vessels thereof" (ver. 18). To do oM that is required, leaving nothing 
undone because it is trivial or because it is not likely to be observed ; and to do all 
without delay, losing no time, accomplishing everything within the days expected of 
us ; — this is the way to do Ghristicm work, to do our duty as disciples of Jesus Christ. , 

VI. Have thb day or account in view. " They went in to Hezekiah the king," 
etc. (ver. 18). We may not be accountable to any human master; but to a Divine 
One we are (Rom. liv. 12 ; 2 Cor. v. 10). Then " every work " will be " brought 
into judgment." Let us therefore labour, that we may then be " accepted of him." — C. 

Vers. 20 — 24. — Confession, propitiation, consecration. By the sacrifices now 
offered to Jehovah, by the sin offerings and the burnt offerings, the king and the represen- 
tatives of the people laying their hands upon the heads of the slain animals (ver. 23), 
three distinct sentiments were expressed, three several spiritual states were passed 
through — confession of sin, atonement offered for sin, consecration of themselves to the 
service of God. Here was made the most public and solemn acknowledgment that 
could be made of the guilt which the nation had incurred by its apostasy ; here wai 
an appeal made to the mercy of God in his appointed way of sacrificing the goats and 
of laying the band upon their heads ; and here was, through the burnt offerings, a 
formal and deliberate dedication of themselves to Jehovah for the future. These three 
experiences are the radical and essential experiences through which penitent and godlj 
man must always pass. 



OH. XXIX. 1—36.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLEa 853 

I. CoHFBBSioN. Not always, not often national, m on this occasion (text). Not 
always, not often now, admission of idolatrous reaction. But always confession of tin — 
«f departure from God, of the neglect of his holy will, of a rebellious exalting of our 
will against his, of unlikeness to him in the spirit we have been breathing and in the 
principles on which we have been acting, of doing or saying or being that which has 
grieved his Holy Spirit. And our confession of sin is likely to be heard and accepted, 
not because it is couched in the most approved language, but because it is the most 
simple and honest utterance of our hearts. 

II. Fbofitiation. Not that God asks now of us a sacrifice for sin. There has been 
" one sacrifice [offered] for sins for ever." He is " the Propitiation for the sins of the 
whole world." But we come to plead that one Sacrifice as offered for mi/r sins ; we come 
to God to pray that that one Propitiation may be accepted on our behalf. We come to 
" lay our hand on that dear head " of Christ, the Lamb of God. We ask that the abound" 
ing and abiding mercy of God may, for his sake, cover our guilt and rest upon our soul. 
And thus, by a living faith, we apply and appropriate to ourselves " the common salva- 
tion "—that " righteousness which is through the faith of Christ." Thus is our sin 
" borne away " into the land of utter forgetfulness, and we ourselves are " bronght nigh 
by the blood of Christ." 

III. CoNSEOBATioN. The consumption of the entire animal in the bnmt offering 
symbolized the entire consecration of the offerer to the Lord. This was the significance 
of those offerings now presented (ver. 24). Hezekiah and his people now offered them- 
selves anew unto the Lord God of their fathers. Their sin being purged, themselves 
having been forgiven and accepted, they dedicated themselves to God for the coming 
time. With us : 1. Consecration attends our entrance upon the Divine life ; when we 
seek the mercy of God in Christ Jesus, we " yield ourselves unto God as those alive from 
the dead." 2. Consecration is a spiritual act continually renewed. It should be an 
•ct in which we offer to our Divine Bedeemer our whole selves ; (1) our entire nature 
(body and spirit) ; (2) our whole life, thenceforwards — at all times, in every sphere, 
under all conditions. — 0. 

Vers. 26 — 86. — The public worship of Ood. The record of the latter part of the pro- 
ceedings on this solemn occasion at Jerusalem may well suggest to us some aspects of 
public worship at all times. 

I. Antioipativb berviob. David, who lived several generations before, had his 
hand in that good work. The Levites played with " the instruments of David King of 
Israel" (ver. 27); and they "sang praise with the words of David and of Asaph" (ver. 
30). A very great and admirable service have those men rendered to Christian worship 
who have written hymns that are simg in all the Churches. In the words which they 
have given us, sweet and strong, our hearts ascend to God in adoration, are poured 
forth in praise, are humbled in confession, renew their vows in glad self-surrender. 
Few men have rendered their race a truer or greater service than those who have thus 
contributed to the worship of many generations. 

II. The bbbviob of baored bono. "And the singers sang, and the trumpeters 
sounded." This part was rendered by the Levites, and no doubt it did much to brighten 
the engagements of that hallowed time. " The service of song in the house of the Lord " 
constitutes a veryimportant part of public worship, for two reasons. 1. Therein and 
thereby all the spiritual attitudes and actions which become us in the near presence 
of God are expressed — reverence, aspiration, penitence, submission, gratitude, etc. 2. 
Therein all the worshippers can join. It would not have been possible for all those 
who were in the temple to take audible part in the music and song without discord and 
confusion. But it is possible, and in every way desirable and delightful, for every 
voice among us (furnished, as we are, with all appliances) to bring its note of praise to 
the worship of the Lord. And thus there is ensured or there is facilitated-^ 

m. Common pabticipatiok. In this sacred service, on this great occasion, every one 
took his part and had his share. " All the congregation worshipped " (ver. 28). " The 
king and all that were present with him bowed themselves, and worshipped " (ver. 29), 
It is best when all the people can take an audible part in public worship, as in the 
service of song. They can then and thus more readily enter into the spirit of it. But 
when this may not be, it is open to every one to take an appreciative and appreciated 

n. CHBONIOLSS. 2 A. 



354 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [cu. xxix. 1—36, 

part by an unbroken, spiritual sympathy with all that is said and done ; by an active, 
intelligent acquiescence, signified by the bowed head or by the fiual "Amen" when 
the ministering voice is silent. The unuttered sympathy of all reverent, earnest 
worshippers is a common participation, which, we may make quite sure, is observed 
and honoured in heaven. 

IV. The 8EBV10E of contribution. " And the congregation brought In sacrifices 
and thank offerings ; and as many as were of a free heart burnt ofi^erings " (ver. 31). The 
people gave of their own possessions freely as an offering to the Lord. This service of 
contribution should always be regarded as an integral part of Divine worship. It 
should be rendered as reverently as an act of prayer or praise. 1. It is — or it should 
be, as it certainly may be^ — an offering that comes from the heart as well as from the 
hand. 2. It is an eminently appropriate service ; for what can be more fitting than 
that, when and where we are recognizing the fulness and greatness of God's gift to us, 
we should then and there offer him our humble, grateful gifts in response ? 3. It is 
acceptable to the Lord whom we serve (see Mark lii. 41 — 44 ; 1 Cor. xvi. 2). 

V. Eevebent jot. " And they sang prtuses with gladness " (ver. 30) ; " And 
Hezekiah rejoiced, and aU the people " (ver. 36). What was more fitted to fill their 
hearts with overflowing joy than the feeling that they, as a nation, had returned unto 
the Lord, and had renewed their covenant with him ; that he had accepted them ; that 
" his anger was turned away ; " that they might now look forward to a time when they 
would dwell in the light of his counteuance and walk in his loving favour? It was an 
hour for the exuberance of the people's heart, from the heart of the king to that of the 
humblest citizen of Judah. And there is no time when joy, reverent joy, is more 
becoming to ourselves than when we are worshipping in the sanctuary of Christ. There 
we are conscious of our reconcilation to our heavenly Father, in him who is our Divine 
Saviour ; there we feel the nearness of our glorious Redeemer who is " present in the 
midst of us ; " there we pour forth our gratitude and love, and there we renew our 
happy bonds of holy service unto " him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in 
his own blood ; " there we realize our substantial and abiding union with all his people, 
our fellow-citizens in the kingdom and fellow-workers in the vineyard of Christ ; and 
there we anticipate the purer joys and the nobler service of the heavenly land. Sacred 
joy is the true key-note of the strain when we meet in the sanctuary and engage in the 
worship of Christ. — 0. 

Vers. 1, 2. — The accession of Hezekiah. L His persok. 1. ITia name. Hezekiah, 
"The might of Jjshovah;" Hizkiyah (2 Kings xviii. 1); Hiskiyaliu (ver. 1; Isa. 
zx^vi. 1 ; xxxvii. 1, 3) ; with which last correspunds Hazakijau, or TIazakiau, of the 
Assyrian inscriptions. 2. His parentage. His father Ahaz (ch. xxviii. 27), to whom 
while yet a lad he must have been born (see homily on ch. xxviii. 1 — 27) ; his mother 
Abijah, " Father of Jehovah " — in shortened form, Abi (2 Kings xviii. 2), the daughter 
of Zecbariah, "a citizen of Jerasalem" (Josephus), perhaps the son of Jeberechiali, a 
contemporary of Ahaz (Isa. viiL 2), " not improbably the &vourite prophet of Uzziah " 
(Stanley). 

II. His beion. 1. Its commencement. (1) When he was twenty-five years old; 
therefore when, having fully attained to manhood, he was old enough to have learnt 
something of the ruinous results of his father's career, and of the utter folly as well as 
wickedness of idolatry. (2) " In the third year of Hoshea, the son of Elah, King of 
Israel " (2 Kings xviii. 1), six years before the carrying away of Israel captive by 
Shalmaneser, the King of Assyria (2 Kings xviii. 10). (3) When Judah as a kingdom 
had been reduced to a low ebb by the Syro-Ephraimitish war, with the invasions of 
the Edomites and Philistines, not to speak of the impoverishment of the royal exchequer 
by the tributes paid to Tiglath-Pileser (ch. xxviii. 5, 6, 8, 17, 21). " Take out of the 
two tribes of Judah and Benjamin one hundred and twenty thousand whom Pekah, 
the King of Israel, slew in one day ; take out two hundred thousand that were carried 
away captive to Samaria" (these, however, returned); "take out those that were trans- 
ported into the bondage of the Edomites, and those that were subdued in the south parts 
by the Philistines ; alas ! what a handful was lelt to the King of Judah, scarce worth the 
name of a dominion I " (Bishop Hall). 2. Its close. After twenty-nine years — upwards 
of » quarter of a century ; a long time for a thoughtful sovereign to bear the responsi- 



OH. XXIX. 1—36.] THi! SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 855 

bilities of a crown, ven had the period been peaceful, much more when it was full of 
trouble and anxiety, both on account of the social and relii^ious degeneracy of IjIs own 
people, and the threatenings and dangers arising from foreign foes. It was hardly 
wonderfnl that Hezekiah's health should have broken down under the intense strain 
to which it was subjected. 3. Iti contents. These may be gathered trom 2 Kings 
(xviii. — XX.), 2 Chronicles (xxix. — xxxii.), and Isaiah (xxxvi. — xxxix.). The principal 
events were : (1) The reformation of religion, commenced in the first (ecclesiastical) 
month of the &st year of his reign, by opening and purifying the temple (ch. xxix. 
3 — 36), and concluded in the second month by the celebratiun of a Passover (ch. xxx. 
1), and the demolition of heathen altars in Jerusalem (ch. xxx. 13) and throughout 
the land (ch. xxxi. 1). To this the king was most likely muved by the impressions 
m-'de upon his mind by the fierce denunciations of Micah, who had already during the 
two previous reigns been testifying against the moral and spiritual corruption of the 
people (Micah i. — iii.). " The outward reformation was doubtless the expression of an 
inward change also" (Stanley). (2) The breaking of the yoke of Assyria and the 
assertion of the nation's independence (2 Kings xviii. 7), with the conducting of a 
successful campaign against the Phili.tines (2 Kings xviii. 8), some time before the 
fourth year of his reign (2 Kings xv ai. 9), clearly before the capture of Samaria by 
the King of Assyria (2 Kings xviii. 10). As the monuments show that the king who 
commenced the siege of Samaria was Shalmaneser, and the king who finished it was 
his son Sargon (Schrader, ' Keilinschrifien,' p. 271), it is more than likely that Hez^- 
kiah was moved to revolt by the death of Shalmaneser, b.o. 722. (3) The sickness oi 
Hezekiah in his fourteenth year, with the gracious prolongation of his life for tifti en 
more years (ch. xxxii. 24 — 26 ; 2 Kings xx. 1 — 11 ; Isa. xxxviii. 1 — 22). (4) The 
imprudent reception of Merodach-Baladan's ambassadors, who had been sent ostensibly 
to congratulate Hezekiah on his recovery, but really to obtain bis assistance against 
Sargon of Assyria (ch. xxxii. 31 ; 2 Kings xx. 12 ; Isa. xxxix. 1). (5) The conquest 
of Judah and the capture of Jerusalem by Sargon, in Hezekiah's fourteenth year, not 
mentioned by the Chronicler or the author of the Kings, but described by Isaiah 

g\., xi.), who represents an Assyrian monarch as first conquering Gaino, Carchemish, 
amatb, Arphad, Damascus, and Samaria, and then advancing towards Jerusalem " by 
the usual high-road from the north-east, and halting at Nob, only an hour's journey 
distant from Jerusalem, in which also (cf. ch. xxii.) the prophet presents the picti^e 
of a siege which has already lasted some time, and which can only be explained by 
Sargon " (Sayce, ' Fresh Light,' etc., p. 139). This conquest of Judah, the monuments 
show, was carried out in connection with Sargon's expedition against Ashdod, which 
he entrusted to his tartan, or commander (Isa. xx. 1), while he himself "overran the 
' widespreading land of Judah,' and captured its capital" (Sayce, 'Fresh Light,' etc., 
p. 137 ; cf. G. Smith's ' Assyrian Discoveries,' pp. 288 — 293). -(6) The fortification 
of Jerusalem in anticipatiun of the above attack upon his capital, not by Sennacherib 
(ch. xxxiL 1 — 8), but by Sargon. (7) The invasion of Judah by Sennacherib, not in 
Hezekiah's fourteenth (2 Kings xviii. 13—16), but in his twenty-fourth year, since, 
according to the monuments, Sargon was murdered in B.C. 705, while Sennacherib's 
campaign against Syria and the West diil not bet;in till b.o. 701. (8) The submission 
of Hezekiah to Sennacherib at Lachish (2 Kings xviii. 14 — 16). (9) The siege of 
Jerusalem by Sennacherib's captains, Tartan, Kabshakeh, and Rabsaris (ch. xxxii. 9 — 
22 ; 2 Kings xviii. 17 — xix. 36 ; Isa. xxxvi. 2 — xxxviL 37). (10) The reception of a 
blasphemous letter from Sennacherib, with the prayer to which it led (ch. xxxii. 20; 
2 Kmgs xix. 8 — 34; Isa. xxxvii. 8 — 35). (11) The destruction of Sennacherib's army 
(ch. xxxii. 21 ; 2 Kings xix. 35 ; Isa. xxxvii. 36). (12) The extension of Hezekiah's 
fame in consequence of this deliverance (ch. xxxiL 23). 

III. His character. 1. Oood. " He did that which was right in the sight of the 
Lord, according to all that David his father had done" (ver. 2). With this agrees the 
testimony of 2 Kings (xviii. 5, 6), that his piety (1) sprang from the right root — faith : 
" he trusted in the Lord God of Israel ; " (2) evinced the right quality — constancy : " [ie 
clave to the Lord, and departed not from following him ; " and (3) produced the right 
fruit— obedience : "he kept the commandments which the Lord commanded Muses." 
The causes which led to Hezekiah's conversion were doubtless manifold : (1) Divine 
grace, without which no change of heart or life can be permanently good (John iii. 7 • 



356 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xm. 1—86. 

I Cor. XV. 10) ; (2) prophetic instruction, given by Isaiah (xxxvii. 2), Micah, Jeremiah 
(xxvL 18, 19), and Zechariah, bis maternal grandfather — no lasting transformation 
being effected on the mind or character except through the medium of the truth (Pa. 
xix. 7 ; cxix. 9 ; Micah ii. 7 ; John xv. 3) ; and (8) personal observation of the sinful- 
DesB and ruinous consequences of idolatry. 2. Energetic Sufficiently apparent from 
the abovB-recited record of bis life. Besides being a pious sovereign, he was a military 
commander of pronounced skill and undaunted courage (ch. xxxii. 3 — 8), a wise and 
judicious civil administrator (ch. xxxii. 27 — 30), a zealous and unwearied religious 
reformer (ch. xxix. — ^xxxi.), a student and patron of letters (Prov. xxv. 1), an anti- 
quarian and a poet (ch. xxxii. 27 ; 2 Kings xxiii. 12 ; Isa. xxxviii. 9 — ^20). In short, 
Hezekiah was " one of the most splendid princes that ever adorned the throne of David, 
and whose reign of nine and twenty years exhibits an almost unclouded picture of per- 
sistent struggles against the most embarrassed and diSicult circumstances, crowned 
with elevating victories " (Ewald, • History of Israel,' iv. 172). 

Learn : 1. That Divine grace is stronger than hereditary corruption. 2. That Ood 
can raise up great men when such are demanded by the times. 3. That the hidden 
toot of all true nobility in man ia faith in God, and steadfast adherence to truth and 
right— W. 

Vers. 8 — 19. — The pwriflcation of (he temple. I. The OATHEBisa of the fbiests 
AND Leviteb. (Yer. 4.) 1. When t In the first year of the king's reign, in the 
first month (vers. 3, 17), but whether of that reign (Caspari) or of the ecclesiastical 
year (Bertheau, Keil, Jamieson, Oehler in Herzog) cannot be determined. In either 
case it was not long after his accession. The acts evinced (1) piety, the king giving 
his first thoughts to religion (Matt. vi. 33) ; and (2) prudence, since a good work never 
can be too soon begun, and reformations may be wrought at the beginning of a reign 
that cannot be so easily effected afterwards. " As the spring-time of nature or of the 
year is the most suitable season for purging natural bodies, so is the spring-time of 
a reign the btst time for purging the body politic " (Bacon). 2. Where t In " the 
broad place on the east;" either the inner court of the temple (Bertheau), or the open 
space in front of the temple towards the east (Keil), which will depend upon whether 
the doors of the temple had been opened prior to the assembling of the priests. 3. 
Why } To invite their co-operation in the work of cleansing the sanctuary Ahaz had 
shut up (ch. xxviii. 24), and of re-establishing the worship Ahaz had abolished. For 
these purposes and as a preliminary thereto, according to one view, the king had 
already opened the temple doors ; according to another, he only did so when the work 
of cleansing commenced. 

II. The words addbessed to them by the kino. (Vers. 5 — ^11.) Hezekiah 
regarding them without distinction as Levitea — not speaking to the Levites as dis- 
tinguished from the priests, as if these were not present, though they certainly (ver. 
84) " hung back from the revolution which swept away the neglect which the head of 
their order, Urijah, must in some measure have countenanced " (Stanley, ' Lectures on 
the Jewish Church,' vol. ii. p. 465), and, exhorting them with fatherly affection (ver. 
11), set before them three things. 1. The work which required to he done. (1) The 
sanctiflcation of themselves, without which they could not enter on such service as 
that to which he was about to invite them (Exod. xix. 10 — 12 ; Lev. xi. 44). This 
sanctiflcation was doubtless carried out formally by the offering of sacrifice, by washing 
and putting on clean garments, and perhaps by anointing with oil (Lev. viii. 1 — T, 30); 
inwardly by acts of spiritual heart devotion and dedication to the work about to be 
performed, and to him whose work it was. (2) The sanctification of the house of the 
Lord ; or, the carrying forth of the filthiness that had accumulated therein since the 
day when its doors were closed, the burnishing of all the utensils that had been left to 
rust through disuse, and the replacing of all the sacred vessels which had been cast 
away. Without this the true national Jehovah-worship could not be reinstituted. 
In this everything must proceed according to the pattern prescribed by the Law. (3) 
The two things symbolized what is needful to constitute true worship under the better 
dispensation of the gospel — in the worshipper, faith in the atoning sacrifice of Christ, 
renewal of heart and mind in the laver of regeneration, pergonal separation from all 
known sin; in the worship, purity, beauty, completeness. 2. Tht reasom why it 



CH. sxix. 1-36.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES 35T 

needed to he done. (1) Because, through the wickedness of tlieir fathers in forsaking 
God, the temple had fallen into disrepair ; its doors had been closed, its lamps put out, 
its altars left without offerings (vers. 6, 7). What their fathers then had done it 
became them to undo. Unless they would be sharers in their fathers' guilt, they must 
separate themselves from their fathers' sin. Their fathers' trespass would not condemn 
them if they disowned it by acting diflferently. (2) Because on account of this wicked- 
ness the wraih of God had fallen upon the nation, "upon Judah and Jerusalem," upon 
the inhabitants of the cities and of the metropolis ; their troops had been slaughtered 
in the field (ch. xxviii. 6), their sons and wives and daughters carried into captivity 
(ch. xxviii, 5, 8), their country delivered to trouble, to astonishment, to hissing. (3) 
Because it was the king's intention, in restoring the ancient worship of Jehovah, to 
renew the covenant between himself with his people and Jehovah (ver. 10), as had 
formerly been done by Joash and hia subjects (ch. xxiii. 16), and earlier by Asa and 
his warriors (ch. xv. 12) — being moved to this by the consideration that not otherwise 
cuuld they escape the fierce wrath their national apostasy had kindled against them. 
3. The argument why they should do the work. The Lord had selected them to be his 
temple ministers — the Levites and priests together to stand before him and serve 
him, the priests to bum incense upon his altar. (N.B. — This is an indirect proof that 
" Levites " in ver. 5 includes the " priests.") Hence (1) faithfulness should lead them 
to do the work specially assigned them, and (2) honour impel them, seeing Jehovah 
had chosen them, rather than others, to be his ministers. 

III. Thb response given by the pbiests and Levites to the kinp. (Vers- 
12 — 16.) 1. 2%e absent members of the order were collected. Fourteen Levites had 
heard the king's speech — two from each of the great families of Kohath, Gershon, and 
Merari; two of the sons of Elizaphan, the son of Uzziel, the son of Kohath (Bxod. vi. 
18), and in Moses' time the head of the family of Kohath (Numb. iii. 30) ; two of the 
sons of Asaph, who belonged to the family of Gershon ; and two of the sons of Heman, 
who again proceeded from the family of Kohath ; and two of the sons of Jeduthun, an 
offshoot from the family of Merari (on these names see Exposition). Responding with 
alacrity and gladness to the king's summons, they went forth and mustered the whole 
body of their brethren in Jerusalem. The work to which they had been called should 
be done by a united body, all hands and one heart — a good model for the Christian 
Church. 2. The duty ^personal sanctification was scrupulously attended to. God's 
work must be done in God's way ; always with fear ami trembling, never with irreverent 
presumption; always in the beauty of holiness, never in the uncleanness of sin. 3. 
2%« work was divided between the Levites and the priests. To each was assigned that 
for which he was qualified and had been appointed; the cleansing of the temple 
proper to the priests, since these alone could enter the holy place; the removal of that 
which the priests brought from the interior of the sanctuary into the porch to the 
Levites, who bore it thence to the brook Kidron, which flowed through the valley of 
Jehoshaphat, on the east of the temple hill. So should all in the Christian work be 
content to do the work to which they are called, and for which they are qualified. As 
all have not the same gifts, so all are not intended for tlie same spheres of Christian 
activity. 4. 2%e work was carried on until it was completed. It began with the 
purification of the buildings exterior to the temple, which occupied eight days. In 
eight days more they had finished the temple proper, both the porcli and the sanctuary. 
On tlie sixteenth day they made an end. How much good work is begun by Christian 
people without being ended! How many become weary in well-doing before they 
have half completed what they have put their hands to ! 5. A report of the work done 
was carried to the king. The whole house of the Lord had been cleansed, all its furni- 
ture and utensils purified, the vessels found wanting replaced. 

Learn : 1. That God can be worshipped only in the beauty of holiness. 2. That as 
Gkid calls none of his servants to uncleanness, he can be served only by the clean. 3. 
That God's house — whether heart or church — should be studiously guarded against 
defilement. 4. That Gud's people, like God himself, should be unwearied in doing good. 
5. That God's servants must one day render to him an account of their works. — W. 

Vers. 20 — 36. — The re-dedication of the temple. 1. The time of the cebemoht. 
Early on the following morning. Uozcliiah lost not a moment in entering upon th« 



858 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xxix. 1— 38, 

good work his heart contemplated (ver. 10), rising up with next day's dawn, gathering 
the rulers of the city, and proceeding with them to the house of the Lord. In this ha 
nctcd in accordance with Jehovah's instructions to Moses at Sinai (Bxod. xxxiv. 2) ; 
with the example of Abraham (Gren. xxii. 2), Jacob (Gen. xxviii. 18), Moses (Bxod, 
xxiv. 4),' Joshua (iiL 1), Job (i. 5), and other good men who selected the morning 
hours for executing good resolutions, and especially for acts of devotion; with the 
practice of God himself, who had been ever forward in blessing his people by sending 
to them his messengers the prophets (ch. xxxvi. 15 ; Jer. vii. 13, 25 ; xxv. 3, 4). 
Perhaps Hezekiah also felt that if wicked men rose up with the dawn and even " pre- 
vented " the daylight in order to prosecute their nefarious works (Job xxiv. 14), yea, 
that his own subjects bad risen up early to corrupt themselves (Zeph. iii. 7), much 
mure ought he to bestir himself and awake up early to begin the splendid work of 
temple-dedication on which he had resolved. 

II. The parties to the obebmont. 1. The king himself. Hezekiah, as the vice- 
gerent of Jehovah and head of Jehovah's people, led the way. This the sort of king- 
ship after which sovereigns should aspire — kingship in works of faith and labours of 
love. 2. The princes of the city — again, in their individual capacities and in their 
lepresentative characters — joined in the ceremonial. So had they done at Sinai (Exod. 
xxiv. 11), and in the wilderness (Numb. xxi. 18) ; in the days of Solomon (ch. v. 2), 
and in those of Jehoiada (ch. xxiii. 20). Happy is that nation whose nobility are ever 
foremost in noble deeds ! 3. The priests and the Levites were present to do their 
respective offices, to sacrifice upon the altars of Jehovah, and to play upon the instru- 
ments of David ; two necessary parts in all Old Testament worship — the former to 
make atonement, the latter to express that which should ever be its fruit (Rom. v. 11). 
4. The people, or a portion of them, were there as assenting parties to the transaction. 

III. The steps in the ceremony. 1. The presentation, of sacrifice, (1) Burnt 
offerings. Seven bullocks, seven rams, and seven lambs were slain in succession upon 
the altar in the fore court, the blood of the slain victims being caught up by the priests 
in a basin and sprinkled on the altar, while their carcases were retained to be consumed 
by fire upon the altar after all the other victims had been slain. (2) Sin offerings. 
Seven he-goats were next presented before the king and the congregation, the priests' 
hands laid upon them — if not with formal confession of sin, at least symbolizing its 
transference to the animals — their lives taken, and their blood sprinkled by the priests 
upon the altar. This done, the carcases of the burnt offerings were consumed by fire. 
2. The accompaniment of music. Hezekiah reinstituted the Levitical service of music, 
according to the Divine ordinance communicated through David, Gad, and Nathan 
(1 Chron. xxiii. 6) ; and on this particular occasion " he set the Levites in the house 
of the Lord with cymbals, with psalteries, and with harps;" and "the priests with the 
trumpets " (1 Chron. xv. 16, 24). When the burnt offering began, i.e. either when the 
■laying of the victims commenced, or when the carcases were lifted to the altar to be 
consumed, the temple courts rang with the strains of instrumental and vocal musio 
—"the singers sang, and the trumpeters sounded" — until the offering was finished, 
until the last ember died upon the altar, and the last wreath of smoke vanished in 
the air. Meanwhile the congregation, standing round in the court as spectators, 
•* worshipped." 

IV. The meaning op the obbbmony. 1. Confession of sin. This idea was 
generally comprehended in the presentation of sin offerings, and particularly set forth 
In the imposition of the ofBciating priest's hands upon the victim's head. The sin 
thus confessed was the sin of the nation as represented by its royal house, its sanctuary, 
and its people. All of these, the occupants of the throne and the members of the 
royal family, the ministers of the sanctuary, the priestly order and the Levitical alike, 
the common people of the realm, both in Israel and in Judah, had been guilty of 
trespiss and apostasy. 2. Propitiation for guilt. The blood of the sin offering, when 
poured out before and sprinkled on the horus of the altar — in particular when done in 
the holy of holies — was desiuned to make atonement for the people's sins, to cover up 
from the eyes of a holy God the wickedness of which they had been guilty, and so 
to reconcile them to God (Lev, vi. 30). 3. Expression of self-surrender. This was 
Bymbolized by the burning of the carcases of both the sin and the burnt offerings. As 
the bodies of the animals whose blood had been brought within the sanctuary for 



OH. XXI3. 1— 36.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, 859 

reconciliation were all devoted to Heaven or given up as food to Jehovah, so the nation 
whose guilt had been put away by that same blood of atonement surrendered itself to 
Jehovah to be consumed by the Are of a new zeal for his glory. 4. VUeranee of 
thanksgiving. This the sigaiScauce of the musical accompaniment to the sacrificial 
ritual. It gave an outlet to the gratitude and joy of the reconciled and pardoned 
worshipper. 

V. The olobb or the obeemont. 1. A national act of worship. " The king and 
all that were present with him bowed themselves, and worshipped " (ver. 29). It was 
worship of the right sort: (1) unanimous — sovereign and subjects were of one mind; 
(2) humble — they bowed themselves ; (3) joyous — they sang praises to the Lord, the 
Levites leading, in the words of David and Asaph. 2. A royal word of invitation. 
" HezeUiah answered and said " (ver. 31) — declaring the fact of their consecration to 
Jehovah, and desiring them to show their acquiescence in the same by personal acts of 
worship and sacrifice — " Come near, and bring sacrifices and thnnk offerings unto the 
Lord." Practice the best vindication of profession (Jas. ii. 14) ; obedience the only 
true justification of faith (Bom. xvi. 19); the sacrifice of one's wealth the most 
reliable index that une has consecrated his heart. 3. A popular outburst of liberality. 
" The congregation brought in sacrifices and thank offerings." (1) Promptly, on the 
spot, without delay, as if they had been only waiting for such an invitaiiun. It is 
well to be prepared for giving before the opportunity of giving comes. Preparation 
makes giving easy (1 Cor. xvi. 2). (2) Freely; "as many as were of a willing heart 
brought burnt offerings." Considering the number of these latter, the people generally 
must have been well disposed towards the movement. Voluntariness indispensable to 
all acceptable religious giving (2 Cor. viii. 12). (3) Largely: "the number of the 
burnt offerings was seventy bullocks, a hundred rams, and two hundred lambs," while 
" the consecrated things," or other offerings, " were six hundred oxen and three thou- 
sand sheep." Indeed, so abundant were the sacrificial victims that the few priests who 
had taken part in the ceremonial were unable to cope with the task of preparing them 
for the altar, and had to call in the assistance of the Levites until more priests were 
sanctified. Extraordinary emergencies in Church as in state call for and allow extra- 
ordinary measures. Where the services of unordained pastors and teachers cannot ba 
obtained, those of unordained may be lawfully employed. Cf. the liberality exemplified 
by the Israelites at the erection of the tabernacle (Exod. xxxv. 21 — ^29 ; Numb. viL 
1—89 ; xxxi. 48—54) and the temple (1 Chron. xxix. 6—9, 16, 17). 

Lessons. 1. Union is strength, in religion as in other things. 2. The inspiration 
of all acts connected with religion should be the glory of God. 3. In religion all things 
are of God, the preparation of the heart no less thau the direction of the hand. — W. 

Ver. 31. — The revival of religion in Church or state. I. Pbeparatobt steps. In 
order to secure such an awakening of religious life as took place in Judah under Heze- 
kiah, three things are indispensable. 1. Confession of sin. " Our fathers have tres- 
passed," etc. (ver. 6). As all religion begins with saying, "Father, I have sinned" 
(Luke XV. 18), so the first symptoms of reviving life in souls that have been apathetic 
is acknowledgment of their trespass (Ps. li. 3). 2. Cleansing of the sanctuary. "We 
have cleansed all the house of the Lord " (ver. 18). As the visible Church is a temple 
of the Lord (Ps. cxxxii. 14; Matt, xviii. 20 ; Eph. ii. 21, 22 ; 1 Tim. iii. 15 ; Heb. iii 
6), this may symbolize the removing from its doctrine, worship, and practice of every- 
thing that is contrary to the mind and will of God as revealed in the Scriptures ; and 
again, as the individual heart is a habitation of the living God (1 Cor. vi. 19), it may 
suggest the duty of purging it from every known sin (2 Cor. vii. 1). 3. Eenewai of 
the covenant. " Now it is in mine heart to make a covenant with the Ldrd God of 
Israel" (ver. 10); and the same must be done by all, whether communities or indi- 
viduals, who would experience a quickening in their religious life. Unnecessary now, 
as in the days of Hezekiah, to offer slain victims and make propitiation for sin, that 
having been done once for all by Jesus Christ (Heb. ix. 11 — 14), it is still indis- 
pensable to appropriate the reconciliation and make the self-surrender to which Heze- 
kiah's offerings pointed. 

II. Certain eesults. A revived condition of the religious life of either Church « 
individual will discover itself in three thingsj as it did with Hezekiah and his people^ 



860 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxx. 1—27. 



1. 8elf-consecriiti(m. Already expressed in the act of covenant-making, this will reveal 
Itself in the life that proceeds therefrom. Christian individuals in the Church, recog- 
nizing themselves to be not their own, hut hought with a price, will lay themselves 
upon the altar as a willing sacritice (Rom. xii. 1). 2. Gladness. " And all the congre- 
gation worshipped, and the singers sang," etc. (ver. 28). Joy an invariable accom- 
paniment of a revived condition of religion in the soul or in the Church (Ps. cxlix. 2, 5 ; 
Isa. Ixv. 14, 18; Hab. iii. 18; Eph. v. 18 ; 1 John i. 4). 3. Liberality. "And the 
congregation brought in sacrifices," etc. (ver. 31). Generosity in giving almost neces- 
sarily follows on a heightened experience of Divine grace. " Freely ye have received, 
freely give." — W. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XXX. 



ma chapter contains the acooant of 
Hezekiah's arrangements after the restora- 
tion for the otiservanoe of the Passover — 
arrangements more than ordinarily interest- 
ing to notice in respect of, fint, the unusual 
time appointed for the celebration ; and, 
Kcond, the determined and brave attempt of 
the good king to win again to the worship 
of Jerusalem (though, as was no doubt 
anticipated, it subjected his royal proffers 
to scorn, ver. 10) the separated people of 
" all Israel " (vers. 1—12) ; and further, the 
celebration itself, the happy omen (ver. 14) 
with which it opened, its duration; and 
certain several other incidents attending it 
(vers. 13—27). 

Yer. 1. — HezeMah sent . . . wrote letters 
also to Ephraim and Uanasseh. Some have 
sought to bring into the appearance of har- 
mony the two first clauses of this verse by 
supposing that the former clause purports 
to say that Hezekiah sent messengers to all 
Israel and Judah, and in particular letters 
in addition to Ephraim and Manasseh, the 
chief tribes of the northern kingdom and 
the Joseph tribes. Vers, 6 and 10, however, 
seem to dispose effectually of this offer of 
explanation; while anotiier explanation, 
that the names of the two tribes are simply 
to be taken as equivalent to "all Israel," 
■eems true, though, in fact, it may be to 
advance us no way at all. We should 
prefer in the difficulty, unimportant though 
it is, yet one facmg us, rather to assume that 
the verse wishes to say that Hezekiah teni 
(<•«. sent messengers, which prove to be the 
runners, rendered the " posts ") to all Israel 
and Judah, and to Epliraim, JIanasseh, and 
the rest of their allied tribes by implication, 
but not to Judah wrote letters also which 
were carried by the posts Qor runners). It 
ia true that ver. 6 may negative even this 
eonjecture for getting over the difficulty, 
but not necessarily so, for it only says that 



the posts went throughout Israel and Jndah 
with the letters, which they may be sup- 
posed to have dropped only to some, not to all, 
and those some Israel, or Ephraim, Manasseh, 
and brethren. There will have been to hand 
other, the usual methods of communication 
with Judah, from Jerusalem its metropolis, 
and from its king. The thing different ftom 
"letters" that was circulated may have 
been just the "proclamation" of ver. 5. 
It has been suggested that the now King of 
Israel, Hoshea, was very probably a captive 
of Assyria at this exact time (2 Kuiga 
xvii. 4). 

Ver. 2. — This and the following verse are ^ 
well explained by Numb. iz. 6 — 13, where 
the particular instance of the "defilement 
by a dead body " simply exemplified other 
legitimate instances of defilement or non- 
sanctification (cb. xxix. 5, 15, 34), and where 
absence on a journey similarly exemplified 
other unavoidable absence. 

Ver. 3. — At that time. The words seem 
like a reminiscence of the "at that day," 
twice occurring in ver. 6 of Numb. ix. But 
anyway the meaning is plain "at the ap- 
pointed season." 

Ver. 4. — This verse betokens the careful 
consideration on the part of " king, princes, 
and all tlie congregation," that had been 
given to the distinct question, whether the 
exact present circumstances legitimately 
fell under the description of Numb. ix. 6 — 
13; and the issue was that they decided 
that they did, they « ruled the thing right " 
(njjn nB''';i). 

Ver. 5. — Of a long time. Though the idea 
expressed in this rendering must, under any 
circumstances, attach to tliis passage, yet it 
can scarcely be understood to be given in the 
one Hebrew word we have here (a^^) ; out 
of nearly a hundred and fifty ocourrenoei 
of tlie word, and often with its present pre- 
position, tbis is the solitary occasion of ita 
being turned into a mark of time. The 
translation should read, for they liad not 
kept it in multitude, i.e. in proper multi- 
tudes, and in the multitude of an undivided 
and holy kingdom. The force of the refei- 



OH. ixx. 1— 27.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



361 



enoe lies in the fact just stated, that Heze- 
kiali, ignoring all the worse precedents of 
now many generations, and ignoring the 
iniquity of the duality of the kingdom, man- 
fully caused his writ to run from south to 
north unchecked I As it was written; i.e. 
in the book of the Law of Moses. So runs 
the full and frequent and honoured phrase : 
nB-D-min hbd? ainjs (2 Kings xiv. 6; 1 
Kings it 8; Josh. iii. 84 ; ch. xxxt. 26, etc.). 

Ver. 6. — So the posts (see note on ver. 1). 
The remnant of you . . . escaped ... of 
Assyria. Hezckiah had, no doubt, already 
made his account with the fact that the 
injured and ciuslied state of the northern 
kingdom might be of salutary omen for the 
attempt on his part to bring tbem to a sense 
of their past sins, specially perhaps of omis- 
sion. Of the calamities of Israel, and their 
captivity in large part, and in the rest sub- 
jection by tribute to Assyria, there is dear 
testimony in 2 Kings xr. 29 ; xvii. 1 — 6. 

Ver. 7. — A strange and significant snatch 
of corroborating history is to be found in 
1 Chron. v. 23—26. 

Ver. 8. — Be ye not stiff-neoked (see Dent. 
16, 17). Yield yourselves; literally, give 
the hand (see 1 Chron. zxix. 21 ; Ezra z. 19, 
«to.). Which he hath sanctified for ever 
(see Fs. czxxii. 13, 14). 

Ver. 10. — Through . . . Ephraim and Ila- 
nasseh. The way in which the names of 
these two tribes are here used may explain 
in part the use of them in brief for simple 
reasons of the convenience of brevity in 
vor. 1. They langhed them to scorn, and 
mocked them. These two words speak sig- 
nificant description of the exact moral state 
in which Israel's tribes were now to be 
found. Even unto Zebulun. What of the 
country lay north of Zebulun had been so 
wasted by Assyria that practically Zebulun 
ia spoken of as what was most northerly. 

Ver. 11. — Adding the tribes of Jiphraim 
and Isaacltar mentioned in ver. 18, and bear- 
ing in mind the contents of our ver. 7 (with 
note), we have really only to account for 
Dan, which was no longer classed with 
Israel, and Naphtali and Simeon. The pro- 
bable significance of the passage is not to 
lay stress upon the tribes represented, but 
on the scattered, though sparse, attendants 
at the Passover who came. 

Ver. 12. — Also in Judah the hand of God 
was. Considering the difference of prepo- 
sition, this expression can perhaps scarcely 
oite as its parallel Ezra vii. 9. " The hand 
of God" here means rather his effectual 
working, which effectual working produced 
• hearty unanimity, that contrasted well 
with the bearing of the northern tribes. 

Ver. 13. — This verse purports to sav that 
tke total, at any rate, of the attendance on 
the Passover was very large. 



Ver. 14. — Took away the altari . . . the 
brook Kidron (see ch. xxviii. 24 ; zxix. 16). 

Ver. 15. — Were ashamed ; Hebrew, lO^p^L 
This word, occurring in one conjugation or 
another thirty-eight times, expresses in 
every instance a genuine shame. It now 
was the forerunner of a practical repenting. 
And bronght in . . . into ; better tendered, 
and carried up to the house of the Lord. 

Ver. 16. — They stood in their place after 
their manner (see Lev. i. 11 — 13, and many 
other references in Leviticus). 

Ver. 17. — Therefore the Levites had the 
charge (see Lev. i., etc., which repeatedly 
afSrms that the original directions of Moiei 
were that the person who brought the victim 
to offer it was to slay it, and to bring the 
blood). 

Ver. 18. — So also the original Law of 
Moses prescribed that the uncleansed must 
not eat the Passover (Numb. ii. 6). 

Ver. 20.— Healed the people. The He- 
brew word here is the strict word for physical 
healing, and is a slight but significant indi- 
cation of the reality of the spiritual view 
contemplated in Moses' Law in this matter. 

Ver. 21. — See Ezod. xii. 18, and many 
repetitions of the same matter, respecting 
the duration of the Passover and eating of 
unleavened bread. With loud instruments. 
Some render this, "instruments ascribing 
might to Jehovah." There seems no neces- 
sity for this; and the plain Hebrew text is 
" instruments of might," i.e. strong or loud 
instruments. 

Ver. 22. — Spake comfortably ; literally, to 
the heart of, etc. That taught the good 
knowledge. This rendering is in some 
error, and is awkward in not indicating the 
direction of the knowledge, A better ren- 
dering (see Eevised Version) will be, who 
were well skiUed in rendering such service 
to Jehovah. And perhaps the simplest 
rendering, "who served with good service 
to Jehovah," will be the most correct to the 
real meaning of the Hebrew text (Ps. oxi. 
10 ; Prov. xiii. 15). Making confession ; i.e. 
the confession or uttering forth of praise (so 
Ps. Ixxv. 2 ; xcii. 1 ; 1 Chron. xvi. 4, 7, 35, 
41 ; xxiii. 30; xxv. 3; ch. v. 13; vii. 3, 6 ; 
zxxi. 2). 

Ver. 23. — This and the following verse 
should read as one. Hezekiah no doubt 
wished, by prolonging the feast and the joy, 
to make the more lasting impressiuu on tlio 
people and the more hopeful conversion of 
tbem. 

Ver. 24, — Did give. This is an inade- 
quate rendering. Bevised Version reaiis. 
did give for offerings { others read, "gave as 
an heaoe offering." In the light of our 
ch. XXXV. 7 — 9, the Bevised Version render- 
ing seems sufficient. 

Ver. 25. — The stranger*. Some oonaidei 



S62 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xix. 1— 27. 



this describes " proselytes from Israel, who 
were non-Israelites." But this seems a most 
gratnitons supposition. The Hebrew onp. 
does, in fact, purport only " sojourners," and 
is frequently so translated, and our next 
clause corroborates this view. The.interest- 
ing aspect of it is, that probably the persons 
described had eini.<<;r'ated from their own 
tribes, as they longed for Jerusalem, " their 
chief joy." 
Ver. 26. — SinM the time of Solomon. The 



reference is to Solomon's " Feast of Taber- 
nacles " (cb. vii. 9). 

Ver. 27.— The priests the levites; i.e. 
the priest-LeTites, and not other Levites 
(Deut. xviL 18; Josh, iii 3). The Septua 
gint, therefore, is wrong in inserting "and." 
A parallel expression in the New Testament 
is "Men brethren" (Acts L 16; ii. 29, 
etc.). The priests were those authorized to 
bless (Numb. vi. 23— 26i 1 Chron. xxiiL 
18). 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 27. — 27ie celebration of the Passover, with its saered tuggestiont. The whole 
of this chapter is concerned with Eezekiah's call of priests, Levites, princes, and con- 
gregation of the people to observe and celebrate with himself the grand solemnity of 
the Passover. From the analogy of the precedent provided for individual cases of certain 
kinds of necessity (Numb. ix. 10), this celebration for the whole nation is fixed for the 
fourteenth day of the second month instead of the first. This was the fourth of the 
seven special occasions, of which description with detail is given us in Scripture — ^the first 
of all in Egypt (Exod. xii.), the first in the desert (Numb, ix.), and that of Joshua at 
Gilgal, after the circumcision of the people and when the manna ceased (Josh, v.), 
being the three which preceded; and those that came after being the Passover 
celebrated by Josiah (oh. xxxv.), by Ezra on the return from the captivity at Babylon 
(Ezra vi.), and that ever-memorable one, the last of our blessed Lord's life on earth. 
The Passover was the first in time of the three great annual feasts which called 
together to Jerusalem all — yes, in happier times, oZ^— from Dan even to Beersheba, the 
other two being the Feasts of Pentecost and of Tabernacles. It was also the first 
in the {Retime of the nation, and always the first in solemn significance. Not only the 
energy and earnestness, therefore, of Hezekiah in carrying through this celebration from 
first to last, but his Diviner wisdom and piety in determining and appointing it, may 
be noted, and dwelt upon in useful and suggestive detail as adapted to modem days. 
That great revival, for instance — one of the greatest the world and Church have ever 
leen — of modem Church-life, familiarly known to ourselves, was rooted in, and has grown 
up proportioned to, eealous attention to the sacraments, faith tn them, and faithful 
observance qf them. This goes to the root of all a nation's evil and malady 1 " If 
once," thought Hezekiah — " if but once a healthy breeze could pass over this erring and 
idolatrous, fevered and long-forlorn people, all might yet be well I " At his prayer, and 
as the reward of his effort, the breeze came, and swept over the land. It refreshed 
weary and parched wastes ; and some signs of healthiness, mingled with some signs of 
iuspioiousness, appeared. Perhaps all was too late ; the disease too deep, and gone too 
far, too long ! Nevertheless, it was none the less right on the part of Hezekiah to have 
tried the religious means, and used the highest of them. We may notice in them — not 
as matter of historic interest in the life of another nation merely — how, in virtue mainly 
of the presence of the Passover, they were fitted to touch all that was deepest, all that 
haply might " remain " (Bev. iii. 2) deepest and best in the hearts of the people. For 
Instance, the Passover was undoubtedly^ 

L The vivid mbmokiai. of an unprecedented birth of a nation. Nor can it 
be said that this was an instance of a " nation born in a day." It gives more point, 
and it is just and true, to remember, that now it may be said of it that it was a nation 
bom tn a night I One supreme, extraordinary effort of faith and obedience ushered 
that nation out of darkness into light. It might, indeed, have been hoped that this 
would stamp it for ever with the corresponding native and hereditary grand qualitiee. 
There are senses in which it may be said that the nation had received in yet earlier 
ages its existence. Certainly the promise and the earnest of this had been fact. Th* 
germ of its existence had been in Abraham, and Gfod's covenant with him. It showed 
to view in distinctness and separateness at the time and in the fact of its compact cor- 
porate descent into Egypt. There was a semblance of truth to support this, and there 



OH. XXX. 1—27.] THE SECOND BOOK OP* THE CHRONICLES. 363 

would have been real truth in it, if a family could be called a nation. " Israel " went 
into Egypt " three score and ten souls " (Gen. xlvi. 27) ; Israel came out of Egypt a 
nation born, that night of the Passover — a vast separate nation, a peculiar people. 
Hezekiah's celebration of the Passover, therefore, at this time suggested to every feeling 
and instinct of honest national love and pride that king, priests, and people should 
live worthily of their origin, raise the fortunes and restore the glory of the nation that 
had so greatly declined (ver. 6). 

II. The vivid memorial op the gbeat deliverance which God wbought fob 

HIS PEOPLE, FROM SORE BONDAQE, UNDER CIRCUMSTANCES OF AN EXTBAOBDINABY 

NATURE. The power and the pity of God were alike demonstrated by the rescue of the 
hosts of Israel from the midst of Egypt. His pity heard their groanings, his power 
subdued their oppressors. Of such things as these the people needed at this time the 
teaching and the inspiriting influences. Every observance of the Passover was a com- 
memoration and rehearsal of this great deliverance, and suggested the long and thick 
succession of Divine interpositions during a period of now nearly eight centuries. 

III. liOTH THE OUTCOME AND THE FOUNDATION OF A COVENANT. The PaSSOVef 

marked a {oiegoing faith and obedience on the part of Muses, Aaron, and all the bouses 
of the rescued, and it inferred an unending continuance of the same, so often as they 
should be called for on special occasions, as well as for the rule of every day's life. Upon 
these conditions being met on the one side, God's great deliverance and his continued 
protection took effect on the other side. Upon this practical aspect it is evident that 
Hezekiah laid great stress (vers. 7 — 9). The remembrance of the saving of all the first- 
bom of the Hebrews, by the side of thie slaying of all the firstborn of the Egyptians, 
both man and beast, was fitted to be a most powerful incentive of loyalty to him who 
had thus bought a people to himself most significantly. This was an inevitable 
memory of the sprinkled blood of the Paschal lamb in every celebration. 

IV. The FOBBSHADOwiNa of THE ONE BTBBNAL SACEiFicB. Por the dcTout Hebrew, 
the Israelite who was " an Israelite indeed," even in these most degenerate days of the 
nation, the Passover must have taken a leading share among ail other sacrifices, in teach- 
ing and shadowing forth " the good things to come ; " the " better hope ; " the " better 
covenant;" the "better sacrifices "(Heb. vii. 19, 22; viii. 6; ix. 23). The "fore- 
shadowing " itself was indeed plain and powerful, which used such a designation for 
the central fact of all the observances of the Passover, as " my sacrifice " (Exod. xxiiL 
18 ; xxxiv. 25) ; and nothing can be deducted from our estimate of the meaning of snch 
passages, and generally of the typical virtue of the whole celebration, when we remember 
the language of St. Paul respecting " Christ our Passover " (1 Cor. v. 7). The faith 
of the people of Israel and their sacrament were looking /oricord to {hit Passover, as 
our faith and our sacrament look back to it, and of a truth ever upward 1 The sugges- 
tions that St. Paul awakes within us by the fulness of the last-quoted verse, as well as 
the time and all the circumstance of the death of Christ, compel us indeed to see in the 
entire features and services of the completed Passover the type of our One sacrifice 
and our second sacrament ! The peace offering, the thank offering, the solemn dedica- 
tion of ourselves, as "a kingdom of priests and a holy nation," the unbroken "unity 
of the body" (Exod. lii. 46; John xix. 36), the "keeping of the feast with the 
unleavened bread of sincerity and truth," and all the sacred, unbounded eucharistic 
enjoyments of that feast, — in a word, the need of deliverance, the Deliverer, and our joyful 
acknowledgment of the same, are all outlined for us in the Hebrew's Passover, and 
according to the measure of his faith and illumination were once all outlined for him, 
even in Hezekiah's time and celebration. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1, 10, 11. — Liters to Ephraim : generosity. Hezekiah now took a very bold 
and decided course. There had been no direct dealings between the king or court of 
Judah and the people of Ephraim (Israel) since the kingdom of David was rent in 
twain. If we understand that this action was taken in the first year of his reign, while 
Hoshea was on the throne of Samaria, it certainly was bold even to audacity, and was 
calculated to rouse the resentment of that ruler. If, however, we hold (with Keil and 



S64 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh, xxx. 1— 27. 

otheri) that it was not until the sixth year of Hezekiah's reign, when Shalmaneser 
had wrought his will with the sister kingdom, that the great Passover was held, the 
measure taken by the pious king is still one of considerable vigour and of no little 
generosity. We learn therefrom — 

I. That ▲ biqht course will prove onk op spiBirnAL enlargement. Had not 
Hezekiali been a faithful servant of Jehovah, he would not have concerned himself about 
the moral and spidtiial condition of Ephraim and Manasseh. He might have rejoiced 
iu anything that would degrade and therefore enfeeble them. But as the servant of 
God, and therefore of the truth and of righteousness, be looked with sorrow upon the 
separation of those tribes of Israel from the Ood of their fathers, and it was " in his 
heart " (ch. xxix. 10) to take a step that might restore them to the faith they bad 
abandoned and to the favour they had lost. His " heart was enlarged toward them " 
(2 Cor. vi. 11). There was nothing that was singular, but everything that was natural 
and usual in this. Let a man determine to take the right course, to set bis whole life 
as well as rule his whole nature by principles which he believes to be Divine, and for 
him there will be a very blessed spiritual enlargement. He will come to see truths 
which had been quite out of sight, and to cherish feelingB to which he had been a 
stranger, and to proceed upon lines high and far above the old levels. His life will be 
lifted up, himself will be enlarged and enriched abundantly 

II. That advances towards estranged belativks are pecumarlt bonoubablb. 
It probably cost Hezekiah and his counsellors some considerable effort to make over- 
tures to Israel. These tribes had revolted from the kingdom ; they had lately inflicted 
a most severe and humiliating defeat upon Judah (ch. xxviii. 6 — 8). It may be taken 
that there existed a strong, if not an intense, animosity between those so nearly related 
to and yet so distinctly divided from one another (see John iv. 9 ; Luke ix. 62, 63). 
Nevertheless, they were regarded and treated as brethren. It is here where we bo often 
fail in the illustration of Christian principles. We can show magnanimity toward 
those who are afar off, who belong to a different nation, or to another Church, or to a 
separate family ; but we find it hard, perhaps impossible, to make advances toward 
those of our own people, ol our own community, of our own family, between whom and 
ourselves some estrangement has come. Truly said the wise man, " A brother offended 
is hardcnr to he won than a strong city." And wisely says our English poet that 

" . . . to be wioth with one we love 
Doth work like madness in the brain. 
• . . • • 

** They stood aloof, the scars remaining. 
Like cliffs which had been rent asunder." 

(Coleridge.) 

But there is one thing that can bring together the divided hearts and lives of brethren— 
the generous heart which takes its rule of life and which gains " the spirit of its mind" 
from Jesus Christ. 

III. That we should not bb deterred from the nobler codrsb by the possi- 
bility OR EVEN THE LIKELIHOOD OF REPDLSE. Hczokiah and Ms counoil faced this 
probability, and they ventured, notwithstanding. Their messengers did meet with 
much scornful rejection (ver. 10) ; but on this they must have counted, and by it they 
were not moved. In spite of all the mockery they encountered, they went through the 
land as they proposed. If we are careful to count all the possible consequences to our- 
selves, we shall never do noble deeds. The soldier does not weigh the chances of his 
lieing wounded as he goes into the battle ; he does not mind if he goes home with some 
scars upon his coimtenance. Nor will the tjood soldier of Jesus Christ. 

IV. That we shall not go unrewarded if we take this oenbbous oouese. 
" Nevertheless divers . . . humbled themselves, and came to Jerusalem" (ver. 11). The 
mission was not altogether a failure, even judged by its visible and calculable results. 
Any serious and generous attempt to heal old wounds and restore broken friendships, or 
to bring back to God those estranged from him, will not be unrewarded. 1. If it does 
not succeed wholly, it will in part. If it does not win affection and reopen fellowship, 
it may weaken resentment and make return easier another time. It may avail with 
one or two, if not with all. It may succeed in time, if not at once. 2. It will certainly 



OH. XXX. 1—27.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 368 

result in some spiritual advancement on our own part. No true act of Christian love 
is ever lost to the agent liimself. 3. It will win the smile and benediction of the 
magnanimous Saviour. — 0. 

Vers. 6 — 9. — Fwvr reasons for repentance. The letters which Hezekiah sent through- 
out the cities and villages of Israel contained an earnest exhortation to repentance ; 
they urged upon the inhabitants of that distressed land that, for the strongest reasons, 
they should return from tlieir idolatrous ways, and worship the true and living God in 
his own ten pie. These considerations are fourfold. 

I. It is to the God of theie fathers thet were exhorted to beturk. " Children 
of Israel, turn again unto the Lord God ... of Israel" (ver. 6). It was not to the 
house of a strange deity they were now invited ; it was to the God of Israel — to him to 
whom their own ancestors bowed the knee ; it was to liim who ever called himself by 
the very name they bore, in whom their illustrious father put his trust and found his 
heritage. Whom should they serve but that One whom Israel himself acknowledged 
as the Lord his God (Geu. xxviii. 16 — 22) ? To those who have gone astray to vanities, 
to the pursuits of earth, to human attachments, to perishable treasures, and who have 
forsaken the Divine Source of all good and joy, we have to say, " Eettirn unto the Lord 
God of your fathers. Ha to whom and to whose service we invite your return is no 
strange God in your house. It is he whom your father, whom your mother, has loved 
and served these many years ; whom (it may be) they are worshipping and serving 
now in tho upper sanctuary. It is their tones that may be recognized in our voice, if 
you have an ear to hear, saying, ' Betum unto our God, unto our Saviour, unto our 
heritage, unto our home.' 

II. Eebbllion means nothing but euin. " Who trespassed against the Lord God 
of their fathers, who therefore gave them up to desolation" (ver. 7). Assuming the 
(more probable) theory that the country was now in the hands of the Assyrians, there 
was " desolation " indeed j to most of their families (and to the best of them) captivity 
or bereavement; to the nation, as such, utter subjection, humiliation, ruin. This was 
the penalty of their rebellion against Jehovah, its natural and inevitable end (Deut. 
xxix. 22 — 28). To those who are estranged from God we have to say, " Return unto God, 
for distance from him is spiritual ruin." 1. It is the forfeiture of the true heritage of the 
human soul, the heritage it has in the favour and the friendship of God. 2. It is the 
endurance of his most serious displeasure. 3. It is a spiritual bondage, the bondage of 
sin. 4. It is the beginning of death eternaL 

III. There is no danger of repulse. " The Lord your God is gracious and 
merciful, and will not turn away his face from you, if ye return unto him " (ver. 9). 
The people of this idolatrous realm might well ask whether they had not hopelessly 
separated themselves from Jehovah, whether their rebelliousness had not gone such 
lengths that mercy was not to be looked for. But Hezekiah charged them to dismiss all 
Buch fears from their minds ; their repentance would meet with a gracious response 
from the forgiving God of their fathers. It is one of the strongest inducements we have 
to offer to those now spiritually estranged, that their genuine repentance, the turning 
of their heart toward the God of their fathers, and their seeking his mercy in Jesus 
Christ the Divine Saviour, is certain to be attended with his abundant mercy, and to 
be followed by their restitution to the favour they have lost, to the home they have 
left, to the blessedness they have thrown away. There is absolutely no fear of a 
repulse — that is a moral impossibility ; the unchangeable Word of the faithful God is 
the immovable pledge that return means reconciliation. 

IV. Reconciliation fob themselves means meeoy fob their relations. " Your 
brethren and your children shall find compassion," etc. (ver. 9). This was iAetroneand 
only hope. If God had mercy upon Israel that was in Israel, he might, he would, recall 
their brethren and children from the land of their captivity ; otherwise these must 
perish in " a strange land," in the land of the enemy. Our message to men is not 
unlike this ; w6 have to say to them, " If you will consult the well-being of those in whom 
you are most interested and for whom you are most responsible ; if you will care for 
the salvation of those nearest and dearest to you, of your brethren and your children • 
then doyoulive the life of the holy, do you give the best and strongest evidence that 
you believe in the excellency of the service of Christ, do you turn from the transient 



866 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxx. 1—27. 

and the unsatisfying treasures of earth, and seek your heritage in the favour of the 
heavenly Father, in the love and the friendship of the Saviour of mankind. Tlierelore 
'yield yourselves unto God' (ver. 8); enter his sanctuary ; accept the overtures of hia 
Son ; sit down at his table ; take on you his Name and his vows." — C. 

Vers. 17 — 20. — The one essential thing. A very interesting and instructive incident 
occurred in the celebration of this great Passover. Many who presented themselves and 
brought their lamb had not gone through the prescribed purifications before engaging 
in an act of sacrifice, and they were disqualified to slay the lamb. So the Levites, under 
the peculiar circumstances, took this part for them. It was a formal irregularity ; it was 
not according to the letter of the Law ; there had been a breach of the enactment. But 
Hezekiah prayed God on behalf of those who had transgressed, and his prayer was 
heard, and the Lord " healed the people " who had so done. There is one lesson which 
stands out from the others ; but before we learn that, we may gather on our way the 
truths — 

I. That substhtttion and intercession have theib place in the einooom op 
God. The Levites were permitted to take the parents' place on this occasion, and 
Hezekiah's prayer for the pardon of the irregularity was granted. We may do some 
things for our fellow-men, and we do well to pray God for their enlightenment and restora- 
tion. But it is not far that either of these two principles can be permitted. " Every 
man must bear his own burden " of responsibility before God ; must repent of his own 
sin ; must approach his Maker in the spirit of self-surrender ; must enter by himself the 
kingdom of Christ. The work we can do for others, though not without its value, is 
narrow in its range. To every human soul it belongs to realize his position, to hearken 
when Heaven is speaking, to make his final and decisive choice, to take bis place among 
the friends or among the foes of Jesus Christ. We may not build on a brother's help, 
nor presume even on a mother's prayers. 

IL That privation of privilege is taken into the Divine consideration. 
The principal if not the only defaulters here were the men of " Ephraim and Manasseh," 
etc. (ver. 18) ; i.e. those who had been living in the idolatrous kingdom of Israel, 
those who had been far from the temple of Jerusalem, and had lived with little (if any) 
instruction in the Divine Law. Much leniency might justly be accorded to these ; and 
much allowance wets made for them. God requireth of us " not according to that we 
have not, but according to that we have." From those to whom but little privilege 
and opportunity are given, the slighter service will be demanded. Our God is just, 
considerate, gracious. 

III. That sin is a vert disablino thing. " The Lord healed the people." By 
their offence against the Law they had lost their wholeness, their health, and needed to 
" be healed." Sin is a moral sickness ; it is the disorder of the spirit ; it is that which 
weakens, which disables, which makes the sinner unable to be and to do what he was 
created to be and to do. But the main lesson is this — 

IV. That the essential thing is spiritual integrity. These transgressors 
were forgiven partly in virtue of Hezekiah's prayer. But may we not say principally 
because the righteous Lord discerned in them the spirit of obedience f They had come 
up to Jerusalem that they might return upon Jehovah their God. It was in their 
heart to cast off their old and evil practices, and to begin a new life of uprightness before 
God : was their ceremonial irregularity to outweigh, in the estimate of the Just One, 
the integrity of their heart before him? The purpose of their soul was toward God and 
toward his service : was not that to be accepted, in spite of a legal impropriety or 
negligence ? Certainly it was ; and these men went down to their homes in Israel 
justified before the Lord. It is the s|)irit of obedience which our God demands of us, 
for which he looks in us. If that be absent, nothing else of any kind or magnitude 
will suffice. If that be present, we may be defaulters in many small particulars, but 
neither we nor our offering wiU be refused. To have a pure, deep, fixed desire to seek 
and to serve the Lord Christ — that is the one essential thing. — C. 

Vers. 21 — 27. — EdigUyus enthusiasm. This chapter reads as if written by an eye- 
witness of the scenes described, so vivid is the account, so much colour is in the picture. 
It was evidently a time of very great enthusiasm, of spiritual exuberance. These are 



OH. XXX. 1—27.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 367 

rery pleasant, and they may he very profitable occasions; but ihey need to be rightly 
directed and well controlled. Of religious enthusiasm, we may consider — 

I. Its ONLY FIRM rouNDATioN. Thls isa true seDse of the Diviiie favouT. Unless God 
be with us, granting us his own approval, intending to further us with his blessing, all 
our congratulatiuiis are ill-timed and all our aition will be fruitless. And it is needful 
that we know that we have his approval. It is too often assumed ia its absence. Heze- 
kiiih and his people, with Isaiah among them, were resting in a well-grounded confi- 
dence. Without such prophetic guidance, we must inquire of ourselves whether our 
repentance and our faith are deep and real ; whether we have in truth " yielded our- 
selves unto the Lord" (ver. 8), whether we are " Christ's disciples indeed " (John viii. 31). 

II. Its natural atmosphere. Sacred joy. They " kept the feast . . . with great 
gladness " (ver. 21) ; " There was great joy in J erusalem " (ver. 26). There are many 
sources of happiness, reaching upwards from the most gross to the most spiritual and 
refined. There is none deeper or purer, none more elevated or enlarging, than the joy 
of the human spirit in the worship and service of the Supreme. To be holding 
hallowed fellowship with our Divine Father and Saviour, and to be so doing in unison 
with a multitude of our Christian brethren and sisters, or to be engaged with them in 
doing some earnest and faithful work, — this is a source of truest and worthiest human 
joy. 

III. It8 best uanifestations. 1. In sacred song. The Levites " praised the Lord 
day by day " (ver. 21). A large measure of spiritual fervovu: finds utterance in song, 
happily to ourselves and acceptably to God. There is no phase of sacred feeling which 
may nut find fitting expression thus. 2. In wise and kind encouragement. Uezekiah 
" spake comfortably unto all the Levites " (ver. 22). He no doubt congratulated them on 
their good spiritual estate and on their opportunity of service, and invited and iirged them 
to exercise their sacred functions in all fidelity. A few words of timely encouragement 
from one that is in a higher position go a long way ; such words constitute a stronger 
inducement to duty and devotion than many words of criticism or censure. 3. In 
religious instruction. " That taught the good knowledge of the Lord " (ver. 22). i. In 
re-dedication. " A great number of priests sanctified themselves." Some of the priests, 
probably many, if not most of them, had shown slackness and had held back (ch. xxix. 
34) ; they had some reason for being asliamed (see ver. 15). But in this hour of wide- 
spread enthusiasm they came forward and made themselves ready for their sat red 
functions. At such a time, much is gained if those who have become cool in the service 
of their Lord, whose faith is failing and whose zeal is dying down, re-oonsecrate them- 
selves to him, take afresh upon them his vows, and solemnly and formally undertake 
to live and labour in his cause. 5. In expansiveness. Boom was found for " the 
strangers that came out of the land of Israel " — room in the hearts and at the tables of 
the people. Nothihg can be better than that our own great gladness of heart in God 
should overflow to those beyond our own pale. By all means let there be a generous 
exiiansiveness at such a time ; let the stranger, let the " outsider," let the outcast, let 
the " abandoned," let those who have come to despair of themselves, be remembered, be 
sought out, be encouraged, be enlightened, be admitteil and welcomed. We tread 
closely in the steps of our Leader when we act thus. 6. In liberality. In the generous 
use of our substance (see ver. 24). When we are receiving freely of God's go<S gift of 
sacred joy, we should give freely of the good he has entrusted to our care. — 0. 

Vers. 1 — 12. — Preparations for a grand national Passover. I. A Passover 
decided ok. (Vers. 1, 5.) 1. By whom f Hezekiah, his princes, and all the congrega- 
tion in Jerusalem, witti both of whom he had taken counsel. The important step, not 
adopted without deliberation, was concurred in by the entire body of tlie people (ver. 4). 
If any in the nation held aloof, these were the priests and the Levites (ver. 15). 2. 
For whomt All Israel and Judah. The contemplated Passover should not be 
sectional or provincial, but national. For " all Israel, from Beer.sheba to Dan " — for the 
inhabitants of the two kingdoms, which ought never to have been divided, and in 
religion at least should ever have been one. 3. On what ground t (1) That it was 
their duty to keep such a Passover. It was written in the Law of Moses that all the 
congregation of Israel should eat the Passover (Exod. xii. 47) ; that three times a year 
should all the males of the nation keep a feast unto the Lord, one of these feasts beinu 



368 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxx. 1—27. 

that of Unleavened Bread, or the Passover (Exod. xxiii. 14, 15) ; and that the Passovei 
should be " sacrificed in the place which Jehovah should choose to set his Name_ there" 
(Deut. xvi. 2). (2) That such a Passover had not been observed by them either in 
great numbers (Revised Version), en masse, by the vrhole body of the people (Bertheau, 
Keil), or for a long time (Authorized Version, De Wette). Certainly since the 
division of the kingiiom they had not observed the Passover ; and even prior to that it 
is doubtful if the feast hnd been observed by §uoh numbers as to amount to a national 
celebration. The unsettled state of the country during the period of the judges was not 
favourable to the carrying out of the Deuteronomic programme ; and the same might 
be said (though perhaps in a less degree) of the early years of the monarchy ; so that 
probably for a Paschal celebration on a truly national scale the historian must go back 
to the days of Joshua immediately after entering Cauaan, and before the dispersion of 
the people had commenced (Josh. v. 10, 11). 

II. The time of celebbation fixed. (Ver. 2.) 1. In the second month. (1) This 
not the regular or legal month, which was the first, or Abib (Exod. xii. 18 ; Lev. xxiii. 
5, 8), the month in which Jehovah brought his people out of Egypt (Deut. ivi. 1, 2). 
(2) This, however, allowable in special circumstances, as e.g. when through absence on 
a journey or ceremonial uncleanness it could not be kept on the statutory day (Numb. 
ix. 6 — 12). In the present instance the special circumstances were that when the 
decision to hold a Passover was arrived at, the 14th of Abib was too near to admit of 
either the priests getting themselves sanctified in sufficient numbers to do the necessary 
work, or the population of the country gathering at Jerusalem in time to give to the feait 
the character of a national celebration. 2. In the first or sixth {perhaps seventh") year 
of Hezekiah's reign. (1) In favour of the former view (Bertheau, Jamieson), it may be 
urged that it is the most natural ; that Hezekiah would more likely take advantage of 
the widespread religious enthusiasm evoked by the purification and re-dedication of 
the temple to appoint a Passover than delay for five if not six years; and that the 
difficulty of understanding how he got permission to send heralds through the northern 
kingdom may be overcome by remembering that Hoshea, the last King of Israel, was 
Aot 80 bad as his predecessors on the throne had been (2 Kings xvii. 2), and that 
lezekiah may have obtained his consent to the proposal of a grand Passover for all 
tsrael and Jvdah (Bertheau). An obvious objection to this is that Hezekiah's letters 
■epresent<'j the inhabitants of Israel as " the remnant escaped out of the hands of the 
dngs '•'i Assyria" (ver. 6), and that the siege of Samaria did not commence till 
fler«"'»iah's fourth year (2 Kings xviii. 9), while the only deportation of people from 
'Yj northern kingdom before that was the removal of the trans- Jordanic tribes and 

iaphtalites by Tiglath-Pileser II. (2 Kings xv. 29) — which would hardly have 
justified the strong language of Hezekiah with reference to Israel's depleted condition. 
Another difficulty is that, as during the first years of Hezekiah's reign Hoshea was 
becoming restive under the heavy tribute of ten talents of gold and a thousand 
of silver imposed on him by Tiglath-Pileser II. (' Eecords,' etc., v. 52 ; Schrader, 
* Keilinachri ften,' 256), and was even negotiating with So (Sabako), King of Egypt, about 
throwing off the Assyrian yoke (2 Kings xvii. 4), it is hardly to be supposed he would 
readily consent to the absence of all his male subjects at Jerusalem even for a limited 
time. Besides, it is doubtful if a month was not too short a space to admit of the 
king's runners travelling from Dan to Beersheba, and of the peojile assembling from all 
comers of the land at Jerusalem. (2) In favour of the second view (Keil, Caspari), 
that the Passover was held after the capture of Samaria, in b.o. 720, and the deporta- 
tion of its inhabitants — according to an inscription of Sargon, 27,280 (Schrader, ' Keilin- 
schriften,' 272 ; ' Records,' etc., vii. 28) — it may be pointed out that after that event the 
situation in Israel corresponded more exactly with the language of Hezekiah (ver. 6), 
and that, Israel having no more an independent sovereign, Hezekiah may have deemed 
the moment opportune for attempting a reunion of the nations. 

III. The INVITATIONB ISSUED. (Vers. 6 — 10.) 1. In whose name they were givtn. 
In that of Hezekiah and his princes. The absence of any reference to Hoshea points 
to a time subsequent to the captivity of Israel. 2. By whom they were carried. The 
posts, or runners, i.e. king's messengers (Esth. iii. 13, 15 ; viii. 14), who may haTe been 
members of the royal body-guard (oh. xii. 10). 3. To what purport they ran. (1) A 
threefold exhortation, (a) To turn again to Jehovah, renouncing idolatry and embrac- 



OH. XXX. 1—27.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 369 

Ing the religion prescribed by Moses (ver. 6). (J) Not to imitate the stubborn conduct 
of their fatheis, who had been earned away captive (vers. 7, 8). (c) To resume 
attendance at the sanctuary, which Jehovah had sanctifiecl for ever as the central place 
of his worship (ver. 8). (2) A fourfold argument, (a) Duty. Jehovah was the Lord 
Ood of their fathers, even of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and, as the one livin<; and 
true, gracious, and covenant-keeping Q-od, was entitled to their allegiance (vers. 6, 7). 
(6) Pear. If they continued rebellious, Jehovah's anger would fall on and consume 
them who were but a remoant, as already it had fallen on and consumed their fathers. 
(c) Clemency. If they returned to Jehovah, Jehovah would turn away the fierceness 
of his anger from them, and extend mercy to those who had been carried away captive, 
causing them to find favour in the eyes of their captors and even to return to their 
own land (ver 9). (d) Hope. The certainty that they would thus be treated wa» 
guaranteed by the fact that Jehovah, whom they had forsaken, and to whom they were 
now invited to return, was a gracious and merciful Q-od (ver. 9). Or otherwise, 
Hezekiah' pleaded with them to return on the grounds of national unity — Jehovah wa» 
Israel's God as well as Judah's ; of historic continuity — Jehovah had been the Lord 
Gh)d of their fathers ; of self-interest — it was the only way to avert their total extinction ; 
of brotherly compassion — ^it was the most effectual means of helping their exiled 
brethren. 
lY. Thx beoeftion aocobded to the mesbenqebs. (Vers. 10 — 12.) 1. In Itrad. 

(1) Prom the main body of the population, laughter and scorn. Seemingly they 
ridiculed the idea of having to protect themselves from extermination by finding a 
sovereign in Hezekiah and a God in <fehovah. Tiglath-Fileser II., if the earlier date 
be adopted, had only overrun and laid waste a portion of their country, the trans- 
Jordanio tribes, with the land of Naphtali, and from these had carried away not all the 
population, but only the principal inhabitants; while, if the latter date be accepted as 
the more probable, Sargon in addition had removed only 27,280 persons (' Becords,' 
vii. 28). Hence as yet they perceived not the necessity of either abandoning hope 
for the kingdom or of repairing to Jerusalem to find a king and a OtoA. So the 
ambassadors of a greater King than Hezekiah, wandering from city to city throughout 
the world and carrying to their fellows a better invitation than Hezekiah's runnen 
did to Israel, are frequently met with derision for themselves and their glad tidings ; as 
e.g. Paul at Athens (Acts xvii. 32), as Christ himself, God's chief Ambassador and 
Plenipotentiary in the city of Jerusalem (John i. 11). (2) From individuals, especially 
in Asher, Manasseh, Zabulon (ver. 11), and Issachar (ver. 8), the northern tribes 
contiguous to Naphtali, cordial acceptance. These, being country-people, were meek 
ones, not ashamed to humble themselves on account of their own and their nation's 
wickedness, and to embrace the opportunity of becoming reconciled to Jehovah and 
their brethren in Judah. Accordingly they spurned not the invitation addressed to 
them, but " came to Jerusalem." In like maimer is the Bang's letter in the gospel 
oftener welcomed and accepted by unlearned rustics than by gay and wise residents in 
cities ; and always by the poor in spirit, who, conscious of their sin and misery, long to 
be reconciled to God (Matt. v. 3 — 6). 2. In Judah, The people generally responded 
to their sovereign's invitation. (1) With unanimity. They were of one mind to do the 
commandment of the king and the princes. A united heart an invaluable preparation 
for obedience, whether for individual or for state (Jer. xxxii. 39 ; Ezek. xi. 19, 20). 

(2) In a spirit of obedience. They recognized the king's and princes' commandment to 
be in accordance with the word of Jehovah (of. ch. xxii. 15). The Word of God, in 
the Old and New Testaments, the supreme directory for faith and practice. " To the 
Law and to the testimony" (Isa. viii. 20). The Bereans searched the Bcriptm-es 
(Acts xvii. 11). (3) In compliance with a heavenly impulse. That they were thus 
enlightened and unanimous was owing to Divine grace ; " The hand of God was upon 
them " for good, as it always is upon them that seek him (Ezra viii. 22). 

Learn ; 1. The unspeakable blessing to a land of a pious king and court. 2. The 
certainty that God will aid all who seek to extend h& cause and kingdom. 3. The 
necessity of diligence, fidelity, sympathy, and courage on the part of all " runners " to 
the King of heaven, 4. The hopefulness with which divinely commissioned preachers 
may enter on their mission — there wiU always be tound a remnant to hear and ob«r, 
6. The excellence of • humble spirit in disposing one to listen to the gospel. — W. 

II. CHB0NI0LE8. 2 B 



370 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHKONICLES, [oh. xxx. 1— 27. 

Vers. 13 — 27. — A national Passover at Jerttsalem. L Thbs oelbbbatino congbega- 
Ties. 1, Large. " Much people ; " "a very great congregation " (ver. 13). Though 
this was usual at the chief religious festivals of the nation, probably so vast a con- 
course of people as assembled at Jerusalem in answer to the king's invitation, in the 
second month of the first or seventh year of his reign (see preceding homily), had not 
been witnessed since the days of Jehoiada (oh. xxiii. 2) or of Asa (oh. xv. 9, 10). 
Something stimulating and impressive in the sight of a crowded city, even when its 
seething population drifts aimlessly about, much more when all are swayed by a 
common feeling and moved by a common impulse. 2. Mixed. Composed of (1) all 
the congregation of Judah, t.e. of the inhabitants of the metropolis and of the country 
districts of Judsea, with the priests and the Levites; (2) all the congregation that came 
out of Israel, viz. a multitude of people from Ephvaim and Manasseh, Issachar, and 
Zabulon (ver. 18) ; and (3) the strangers, or proselytes who dwelt within the borders 
of Judah, and those who came from Israel or the northern kingdom (ver. 25). 3. 
United. All actuated by one purpose — that of keeping the Feast of Unleavened Bread 
(ver. 13), which probably none of them in their lifetime had ever done. It was such 
a festival as could be rightly celebrated only by a united people, and such as was fitted 
to draw closer the bonds of union between the celebrants. 4. Resolute. Prepared to 
undergo any sacrifices and attempt any labours necessary to carry the feast through 
with success, determined to be hindered by nothing and no one from their great act of 
religious homage to the Lord God of their fathers (vers. 19, 22). 6. Joyous. Inspired 
with feelings of gladness (ver. 23), even " great gladness " (ver. 21), and " great joy " 
(ver. 26), which found expression in peace offerings and penitential confessions (ver. 22), 
accompanied by vocal and instrumental strains, and abated not during the seven days 
of the feast proper (ver. 21), but sustained the people throughout seven superadded 
days (ver. 28). Indeed, so high ran the enthusiasm, and so overflowing became the joy, 
that nothing like it had been witnessed since the days of Solomon, when the dedication 
of the temple had been celebrated by a double period of rejoicing (ch. vii. 1 — 10). The 
occasion certainly was fitted to excite gladness — the return of the nation to its allegiance 
to Jehovah. So is the soul's return to God in penitence, faith, and holy obedience a 
cause of jubilation not only in heaven (Luke xv. 7, 10), but also on earth (Acts viii. 8); 
and not among spectators merely, but also in the souls of them who return (Luke xxiv. 
52; Acts viii. 39; Bom. v. 11). Moreover, the service of God and Christ should 
always be accompanied with gladness (Ps. c. 2 ; cxlix. 2, 5 ; Isa. xii. 3), as in gladness 
it will invariably result (Ps. Ixiv. 10 ; Isa. xlvlii. 18 ; li. 11 ; Bom. xiv. 17 ; 1 Thess. 
V. 16). 

II. The celebrated festival. 1. The zeal of the people. (1) Necessary prepara- 
tion. This consisted of two things — the purgation of the city from idolatry, and the 
cleansing of themselves from defilement. The first they carried out with promptitude 
and decision — " they arose and took away the altars " (ver. 14) ; and with thorough- 
going energy and efficiency which allowed of no escape — " they took them all away," 
the altars for offering to heathen divinities, and the altars or " vessels " for incense, 
which Ahaz had erected in every corner of the city (ch. xxviii. 24), and cast them into 
the Eidron, where already the filth of the temple had been thrown (ch. xxix. 16). Never 
in any previous reign had there been such a clearance of the instruments of idolatry as 
DOW occurred under Hezekiah. The second, though not mentioned, is implied, at least, 
of those who belonged to Judah (see ver. 17 ; and cf. on ver. 3). These, having had 
the meant of seU'-sanctification at hand, most likely used them ; those who came from 
Israel having not had such means, their want of sanctification was prayed for and over- 
looked (vers. 17 — 20). (2) Statutory adoration. They killed the Passover on the 
fourteenth day of the second month (see on ver. 2). The heads of families in Judah 
who were sanctified killed their own lambs and placed the blood in the priests' hands ; 
for such as had not been cleansed according to the purification of the sactuary, the 
Levites killed the Passovers, and delivered the blood into the hands of the priests (ver. 
17). These sprinkled the blood upon the altars. 2. The behaviour of the priests and 
Levites. (1) Their sanctification of themselves. The priests and Levites were not those 
of Jerusalem merely who had taken part in the dedication of the temple, and of whom 
it is said (eh. xxix. 34) that the Levites had been more forward to sanctify themselves 
than the priests, but the whole body of the priests and Levites who had come from 



CH. XXX. 1—27,] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE OHRONIOLBS. 871 

Judah and Israel, among whom were many who did not immediately pnrify themselvei 
from de&lement as they onght to have done on convening at Jerusalem. Most likely 
at first half-hearted in the business, afterwards through beholding the zeal of the people 
they were shamed into repairing their neglect. (2) Their discharge of o£Scial duties. 
Having sanctified themselves, they performed the statutory functions required of them 
in connection with their consecration : " They brought burnt offerings into the house of 
the Lord " (cf. Lev. viii. 18 ; Numb. viii. 12) ; or with the Passover: " They brought the 
[Authorized Version] burnt offerings " presented by the people " into the house of the 
Lord," and " they stood in their places after their order according to the Law of Moses," 
the priests sprinkling the blood upon the'altar (Lev. xvL 14 — 19), aud the Levites, for 
the reason above explained, handing the blood to them. 3. ITie piety of the king. 
(1) The king's prayer (vers. 18 — 20). (a) To whom addressed. ~ "The good Lord." 
Goodness au attribute of the Divine nature (Ps. zxv. 8 ; xxxiv. 8 ; Nah. L 7), in its 
ideal character belonging only to him (Matt. xix. 17), infinite in its measure (Exod. 
xxxiv. 6) and excellence (Ps. xxxvi. 7), unwearied in its operation (Ps. xxxiii. 6; 
Jas. i. 5), 8ver-during in its continuance (Ps. Hi 1). (&) For whom presented? 
"Every one that prepareth [Authorized Version, or 'setteth' Revised Version] his heart 
to seek the Lord Ood of his fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the purifi- 
cation of the sanctuary ; " i.e. for every one who approached Ood with earnestness and 
resolution, "preparing and setting his heart" — in the margin, "his whole heart" (ch. 
XV. 12 ; Ps. cxix. 2) ; with humility and faith, seeking " the Lord God of his fathers," 
thereby acknowledging he believed in Jehovah as his rightful Lord, and had sinned in 
turning aside to idolatry (Judg. x. 10; 1 Sam. xii. 10; ch. vi. 37; Ps. cvL 6; Jer. 
uv. 7); with obedience and submission, embracing the right way of seeking God, in 
Jerusalem (Deut. xii. 6), at his temple (Exod. xxv. 8), through the sacrificial worship 
by him appointed (Heb. ix. 13) — as under the New Testament dispensation no one can 
approach God acceptably except through Christ (John xiv. 6), though with imperfec- 
tion and defect in external ceremonial — which showed that the best spirits in the 
Hebrew Church had some conception of the spirituality of all true worship of God, of 
the value of real heart-adoration even when accompanied by errors in form, and of the 
worthlessness of the most externally correct, complete, »sthetically beautiful, and 
perfect performance when divorced from the inner homage of the heart, (c) What it 
•ought. The pardon of every one who had approached the Divine altar without com- 
plying with the Divine prescription as to self-purification. A sin of ignorance in case 
of some, in that of others a sin of involuntary disability, it was nevertheless a violation 
of the divinely appointed order, as real though not as heinous as that of Uzziah (ch. 
xxvi. IS), and as such fitted to evoke a display of Divine anger similar to that which 
fell on Uzziah. ((2) How it fared. " The Lord hearkened to Hezekiah, and healed the 
people" (ver. 20); which may signify either that symptoms of bodily malady had 
begun to appear among the people, or that Uezekiah feared they would. In either 
case Hezekiah's prayer was successful for his people, as afterwards was his supplication 
for himself (ch. xxxii. 24). Cf. the intercession of Abraham for the cities of the plain 
(Gen. xviii. 28 — 32), of Moses for Israel (Exod. xxxii. 31, 32), of David for his people 
(2 Sam. xxiv. 17), of Daniel for Jerusalem (ix. 17 — 19), of Paul for his converts 
(Eph. iii. 14—19; Phil. i. 3—9). (2) The king's exhortation (ver. 22). (a) The 
racipients of it. "All the Levites that taught the good knowledge of the Lord" 
(Authorized Version), t.e. who were more skilled and able to instruct others in the 
proper method of worshipping Jehovah (Piscator) ; or, more accurately, " all the Levites 
that were well skilled in the service of Jehovah" (Revised Version), or as regard* 
Jehovah ; i.e. " who bad distinguished themselves by intelligent playing to the honour 
of the Lord" (Keil). (6) The spirit of it. He apske comfortably, or to the heart, of 
all. No doubt there were degrees of excellence amongst the players and their music, 
but the king made no distinction in his treatment of them; he spake to the hearts of 
all. His words of encouragement and good cheer were needed by all, perhaps most by 
those least skilled who yet were doing their best. Leaders of men, pastors of Chiirches, 
and such-like, sometimes forget this, and, by making distinctions between the mora 
gifted and the less, do Injury to both — inflate the former with pride, and cast down the 
hitter with discouragement. (3) The king's liberality (ver. 24). This was: (o) 
Munificent. Hezekiah presented to the congregation a thouaan/^ '' <Ijocks ssA seven 



872 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE OHBONICLES. [oh. xxxi. 1— 21. 

thousand sheep. (&) Catching. " The princes gave to the congregation a thcasand 
bullocks and ten thousand sheep." (c) Timely. It enabled the people to carry out 
their good resolution to prolong the feast for seven more days, (d) Appreciated. 
It filled the people's hearts with gladness, and doubtless contributed largely to entwine 
their affections round the person and the throne of the king. 

Learn : 1. The duty of not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together for 
Divine worship (Heb. x. 25). 2. The excellence of unity among the people of God 
(Ps. cxxxii. 1 ; Acts iv. 32 ; 1 Cor. i. 10). 3. The joyous character of all true worship 
(1 Chron. xvi. 27; Ps. xxxii. 11; c. 1, 2; Luke xxiv. 52; Eph. v. 18, 19). 4. The 
acceptableness of sincere worship even when mingled with imperfection (Acts x. 35). 
6. The beauty as well as propriety of Christian liberality (Exod. xxiii. 15 ; 2 Cor. 
viii. 9).— W. 

Ver. 26. — An ideal city: Jerusalem in the first dayt of Eezekiah. I. Its God wai 
BBACI0U8. (Ver. 9.) Its people had a Divinity who was : 1. Propitious towards their 
persons. He had given them one heart (ver. 12). 2. Propitimit towards their 
tacrifices. He accepted them, although offered not in perfect accordance with the Law 
of Moses (ver. 16). 3. Propitious towards thtir prayers. He heard the king's interces- 
non (ver. 20), the priests' prayers (ver. 27), and the people's confessions (ver. 22). 

II. Its kino was beligioub. (Ch. xxix. 2.) This was manifested by : 1. Hit care 
for the institutions of religion. Exemplified in his purification and dedication of the 
temple, including his rearrangement of the Levitioal orders of musicians. 2. His zeal 
in the observances of religion. Shown by his revival of the Passover ordinance, and the 
efforts made by him to secure a national observance of the same (ch. xxx. 1). 3. His 
possession of the spirit of religion. Besides being a man of prayer (ver. 18), he 
delighted to encourage others in good works (ver. 22), and evinced his own sincerity by 
the abundance of his liberality (ver. 24). 

III. Its ministbbs werb rtrousTEioas. (Ver. 17.) 1. In attending to their own 
personal sanctiflcation. (Ver. 15.) This no ministers of religion under the New 
Testament dispensation can afford to neglect. He who cares nothing for the cultivation 
of piety in himself is not likely to be zealous in aiming at the good of others. 2. In 
discharging the puhlic services of the sanctuary. Under the Hebrew economy these 
services were the offering of sacrifice and the blessing of the people (ver. 27) by the 
priests, with the making of music by the Levites ; under the Christian economy they 
are chiefly the preaching of the gospel, the conducting of worship, and the super- 
intendence of the Church. Where the ordinances of religion fall into abeyance and 
neglect, and the ministers of religion are as heedless of the souls of others as of their 
own, it is idle to expect prosperity, in either Church or state, in city or in country. 

IV. Its inhabitants wbbb joyous. (Ver. 26.) 1. Exulting in Jehovah's favour. 
Without a conviction that they possessed this, the mere external celebration woull not 
have filled them with such long-continued, deep, and exuberant emotion (Ps. xxxiii, 
21; Isa. xii. 2 ; Bom. T. 11). 2. Observing the rites of religion. In turning from the 
worship of idols to serve the living God, they experienced an inward satisfaction which 
made them "sing in the ways of the Lord" (Ps. cxxxviiL 6). 3. Enjoying the affec- 
tion of their brethren. Of one heart and mind, there was not a jarring note in tbeir 
melody. They dwelt together in peace, and loved as brethren, each esteeming the 
other as better than himself, and all preferring one another and honouring one 
another. — W. 



EXPOSITION, 
CHAPTER XXXL 



This chapter, after its first verse (which 
holds an intermediate place with relation to 
the enthusiastio devoutness of the people 
recorded in the last vene of the former 



doings of the king), tells how Hezekiah one* 
more settles, first, the courses of the priests 
and Levites, and the offerings for their sup- 
port (vers. 2 — 10) ; and, secondly, both the 
offices and officers needfnl for rightly 
attending to the business. The Book of 



chapter, and what now followed of the Kin£s gives us no parallel to this chapter. 



OH.xxnl— 21.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHBONICLBS. 



37J 



Ver. 1. — As much as the last verse of the 
foregoing chapter was all of the religious 
fervour of the occasion, this verse is all of 
the. practical honest work of the people and 
their leaders. All Israel that were present ; 
«".«. present (or Hebrew, "found") in Jeru- 
salem at the conclusion of the Feast of the 
Passover. Jerusalem had already been 
attended to (ver. 14 of foregoing chapter). 
Now the right mind of the people bore the 
reformation with a wave of enthusiasm over 
all Judah and Benjamin ; and their righteous 
ceal earned them also over the strict limlta 
of their own kingdom into Ephradm . . . 
and Manasseh — a course the more practi- 
cable, and even the more technically correct, 
because of the crippled state of the northern 
kingddm, and the piobably still continued 
captivity of King Hoshea of Israel (2 Kings 
xvii. 1—4; zviii. 1 — ^7: compare also the 
matter of our ch. zxix. 21). Images . . . 
grove* . . . high places . . . altars (comp. 
ch. xiT. S, etc.). 

Ver. 2. — And Hezekiah appointed the 
courses. The twenty-fourth and following 
two chapters of 1 Chronicles give in full 
the appointment and arrangement of these 
courses, now again thrown out of order. 
Appointed; Hebrew, noJ!*l. It is equivalent 
to sxying Hezekiah re-established the courses. 
Of the tents. The word is nnt " tents," but 
the expressive and emphatic " camps " 
(rtmo). Order of the divinest kind, dis- 
cipline of the most perfect sort, are the glory 
of the temple and temple service of old, of 
the Church, her ministers, her members, and 
all her pious work of more modern date. 

Ver. 3. — Also the king's portion of his 
substance ; i.e. Hezekiah did not evade his 
own responsibilities in the matter of con- 
tribution. His "portion" was the tithe, 
and he was evidently liable on " substance 
very much " (ch. xxxii. 29). Numb, xxviii., 
zxix., and Lev. xxiii. give us the particulars 
of the offerings and set feasts, respectively 
here alluded to, in their original prescription. 

Ver. 4. — He commanded ... to give the 
portion of the priests . . . that they might 
be euconraged. Hezekiah's object was to 
send impulses of energy through the whole 
nation. The portions liere spoken of are 
described originally in Exod. xxiiL 19; 
Numb, xviii. 11—27; Deut. xiv. 22, 23. 
After our word "encouraged," we may 
probably supply the words " to teach ; " for 
see our ch. xvii. 9. 

Ver. 5. — Honey; Hebrew, ('an. This is no 
doubt the proper word for the honey of bees, 
tor see Judg. xiv. 8 — 18 ; 1 Sam. xiv. 27 ; 
Ps. xix, 11, and many other passages. It 
IB not certain, however, that the word did 
not cover other sweet preparations, as prob- 
ably in Gen. xliii. 11 ; Ezek. xxvii. 1 7. The 
alternative reading, " dates," Las thus come 



into the margin, bnt on very inaufiBcient 
title, as, while there is doubt as to whether 
the honey of bees was generally tithed, 
there is none at all that the people's pious 
leal might prompt them to bring tithe of it 
voluntarily, among other things, that they 
at any time held in honour and had in 
abundance. 

Ver. 6. — That dwelt in the cities of Judah. 
As vers. 4 and 5 referred to the dwellers in 
Jerusalem, so this verse tells of the dwellers 
in other cities, villages, eto., of the sur- 
rounding country (so ch. xxx. 25). Their 
tithes of holy things probably denote the 
" heave offerings " of Aaron (Numb, xviii. 
8 ; for other references to the matter of this 
verse, see Lev. xxvii. 30; Deut. xiv. 28). 

Ver. 7. — The third month . . . the heaps 
. . . the seventh month. The grain harvest 
dosed with the Feast of Weeks, about the 
sixth day of the third month so that tithe 
in kind would be paid. The seventh month 
brought the Feast of Ingathering, when the 
vintage was over. For illustration of the 
despatch with which Hezekiah proceeded in 
his reforming works, comp. our oh. xxix. 3; 
xxx. 2, 13. 

Ver. 9. — The qnestioning had no doubt to 
do with the subject how the superabundant 
contributions should be utilized or preserved. 

Ver. 10. — Azariah . . . chief priest of the 
house of Zadok. Though this Azariah be of 
the house of Zadok, he is not of the line 
of Jozadak ; and we cannot be certain that 
he is one with him of oh. xxvi. 17, 20 ; in 
which case his grandson Jotham (ch. xxvii. 
1) would be grandfather of Hezekiah, in- 
ferring a long term both for his office and 
his life. 

Ver. 11. — To prepare chambers; f.«. to 
prepare for present use the chambers con- 
structed for the purpose (1 Kings vi. 5). 

Ver. 12.— Faithfully. A pleasant re- 
miniscence of ch. xix. 9. Shimei (see oh. 
xxix. 14). Buler ... the next (so note, 
1 Chron. v. 12). 

Ver. 13. — Of these ten subordinates, Jehiel 
and Ifahath are found in ch. zxix. 12, 14. 

Ver. 14. — Kore. The name one with the 
grandson of Korah (1 Chron. ix. 19 ; zxvi. 
17). 

Ver. 15. — Eden . , . Shemaiah (see oh. 
zxix. 12, 14). In the cities (see Josh. zzi. 19). 
In their set office ; t'.«. in their appointed 
duty. The word (njiD».3) here used be- 
speaks the important and trustworthy nature 
of the duty committed to those spoken o^ 
and probably betrays the fact that the duty 
had not always in the past been honeetlf 
discharged (see same word in ver. 12). 

Ver. 16. — Beside their genealogy of males; 
»,«. except (1370) the family eount of males, 
etc., the remainder of the verse describing 
those who are meant by the eseepted. They 



374 



THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLBa [oh. xxxi. 1— 21, 



were excepted becanse for themselves and 
their little ones, their daily present temple 
service brought their daily maintenance as 
of conrse. The "unto every one" of our 
Tersion is misleading. Eeil translates per- 
spicuously, "of all tho»e who entered the 
house of the Lord, to the daily portion for 
their service," etc. The glimpse of the 
picture of the little children fed for the sake 
of their fathers' sanctuary service, io true 
to the true religion even of nature, is a 
pleasant glimpse to catch. 

Ver. 17. — It is hard to feel certain as to 
the exact construction of this and the follow- 
ing verse. Keil would translate here, " And 
concerning the catalogue of the priests, it 
was according, eto. ; and the Levites, they 
were from twenty years," eto. And arrived 
at ver. 18, and unable to proceed in like 
manner with it, he reverts to the " to 
give " of ver. 15, as what is to stand before 
9ie words, " to the genealogy [or, ' catalogue '] 
of all their little ones." He thus treats buth 
vers. 16 and 17 as parenthetical. It seems 
quite as probable that the " to give " should 
be shown before ver. 17 as well as ver. 18. 
On the whole, this seems to suit best the 
entire passage. The significant nvn, at the 
beginning of ver. 17, neutralizes then the 



13^ of ver. 16, and connects vers. 15 and 
17.' ' (On the words, from twenty years old, 
comp. 1 Ohron. xxiii. 27. See also Numb. 
iv. 3 ; viii. 24.) 

Ver. 18. — (Comp. our ch. xx. 13.) 

Ver. 19. — The much more manifest mean« 
ing of this verse confirms the interpretation 
favoured just above for vers. 15, 17, 18. 
The men that were expressed by name; 
translate, men were expreeeed . . . to give. 
The purport of this verse is to say that 
all priests and Levites of full age were 
sacredly remembered and similarly care- 
fully provided for, viz. those also who lived 
in the fields of the suburbs of the citie* 
(Lev. XXV. 32—34 ; Numb. xxxv. 2—5;. 

Ver. 20. — This verse, when rendered with 
literal exactness, is a fine instance of the 
force and brevity of the Hebrew style in 
Old Testament history ; And thus did Heze- 
kiah in all Judah, and he did the good and 
the right and the truth in the sight of 
Jehovah his God. 

Ver. 21. — In every work ; translate, and 
in all work. The "all work" being in the 
following clause triply described as pertain- 
iug to the service of tlie house of God, the 
observance of the sacred Law, and of any 
individual commandments flowing from it. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 21. — The worhs that came of faith. This chapter discloses to our view 
the perfection of activity. The rest of the Sun(lay, so to say, is followed by most 
laudable industry, and "the fervent in spirit" are "diligent in business" worthy of 
them. The picture is, indeed, of a living, moving scene. An army of volunteers issues 
forth from the recently purged city of Jerusalem to engage in worthy warfare, extir- 
patinc; "images," " groves," " high places," "altars," and utterly exterminating them 
from " Judah and Benjamin, Ephraim and Manasseh." They do not stay their hand till 
the work is done. The " camp " (ver. 2) also at home, the sacred camp of the temple, 
is once more set in array, that shall make it answer to its name, and in higher 
sense show forth that Church,, wherein all should be "decent and in order." King 
mnd people, priests, chief priest, and Levites, work with one surprising consent. The 
destruction of images and all the other signs of idolatry is followed by the restoration 
of David's arrangement of the courses, dishonoured so grievously by the neglect of 
worship in the temple, even to the closing of that temple, and by the re-ordaining of 
tithes mnd firstfruits, the king himself setting the example. Everywhere the work 
glows, everywhere there is plenty; the work of God is no more starved, and sacred 
" barns " and storehouses have to be " prepared " for tithes, which in their " heaps " 
were so plentiful that they take the name — auspicious omen^-of " free-will offerings " 
(ver. 145. In this busy, happy, holy scene, it i.s not difficult to pick out, even in th« 
human elements of it, four features which embody noble principles, offer inspiring 
example, and lend dignity to our faith in the possibilities of human nature when once 
divinely set on the pursuit of the right. We notice — 

I. The THonGHT, desire, devotion to oood, op one mah beoobik the adopted 

BXAMPLB, THE CREED, AND THE HEARTY PBAOTIOB OP A VERT ABMT, THAT 8BEM8 THBRB- 
tJPON TO NEED NO OTHER TKAININO. (VorS. 20, 21, 1, 2, 8.) 

II. The deepest soundings op religious memories, and beugious feelings 

FITTED TO PBODUOB, AND ACTUALLT PRODUCING, THE TRUE PRACTICAL LIFB. EvCry 

grateful work of this chapter was the outcome of the religioug heart-stirriugg recorded 
in the former. 



OH. XXXI. 1—21.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 375 

HL In oub mobal and spiniTnAL life (whbthbb as individuai8 ob as com- 

mJNITIBS OF people), WHEN YEABS HAVE AOOUMULATBD UPON US, WITH ALL TBEIB 
MIXED CONTENTS, A MERCILESS DESTRUCTION OF THE OLD WBONO IS THE WAY TO LAY 

RUBE FOUNDATIONS OF coNSTHUOTioN. Hezekiah had found "good and right and 
truth " nothing less than choked up of evil when he entered on his reign. But th« 
kej-note of his reformation was its thoroughness and completeness, and his own 
heartiness of work, in the " service of the house of God, and in the Law, and in th* 
commandmenU" (vers. 20, 21, 2, 4, and passim). 

lY. Upon all the rightest and hardest wobe it is that thebb follows thk 
ooDia houb in pbacs and bbnediotion. (Vers. 1, 21.) 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Yer. 1. — After the excitement. And now what next ? The services and the feasts 
are over ; the temple door is closed ; the tahles are taken down ; the musical instru- 
ments are laid aside in their places; the programme has heen completed— tha 
extended programme. What now shall that excited, enthusiastic multitude do 7 
There is — 

L The peouliak peril of the houb. There is no hour of greater moral danger— 
■ach is our human nature — than that immediately following great religious excitement. 
The leaders of revivals are well aware that this is so. There comes a certain reaction 
of the soul, a readiness to give way to other and to unworthy impulses ; the highly 
strung system seeks relaxation, and hecomes relaxed, and that is often found to be 
the enemy's opportunity ; then he can sometimes find a footing, and do his deadly 
work. Hence the need for wisddm, and hence — 

IL The necessity fob action. When " all this was finished," when there was 
the danger of some kind of reaction and wrong-doing, all Israel went out " and brake 
the images In pieces, and cut down the groves," etc. This was something done in 
accordance with their religious convictions ; it was action along the line of their new 
devotedness to Jehovah. It was rightful action, and, as such, it was timely, and it was 
serviceable. Whenever there is any kind of danger, do something that is right ; get 
to some useful work. It may not be of the highest kind ; it may not be particularly 
meritorious or eminently useful; but so that it is rightful action of some kind, it is 
well. Peril passes off in labour, in wholesome exertion. If a man is doing anything 
which can be honestly considered by him to be done unto the Lord, he is in the way 
of safety and of wisdom. 

III. The piety of removal. Ordinarily we can show our spirit of obedience by 
shunning the evil thing; by avoiding it; by "turning from it and passing away" 
(Prov. iv, 15), or simply by declining to touch it. But there are times and cases when 
this does not suffice ; when our wisdom is not merely to shut the eye or to tighten the 
hand, but to bring the axe and to smite to the ground, and to break in pieces. Such 
was the wisdom of Israel in regard to all images, altars, groves, *' high places." Their 
existence was too strong a temptation for those times ; true piety was shown in their 
abolition, in sweeping them from sight, in clearing the temptation wholly from the 
view. Such is often our wisdom, our piety now. The wine-cup must be banished 
from the table, and even from the house. The cards must be thrown into the fire; 
the favourite amusement must be kepi well out of reach. There are those — perhaps 
they are more numerous than is supposed — whose devotion to their Master is most 
wisely shown by an act of abolition ; by placing beyond access the temptation that 
has again and again proved to be too strong for them. The idol must not even be kept 
in the cabinet ; it must be broken in pieces. 

IV. The wisdom of thobougelnbss in all destbuctivb bebvice. They went on 
thriir way with their work of destruction, " until they had utterly destroyed them all." 
To leave any of those objects at all would have been like leaving weeds in the soil ; 
they needed to be thoroughly uprooted. For the act of destructiou to be of any lasting 
virtue, it was essential that it should be complete. If we are bent on destroying any 
vice in our nature, or ridding ourselves of any harmful habit in our life, the only thin" 
we can do is to extirpate utterly that which is wrong ; to sweep it away without reserve*) 



S76 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxxl 1— 21. 

to lay the aie to the root of the " evil tree." It is useless to out weeds ; they must be 
torn out of the soil. 

V. Thk houb fob sacrifice in Christian sebviob. There no doubt went to the 
creation of these imapjes and altars much that was valuable in its way. There had 
been expended on them labour, skill, affection, piety (after its kind). There were 
connected with them some old and, probably, some tender domestic associations. 
But while they were thus costly, they must go down and disappear in the interest of 
truth and pure relii;ion. Their costliness must not save them when they stood in the 
way of the nation's true piety and real prosperity. Nor may the costliness of any 
treasure we possess save it from removal from before our eyes, if it stand (1) between 
us and our Master ; (2) between us and our moral and spiritual integrity ; (3) between 
us and our usefulness ; (4) between us and eternal life. "If thy right eye offend thee, 
pluck it out, and cast it from thee," etc.— -C. 

Vers. 2 — 10. — The service of the consecrated life, and of the tiHtiance. Hezekiah, a* 
soon as the excitement of the great Passover and of the subsequent destruction of all 
idolatrous symbols was over, made wise arrangements for the regular service of Jehovah. 
And this included — 

I. The sebvioe of the consecbated life ; that, namely, of the priests and the 
Levites (ver. 2). This service was threefold : 1. Discharging sacred fimctions at the 
altar ; doing for the people that which only consecrated men could do — ^presenting their 
sacrifices to Jehovah, thus standing between their fellows and their God, and con- 
stituting a medium of communion between them and him. 2. Inquiry into and 
acquisition of all possible knowledge of the Law (oh. xvii. 9 ; Deut. xxxiii. 10). 3. 
Conducting the service of song (ver. 2), and teaching the people the Law which they 
had themselves learned. There are many in the Christian Church who have imder> 
taken to oB'er to their Divine Lord a consecrated life ; and it devolves on them to yield 
to him their strength in these three ways. (1) Ministration in his house or elsewhere ; 
the special service which the minister of Christ, as such, can render ; praying to God 
for his people, or helping them to draw nigh to God — a very valuable, indeed inestimable, 
service. (2) Earnest thought and inquiry ; becoming more and more fully acquainted 
with the mind uf Christ as that is revealed in his Word or in his providence, or through 
the experience or research of other servants of his. (3) Utterance of the truth thus 
acquired ; by teaching or preaching, in the sanctuary, or the school, or the house, 
personally or instrumentally. For the advancement of the kingdom of Christ it is 
needful that there should be a large number of men, answering to the priests and 
Levites, who shall regularly give a consecrated life to the service of the Lord. 

II. The sebvioe of the substance. We have a very interesting instance here 
recorded of the full and cheerful dedication of the substance to the cause of God. Led 
as well as taught by Hezekiah, the people responded with tithes and firstfruits, so that 
there were " heaps " in the temple courts, even when everything had been taken that wa» 
required (ver. 10). Even the remainder was " this great store." The scene snggesti 
the truths : 1. That the offering of our substance is a most appropriate method of sacred 
service. How can we better express our gratituile to the gieat Giver of every good 
thing of every kind than by dedicating to him and to his service some serious pro- 
portion of the pruduce of our strength and skill? 2. That those who urge others to 
show this grace should be forward to illustrate it themselves (ver. 3). 3. That from 
those who have the greater privileges may be expected a very clear encouragement by 
example (ver. 4). 4. That, if rightly addresse<l, the people of God may be trusted to 
make a lair and even a liberal response (vers. 5, 6). 5. That such service, rendered in 
a religious spirit, will draw down the Divine blessing in abundance (ver. 10; and see 
Mai. iu. 10).— C. 

Vers. 11 — 21.^:— Systematic Church finance. Hezekiah was careful to provide for 
the distribution of the tirstfruits and tithes and special offerings among the priests 
and Levites. So he had cells, or chambers, constructed for their reception (ver. 11), 
and every needful arrangement made for the due apportionment of all that was 
stored among those for whom it was intended. There are three points worthy of 
consideration. 



OH. xixi. 1— 21.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHEONIOLES. 877 

I. The dibtinctlt baobed ohabaoteb of Chuboh finance. What was given hers 
was placed within the precincts of the temple, for it was given to the Lord while it was 
appropriated to his ministers. It was a religious act on the part of the donors, and 
not less so on the part of those whose special duty it was to distribute it. " They 
brought in the dedicated things faithfulli/ " fver, 12) ; and " according to their fidelity 
did they show themselves holy in regard to the holy ; " i.e. " they acted in a holy manner 
with the holy gifts, distributed them disinterestedly and impartially" (Eeil). There 
is no reason why both the giving of money to the cause of God (and included in this 
is the contribution to the sustenance of the Christian ministry) and also the allocation 
of all such money should not be a thoroughly devout and pious action. It may b« 
rendered as truly " unto the Lord " as the singing of a hymn or the delivery of » 
discourse. It should be a sacred service, offered conscientiously, devoutly, holily. 

XL Stbtematio collection of CnnBCH finance. While considerable room was 
left under the Law for spontaneous liberality and for special offerings under peculiar 
circumstances, there were certain regulations as to tithes and flrstfruits (ver. 6). These 
latter were not optional, but obligatory ; at the same time, they do not seem to have been 
recoverable by legal process ; but they point to systematic contribution not unattended 
with special and spontaneous bestowraents. And this surely is the right principle 
in the Christian Church. 1. Let every man consider what proportion of his income, 
considering (1) the amount of his receipts, and also (2) the measure of his liabilities, 
he can possibly devote to the cause of God and man, of religion and philanthropy ; 
and let him set that apart. 2. Let every one of us be prompted to give special help 
whenever some specially powerful appeal is made to our spiritual convictions or our 
human sympathies. 

in. Systematic distribution. This ii something which must depend upon the 
constitution of each particular Church, and must vary according to that constitution. 
But there are some general principles, partly suggested by these verses. 1. Let 
every care be taken that all that is contributed be devoted and distributed, none being 
wasted or perverted. Here is scope for carefulness and for faithfulness. 2. Let the 
necessities of those on whom God has laid the weightier domestic burdens be generously 
met. 3. Let those who are engaged in the less prominent places be as much regarded 
as those who are " serving at Jerusalem " (see vers. 15, 19). 4. Let men of acknow- 
ledged probity and capacity liave charge of the treasury (see vers. 12 — 14). — C. 

Vers. 20, 21. — Earnestness. Perhaps the characteristic of Hezekiah was moral 
earnestness. There was no hesitation or half-heartedness about him. What he did 
he did " with all his heart," as is stated in the text. Under his direction everything 
was carried out and completed with a vigour and determination that showed that his 
heart as well as his hand was in his work. Hence his success in accomplishing that 
in which even Asa, Jehoshaphat, and Jotham, failed ; by him " the high places were 
removed " (ver. 1) ; and hence the historian could say, shortly but sfgnificantly, of 
him that " he prospered." Eegarding earnestness itself, we may consider — 

I. Its essentially spibitcal natdbe. It is not a question of mere temperament ; 
it is a distinctly moral quahty. Men may be endowed with a very ardent nature, and 
they may, as a consequence of their natural disposition, without any praise or blame 
attaching to them, espouse any and every cause they adopt with the greatest warmth, 
throwing into it an almost consuming energy. Yet they may be far from being 
earnest men. Such moral earnestness as Hezekiah had, which was the glory and 
crown of his character, was more than this, was different from this. It was the 
consecration and concentration of his powers to the full performance of that which he 
saw to be right. It was the conscientious and determined keeping to the front 
holding in full view of his soul those things which he knew to be of the first importance' 
which he felt entailed the weightiest obligation. Earnestness was with him, as it should 
be with us, not a constitutional peculiarity, but a spiritual force. 

IL The dibeotionb it should take. Just those which it took with the wise 
King of Judah ; he sought and wrought the good and the right and the true thing. 
1. The pursuit of truth. The first thing for a man tc know is— What is the truth'? 
Who is right? What is our life ? Who and what are we ourselves ? What can we 
accomplish on the earth ? What is the range and what are the limitB of our powers? 



878 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxn. 1— 2L 

To whom are we accountHble for all we are and do ? When we die, shall we live 
again? Has God spoken to us now in the Person of Jesus Christ? It becomes 
every man patiently, diligently, determinately, earnestly, to seek an answer to these 
questions until he finds it. 2. The acquisition of rectitude of character. To become 
right with God, to be right at heart, to be governed by right principles, to be moved 
and prompted by a right spirit, to have a character that is sound and strong, — this also 
is a thing to be earnestly endeavoured after until it is attained. 3. The accompU>-h- 
ment of that which is good and useful. It should be our most earnest hope and effort 
to live a life that will be one of faithful service ; and, in particular, to be the servants 
of God. Here the earnestness of Hezekiah shone forth most brightly. "In every 
work that he began in the service of the house of God ... to seek his God, he did it 
with all his heart." To promote the cause and kingdom of Jesus Christ, and in this 
way to contribute toward the elevation and well-being of our kind, — this is a direction 
in which our earnestness should stand out strong and clear. Let us be unmistakably 
In earnest in all the work we do for our Divine Saviour — for him who gave himself 
for us. Let us live and labour " with all our heart, " and with all our strength, 
never flagging nor failing, maintaining our devotedness through the heats of youth, 
and through the vigour of manhood, past the golden days of prime, still " bringing 
forth fruit in old age." 

III. Its SUCCESS. Hezekiah "prospered;" he prospered generally because God loved 
him and smiled upon him, and was " with him." He prospered also in those particular 
spheres in which he manifested so much earnestness. It is earnestness that does 
prosper. Indifference does not leave the starting-post. ImpulsiveDess soon turns 
back. Half-heartedneas is weary long before the course is run. But earnestness 
clasps the goal and wins the prize. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 4. — A religious reformation in the days of Hezekiah. I. A popdlab 
OBUSADE AGAINST IDOLATKT. (Ver. 1.) 1. When hegun. " When all this was finished," 
i.e. after the temple had been purified and rededicated (ch. xxii.), and the Passover 
celebrated (ch. xxx.). Everything in its order. "To everything there is a season, 
and a time to every purpose under the heaven ; " " a time to pluck up that which is 
planted ; " " a time to break down ; " "a time to rend " (Eccles. lii. 1, 2, 3, 7). This 
time had arrived in Judah, and partially also in Israel, in the days of Hezekiah. 2. By 
whom vmdertaken. " All Israel that were present," «'.«. all the members of the two 
kingdoms (Judah and Israel proper) that were in the metropolis observing the Passover. 
That they felt themselves stirred to such a vigorous assault upon the instruments and 
institutions of idolatry was an indication of the depth to which they had been moved 
by the high ceremonial in which they had borne a part. A pity was it that the 
nation's zeal for the true religion was so evanescent, not in Judah alone (ch. xxxiiL 
2, 9), but also in Ephraim (Eos. vi. 4). It is no contradiction to this that the Book 
of Kings ascribes this destruction of the altars, etc., to the king (2 Kings xviii. 4). 
8. To what extent carried. (1) Geographically, the wave of reformation swept over 
all Judah and Benjamin, i.e. all the southern kingdom, and over Ephraim and Manasseh, 
i.e. a considerable portion of the northern kingdom — that portion which had furnished 
feast-pilgrims to Jerusalem. (2) Religiously, it paused not until within those terri- 
tories it had swept away every vestige of idol-worship. The iconoclastic zeal of the 
people " brake in pieces the pillars or obelisks, hewed down the Asherim, and brake 
down the high places and the altars, until it had destroyed them all." A similar 
outbreak against the symbols of idolatry, only on a smaller scale, had taken place in 
the days of Jehoiada, immediately after the fall of Athaliah and the coronation of Joash 
(ch. xxiii. 17, which see); never before had the land experienced such a purgation 
of idolatrous institutions and instruments. So thorough-going was it that even the 
brazen serpent made by Moses in the wilderness (Numb. xxi. 9), and in Hezekiah's day 
become an object of idolatrous veneration, was called Nehushtan, " a piece of brass," 
and ground to pieces (2 Kings xviii. 4). 

II. A KINGLY ESTABLISHMENT OF THE TRtTE RELIGION. (Vers. 2 4.) 1. The puhlic 

ordinances of religion arranged. (1) The priests and the Levites were divided into 
courses according to the plan of David (1 Chron. xxiv. 3, etc.), as in the reformation 
under Jehoiada. (2) Each man was appointed to the special service for which he waa 



OH. XXXI. 1—21.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. ' 379 

designed — each had his own work to attend to and perform. In the New Testament 
Church Christ gives " to every man his work " (Mark xiii. 34). (3) The works dis- 
tributed amimgst them were such as pertained to the temple- worship, viz. the offering 
of sacrifice, burnt offerings, and peace offerings, and the ministering, i.e. giving thanks 
and praising by means of vocal and instrumental music, "in the gates of the camp of 
the Lord" — a remarkable expression (see next homily). 2." The state service of religion 
provided for. , The expense of keeping up that part of the temple-worship which was, 
properly speaking, national, t.e. the morning and evening burnt offerings, with the 
burnt offerings for the sabbaths, the new moons, and the set feasts prescribed in the 
Law of Jehovah (Numb, xxviii., xxix.), the king took upon himself and discharged out 
of his own possessions (ch. xxxii. 27 — 29). As the crown wealth was, to all intents 
and purposes, the nation's property, the act of the king was right ; still, in so far as the 
national wealth was under his control, his act was a deed of liberality. Wlieiher 
kings or parliaments under the Christian dispensation we required or permitted to 
allocate national wealth to the support of religion may be open to debate ; there is no 
room for doubting that neither kings nor statesmen are hindered from devoting portion! 
of their own wealth to the cause of Christ, i.e. to the up-keep and propagation of tho 
true religion. 3. A maintenance assigned to the ministers of religion. The portion 
which belonged to the priests and Levites by the Law of Jehovah, t.e. the firstfruits 

SExod. xxiii. 19 ; Numb, xviii. 12, 13 ; Deut. xxvi. 2 — 4), and the tithes of land and beast 
Lev. xxvii. 30—33; Numb, xviii. 21 — 24) — the firstfruits being assigned specially 
to the priests, and the tithes to the whole tribe of Levi — the king commanded the 
people residing in Jerusalem to render. Under the Christian dispensation the support 
of the ministers of religion devolves exclusively upon believers (1 Cor. ix. 7 — 14; 
2 Cor. xi, 7 — 12 ; Gal. vi. 6 ; 1 Thess. iL 6). Kings and parliaments in their official 
capacities have not been charged with the duty of supporting ministers of religion out 
of public revenues. 

Lessors. 1. It is good to be zealously affected in a good thing, such as the suppres- 
sion of idolatry. 2. It is not permissible under the gospel to suppress idolatry by 
violence, but only by argument and the force of truth. 3. The lawfulness of state 
establishments of religion in Christian times cannot be inferred from the existence 
of such an institution among the Hebrews. 4. Compulsory payments in support of 
Christ's religion are indefensible. 6. It is open to all to practise Christian liberality. — W. 

Ver. 2. — "Tlie camp of the Lard." I. To what this debionation belonged? L 
To the tabernacle. (1 Chron. ix. 19.) The religious centre in Israel from the days 
of the conquest till the times of David and Solomon. 2. To the temple. (Ver. 2.) 
On Mount Moriah in Jerusalem, which Ahaz had closed during the latter years of his 
reign (ch. xxviii. 24), but Hezokiah had now opened, cleansed, and rededicated to the 
worship of Jehovah (oh. xxix., xxx.). 3. To the Church of God. (1) Under the Old 
Testament dispensation (Lev. xiv. 8 ; Numb, v. 2 ; Deut. xxiii. 10), and (2) under the 
New Testament dispensation (Rev. xx. 9). 

II, What this designation meant. 1. 7%at the Lord had pitched his tent there. 
This was true (1) of the tabernacle, which was usually styled the dwelling (Exod. 
XXV. 9), and, when finished, was filled with the symbol of the Divine presence, the 
glory of the Lord (Exod. xl. 34, 35) ; (2) of the temple of Solomon, which also was 
simUarly named (ch. vi, 2) and inhabited (ch. v. 13, 14) ; (3) of the Old Testament 
Church as distinguished from its institutions (Ps. cxxxii, 13, 14) ; and (4) of the New 
Testament Church or assembly of believers (Matt, xviii. 20 ; xxviiL 20 ; 2 Cor, vi. 16). 
2, That those anumgst whom the Lord dwelt were warriors. This, again, was true 
(1) of Israel, in the wilderness and in Canaan, her principal occupation in the latter 
place being fighting, not always with the Lord's enemies, as should have been the case, 
but frequently with one another ; and worshipping, though much oftener idols than 
Jehovah, So should it be true (2) of Christian believers, as it is when they in any 
degree realize the ideal of their vocation — to fight the good fight of faith (1 Tim, vi. 12V 
and to endure hardness as good soldiers of Jesus Christ (2 Tim, ii, 3),— W. 

Vers, 5 — 19, — A nation's Itberaliiy ; or, a lecture on tithes. I, Thb imposition o» 
the tithes. Done by the commandment of Hezekiah (ver, 5), not, however, acting ia 



380 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHEONICLEa [oh. xxxi. 1— 21. 

hfs own name and by hig own antliorlty, but merely publishing the Law of Jehovah for 
the maintenance of those who conducted the temple service. Under the old economy 
Jehovah was the sole Head of the Church, as Christ is under the new. For the Hebrew 
Church the exclusive source of legislation was not the sovereigns or prophets of tht 
nation, but Jehovah ; as for the Christian Church it is neither kings nor parliaments, 
neither Church dignitaries nor Church courts, but Jesus Christ. That which gave 
binding authority to Hezekiah's commandment was not that it was " the word of s 
king " (Bccles. viii 4), but that it was the ordinance of Jehovah as declared by Moses 
(Bxod. xxiii. 19; Lev. xxvii. 30—33 ; Numb, xviii. 12, 13, 21, 24; Ueut. xxvi. 2—4). 
That which lends weight to hnman legislation in the Christian Church is the circum- 
stance that it accords with the teaching of Christ in the New Testament Scriptures. 

II. The paying of the tithes, etc. 1. Promptly. " As soon as the commandment 
came abroad," the childiren of Israel began to pour in their contributions (ver. 5). 
The absence of delay showed their zeal was not fanatical, but religious, and not seeming, 
but real — the last thing to be affected by a man's religion being his purse ; perhaps 
also it proved that the king's liberality had been not without its influence (ch. xxx. 24), 
as certainly it imparted additional value to their gifts. Qui eito dat Ms dat. 2. Faith- 
fully. Nothing was omitted or evaded that the Law enjoined. The people presented 
" the firstfruits of corn, and wine, and oil, and honey, and of all the increase of the 
field ; " paid in the tithes or tenth parts Jehovah had assigned as a portion for the 
whole tribe of Levi (ver. 5), as well as the tenth parts of such things as were dedi- 
cated to the Lord (ver. 6) ; and rendered free-will offerings to Jehovah over and above 
what had been directly commanded (ver. 14). 3. Unweariedly. It was no sudden fit 
of liberality which had overtaken them and quickly expended itself. The firstfruits 
presenting, tithe-paying, and free-will offering went on for four months (ver. 7). 
Many can do a generous deed when seized by a momentary impulse, but are wholly 
unable to bear the strain of continuous giving. That these ancient givers grew not 
tired of their liberality was a proof that it proceeded from principle rather than from 
impulse — showed they were acting more from respect to the Divine Law than from 
a desire to gratify their own feelings. 4. Abundantly. So extraordinary was the out- 
burst of liberality, that not only had the priests and Levites obtained the most ample 
mainteniince, having had enough to eat and plenty over (ver. 10), but so fast came the 
people's offerings in that they were obliged to be piled up in heaps (ver. 6), while so 
liberal had they been that, when the tithe season ended, so great a store remained 
(ver. 10), that the priests and Levites were guaranteed against want throughout the 
rest of the year. The Christian Church might herein find an example. It is poor 
policy, besides being unscriptural (Luke x. 7 ; 1 Cor. ix. 14), for Churches or congre- 
gations to starve or underpay their ministers. 5. OeneraMy. Most likely there were 
those who refused to comply with the king's commandment, acting from a spirit of 
avarice which could not bear to part with their goods, or a spirit of unbelief which 
secretly hankered after the false gods they had formerly worshipped, or from a spirit 
of indifference, because they had no real interest in religion ; and doubtless there were 
those who gave grudgingly and of necessity, adhering strictly to the letter of the Law, 
never going beyond the bond if they could help it, and certainly never throwing in any 
free-will offerings ; but manifestly also the main body of the people, in the northern 
kingdom (ver. 5) no less than in the southern (ver. 6), yielded obedience to the king's 
commandment, and fell in with the order of the day. 

III. The stobino of the tithes. 1. The chambers for their reception. These were 
prepared in the house of the Lord (ver. 11), in accordance with instructions from 
Hezekiah, but whether they were old cells or new cannot he determined. 2. The 
officers for their supervition. (1) Two superior — Cononiah the Levite, and Shimei his 
brother (ver. 12). (2) Ten inferior — Jehiel and Azaziah, Nahath and Asahel, Jeri- 
moth and Jozabad, Eliel and Ismachiah, Mahath and Benaiah — who acted as subor- 
dinates and assistants to the two chiefs, who derived their authority from Hezekiah th« 
king, the chief magistrate in the state, and Azariah the chief priest of the house of 
Zadok (ver. 10), and ruler of the house of Grod (ver. 13). 

rV. The disteibotion of the tithes, etc. 1. The distributors. (1) The chief— 
Kore, signifying " Partridge " (Gesenius), a name home by the son of Ebiasaph (1 Chron. 
ix. 18), and here by the son of Imnah. By descent a Levite, he was by occupation 



OH. XXXII. 1—33.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 381 

** a porter towards the east," i.e. keeper of the king's gate on the east side of the temple, 
(2) The assistants, six in number, named Eden, Miniamin, Jeshua, Shemaiah, Amariah, 
and Shecaniah, resided in the cities of the priests in different parts of the country. 
2. The distribution. (1) Kore distributed to those priests and Levites who served in 
the temple, first of such things as were required for the maintenance of themselves 
and the male children over three years of age who accompanied their parents (being 
priests) to Jerusalem when the turn came for these to serve, and secondly of inch 
things as were necessary for any portion of their temple service. The distribution to 
the priests was according to fathers' houses (ver. 17) — so much for every house, accord- 
ing to its size; that to the Levites was to individuals from twenty years old and 
upwards, according to a carefully prepared register. (2) The assistants distributed 
necessary portions to those priests and Levites who resided in the priests' cities, not 
being at the time engaged in active duty at the temple, and to the families of these as 
well as of those who were engaged (vers. 15 — 19). Both parts of this work were per- 
formed with scrupulous fidelity (ver. 18); the distributors "acted in a holy manner 
with the holy gifts," distributing them " impartially and disinterestedly to all who had 
any claim to them " (Keil). 

Learn : 1. The duty of Christ's people to support the ministers of religion, 2. The 
voluntary character of all acceptable payments tdwards religion. 3. The necessity of 
order and system in Church finance. 4. The excellence of Christian liberality. — W. 

Vers. 20, 21. — The secret of prosperity. L A lofty conception of what truk 
PBOSPERiTT IS. 1. Negatively. It is not personal, material, and temporal aggrandize- 
ment, inasmuch as one might gain the whole world, and yet lose his own soul (Matt. 
xvi. 26) ; thus seeming to succeed, but in reality only gaining a disastrous failure. 
2. Positively. It is working that which is good, right, and faithful before the Lord as 
Hezekiah did — constructing a life in harmony with the Divine ideal of what a life 
should be, viz. (1) good, such as God can approve, admire, and pronounce excellent 
(Gen. 1. 31); (2) right, according with the law of duty prescribed for God's intelligent 
creatures ; and (3) faithful, in the sense of proceeding from a spirit of fidelity towards 
God. A life fashioned after this model is prosperous, no matter what its external 
environment may be. 

II. A BIGHT IDEA OF HOW TRUE PROSPERITT SHOtTLD BE SOUGHT. 1. Generally, by 

leeking God. Only in the knowledge and service, favour and fellowship of God, can 
the ideal of life above outlined be realized. To designate that career successful which 
has never proposed for its aim, and consequently never reached as its end, a personal 
acquaintance with God — which has never occupied itself with either ascertaining or 
doing God's will — is simply to misapply language. 2. Particularly, by rendering to 
God acceptable worship and true obedience. To worship and obey God the chief end 
of man. No life can be successful which offers its homage and seivice to another than 
God, or offers only homage self-devised, and service self-directed. Both in worship and 
la duty the Law of God, with its speciiic commandments, must rule. 

III. A COEBBOT METHOD OF PUBSUINO AFTEB TBCE PB08PEBITY. It mUSt be SOUght 

after : 1. Always. Hezekiah kept the above turn before him " in every work that he 
began." Mere occasional efforts after goodness will result in nothing but failure. 
2. Earnestly. Hezekiah sought it with all his heart. Half-hearted endeavours can 
only terminate in feeble achievements. "Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do," etc 
(Eccles. Ix. 10); "This one thing I do" (Phil. iii. 13). 3. Religiously. Whatever 
works Hezekiah engaged in were done " before the Lord his God," as in his sight and 
for his glory. So should it be with Christians. " Whether therefore ye eat or drink," 
etc. (1 Cor. X. 31) ; and " Whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord," etc. 
(Col. iii. 23).— W. 



EXPOSITION. 
CHAPTBB XXXn, 
This chapter of thirty-three verses is 
paralleled by the sixty-one verses that begin 
<nth 2 Kings xviii. 13 and end with xix. 



87; and by Isa. xxxvi., xxxvii. Oni chapter 

gives, as might be anticipated, but a very 
partial and somewhat broken account, there- 
fore, of this stretch of Hezekiah's career. 



882 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xxxn. 1-33. 



•nd no adequate impression whatever of the 
great power nf eome poriious of the parallel. 
A close comparison of the two places leaves 
us tolerably clear as to the order and con- 
Becutivenees of the history, although perhaps 
not entirely so. The style of our present 
chapter betrays the usual marks of dls- 
jointedness, in the case of extracts from 
fuller history, in the indeflniteness of its 
connecting phrases, found, e.g., in vers. 1, 9, 
24, 31. Onr compiler, by omission, seems to 
shield Hezekiah, probably designedly, from 
the disrepute that must be felt to attach to 
his want of faith, courage, and fidelity in 
his trusteeship of the sacred property of the 
temple as indicated by what is written in 
2 Kings xviii. 14 — 16, of which see further 
infra. 

Ver. 1. — The establishment thereof; trans- 
late, and this (his) truth. The word is the 
•ame with the third of the trio (see above), 
as given in ver. 20 of the foregoing chapter. 
The evident meaning intended to be con- 
veyed is, "After these things and this 
truth," i.e. truthfulness of conduct on the 
part of Hezekiah, the strict rendering being, 
"After the things and the truth this." 
Seunaoherib . . . came . . , entered into 
Judah . . . encamped against the fenced 
Oities . . . thought to vin. This verse and 
these items of it may without any incon- 
venient strain be made conterminous with 
just one verse in Kings, the thirteenth of 
2 Kings xviii. The king personally seems to 
have devoted himself especially to the siege 
of Laohish, an Amoritish city indeed origin- 
ally, and a place of great strength of posi- 
tion, but conquered by Judah (Josh. x. 26, 
81 — 35 ; ch. xi. 9 ; xxv. 27 ; and infra here 
and in parallel). This invasion of Senna- 
cherib (Herod., ii. 141). son of Sargon, may 
be with moderate certainty affixed to the 
date B.C. 701. Thought to win. A weak 
rendering for the preferable purpoied or 
hoasted to hreak them (Gen. vii. 11). 

Yer. 2. — When Hezekiah saw . . . and 
that he purposed . . . Jerusalem. Whether 
the three verses of ill omen already alluded 
to (2 Kings xviii. 14 — 16) may be read pre- 
cedent to this verse, and purport that the 
bribes had heen paid, and yet had failed of 
their object, so that Hezekiah was now com- 
pelled to brace himself to the occasion, and 
" took counsel," etc. (next verse) ; or whether 
this verse dates (as some think) the quailing 
heart of Hezekiah, and an offer or part 
payment of treasure by Hezekiah to Senna- 
cherib, which only increased his insolence, 
■■ immediately now related, is uncertain, 
perhaps. In the face of the emphatic 



language of the three verses of the parallel, 
and in consideration of the possible motive! 
as suggested above for our compiler omitting 
the matter altogether, we incline to the 
former opinion. That would have the effect 
of making this verse say that when Hezekiah 
had his eyes opened to the failure of hig 
bribe —a waste payment, for that Sennacherib 
still " purposed to fight against Jerusalem " 
— he finally proceeded to take the right steps. 
However, the witness and indications of 
Isa. xxii. 13 — 19 ; xxix. 2 — 4, may go some 
way to shield Hezekiah &om the entire 
blame. The silence of our compiler on the 
whole matter is the one residuum of fact, 
and unfortunate in its suggestion. 

Ver. 3. — To stop the waters of the foun- 
tains . . . without the eity. These fountain! 
or springs were probably those represented 
by En Bogel, on the Ophel spur or very 
large mound, or fortified hill (mistranslatea 
possibly from that circumstance " tower," in 
2 Kings V. 24 ; Isa. xxxii. 14), on the south- 
east of the temple. The object of Hezekiah 
is obvious enough. The word (dTO) for 
"stopping" occurs in all thirteen times — 
twice in piel iu Genesis, once in niph. in 
Nehemiah, and ten times in kal in Kings, 
Chronicles, Daniel, EzeMel, and Psalms. 
It is for all material purposes very uniformly 
rendered in all these places by the word 
" stop " eight times, and otherwise " shut " 
or " closed," or to carry a derived meaning, 
"hidden "or "secret." Iftheword "shut" or 
" shut off" were employed, it would fit every 
occasion. So we are not told here how he 
etopped the fountain or fountains, but that 
he shut the waters off from one direction 
and guided them into another, viz. by a 
conduit running westward from the springs 
and the Gihon (i.e. the brook) flowing 
naturally down the Tyropoean valley to a 
pool prepared for it in the city (see our ver. 
30 ; and 2 Kings xviii. 17 ; xx. 20 ; Eoclus. 
xlviii. 17 ; and Condor's ' Handbook to the 
Bible,' p. 339). This pool was very probably 
none other than the pool of Siloam. 

Ver. 4. — The brook that ran through the 
midst of the land. Compare the Septuagint, 
which has it, " through the midst of the 
city;" and compare foregoing verse and 
note ; and see again above reference to 
Conder's ' Handbook ' at length. 

Ver. 5. — He strengthened himself; t.e., 
as in our several previous instances of the 
oocui-rence of the phrase (1 Chron. xi. 10; 
ch. xii. 1 ; xxv. 11 ; xxvi. 8), he took all 
possible means to make himself and people 
and city strong to withstand the invader. 
All the wall that was broken (see Isa. 
xxii. 9). Although we read that the devas- 
tation wrought by Joash (oh. xxv. 23) was 
very largely repaired by Uzziah (oh. xxvi. 9) 
and by Jotham (ch. xxvii 3), it is not ex- 



OH. xxxn. 1— 33.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



383 



plicitly eaid that the hroken four hundred 
cubits of wall, from the gate of Ephraim to 
the comer gate, were made absolutely good 
again, although in the matter of towers and 
fortifications much was evidently done. 
Note also the word " all " here, side by side 
with the "much" of eh. xxvii. 3. And 
raised (it) np to the towers. Discard this 
Authorized Version rendering. The meaning 
cannot be certainly pronounced upon, but 
perhaps it may be intended to say that he 
heightened the towers. The objection is 
that the same verb is wanted for the next 
clause, and that its rendering would need to 
be there slightly reduced again to a mere 
statement of raising from the ground (i.s. 
building) another vail without. Bepaired 
Uillo (see note^ 1 Chron. xi. 8). 

Ver. 6. — The street of the gate ; translate, 
ffie wide area at the gate, etc. ; what gate is 
not specified, but presumably either "the 
gate of Ephraim," which would be the one 
opposed to the camp of the besiegers, or 
possibly "the corner gate" (oh. xxv. 23; 
and Gender's 'Handbook,' pp. 343—345). 

Ver. 7. — Several of the descriptive dra- 
matic touches of Isa. xxii. 4 — 14 are forcible 
and apt commentary to this verse. 

Ver. 8.— (See 2 Kings vi. 16 ; Jer. ivii. 5.) 
The admirable language of Hezekiah here 
quickens our desire to feel sure that this was 
after (aud after genuine repentance for) his 
faitlilessness (2 Kings xviii. 14 — 16). 

Ver. 9. — The passage beginning with this 
verse and ending with ver. 21 represents 
the much fuller parallel (2 Kings xviii. 17 
— xix. 37), fifty-eight verses in all. This 
much greater fulness is owing to the greater 
length at which the language of defiance on 
the part of Sennacherib and his appointed 
ofScera is narrated, and the matter of his 
subsequent letter ; also the prayer of Heze- 
kiah ; and his application to Isaiah, with the 
reply of the latter to it. On the other side, 
there is very little additional in our narra- 
tive, a few words heightening the effect in 
our vers. 18, 20, 21, constituting tlie whole 
of such additional matter. The vague mark 
of time, after this, with which our present 
verse opens, merely says that in due course 
of Sennacherib's invasion of Judah, and 
attack of the fenced cities (ver. 1), he pro- 
ceeds to send his servants and his insolent 
defiances to the metropolis, Jerusalem itself. 
The three words in italics, "himself laid 
liege" should evidently give place to the 
single word " remained " or " was ; " i.e. he 
and all his host vnth him remained at, or 
opposite to, Lachish, while his servants 
went to defy Jerusalem in his name, 

Ver. 10. — In the siege. This Authorized 
Version rendering is manifestly incorrect, 
though, if we simply omit the article, and 
lender m tiege, we shall probably have 



Sennacherib's exact idea. He spoke not of 
the literal technical thing siege, but of the 
distress and confinement that the apprehen- 
sion of the siege did not fail to bring. This 
so to say moral tone to the rendering of the 
word (niipa) is much to be preferred to that 
of the margin, " in the fortress or stronghold." 

Ver. 11. — The policy of Sennacherib, in 
the direct attempt to undermine Hezekiah 
by appealing straight to his people, instead of 
to himself or his ministers of state, is yet 
more pronounced in expression, as seen in 
2 Kings xviii. 26, 27. 

Ver. 12. — This misrepresenting of Heze- 
kiah's pious actions is thought by some to 
have been iimocent ignorance on the part of 
Sennacherib. Yet it is scarcely credible. 

Ver. 13. — Some of these deeds of Senna- 
cherib and his fathers, i.e. predecessors in 
the kingdom of Assyria, are mentioned in 
detail in 2 Kings xvii., passim. 

Ver. 15. — The urgency of Sennacherib's 
appeal to the people was of course his way 
of trying to save work of actual siege, fight- 
ing, etc., to himself and his army. The 
how mnoh less of the message of Sennacherib 
probably meant that his estimate of the your 
God, t.e. the God of Israel, was measured 
partly by the comparative smallness and un- 
warlike character of the nation of Judah, 
when set side by side with the great heathen 
nations, and partly by the spiritual and in- 
visible character and being of God, little in- 
telligible to such a one as Sennacherib. 

Ver. 16. — And his servants spake yet more. 
A glimpse of the fact that the compiler of 
our book very designedly excerpted only 
what he thought needful from very much 
more abundant resources. 

Ver. 17. — Letters to rail on the Lord God 
of Israel (so 2 Kings xix. 8 — 14). The 
rumour of the approach of " Tiihakah King 
of Ethiopia" (ver. 9) quickened Senna- 
cherib's anxiety to make short work with 
the conflict at Jerusalem, by intimidating 
the people to an early collapse of their 
resistance. 

Ver. 18. — In the Jews' speech (see again 
2 Kings xviii. 26, 27). The last three 
clauses of this verse are additional matter 
to that contained in the parallel. 

Ver. 19. — As against the gods of the people 
of the earth, the work of the hands of men. 
Our compiler, at all events, signalizes the 
difference, which Sennacherib worse than 
minimizes, between the God of Israel and 
the so-called gods of the surrounding heathen 
nations. 

Ver. 20.— For the prayer cf Hezekiah, see 
2 Kings xix. 14—19; and for the place of 
the prayer or prayers of Isaiah, and the in- 
dications of their having been offered, see 
alike ch. xix. 4—7, and the veises of the 
grand passage, 20—81. 



384 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxxii. 1—33, 



Ver. 21. — The extMSt matter corresponding 
with this one verse is embraced by vers. 
85—37 in the parallel (2 Kings six.). It 
gives the number of slain as a hundred and 
eighty-five thousand. It does not speak of 
the heavy pioportion of leaders and captains 
lost. It leads as to suppose that for all sur- 
vivors it was a surprise in the morning — 
that silent vision of the dead in such vast 
array. Stating, on the other hand, in mere 
historic dry detail, the return of Sennacherib 
to his own land, his dwelling at Nineveh, 
and assassination, in the house of Nisroch 
" his god," at the hands of his own two sons, 
mentioned by name Adrammelech and 
Sharezer, who had to fly for it to Armenia 
(Ararat), it does not show the obviously 
designed moral touch of our compiler, So he 
returned with shame of face to his own land, 
nor the similarly complexioned description 
of the time, place, and agents of his assassi- 
nation. Lastly, it gives Esarhaddon as the 
name of his successor on the throne. 

Ver. 22. — This verse, with the notification 
of Hezekiah's great deliverance from the 
hand of the King of Assyria, summarizes 
also his various other deliverances, with taoit 
reference to such suggestion of other con- 
flicts as we have in 2 Kings xviii. 7, 8. 
Guided them on every side. The Septuagint 
reads, gave them rest. This suits the con- 
nection as regards meaning best, and also as 
regards the immediately following adverb, 
*' on every side." It has also in our present 
book the correspondences of ch. xiv. 6 ; xv. 
15; and especially ch. xx. 30, with tlie 
Hebrew words of which, an easily supposed 
tectifioation brings it into exact agreement. 

Ver. 23. — Presents to Hezekiah. The 
"precious things " (nij'jjD) of ch. xxi. 3. 

Ver. 24.— The extreme brevity again of 
onr compiler, in the account of Hezekiah's 
illness, and his passing so lightly over 
whatever in it cast shades upon his character 
and career, cannot escape our notice. Much 
fuller is the narrative of 2 Kings xx. 1 — 21. 
Gave him a sign (see 2 Kings xx. 8 — 11, 
and onr ver. 31, middle clause. See also at 
length of the sickness of Hezekiah, Isa. 
zxxviii.). 

Ver. 25.— The parallel, 2 Kings xx. 12—19 
and Isa. xxxix., fully explain the circum- 
stances here referred to, and we may con- 
dnda that Hezekiali'i sin eonsisted in the 



spirit in which he acted, displaying his 
treasures, so that it was in the fullest sense 
a sin of " the heart." 

Ver. 26. — Hezekiah hnmhled himself. Pos- 
sibly the language of the nineteenth verse 
in the parallel is the one surviving historic 
trace of this. The language found in Jer. 
xxvi. 19 may be also a note of the same, 
though its dependence (see vers. 17, 18) on 
Micah iii. 12 seems to make it less likely. 

Ver. 27. — If Hezekiah not only began to 
negotiate, but actually paid the precious 
metals, etc., with which he offered to buy off 
the invasion of Sennacherib (2 Kings xviii. 
14—16), he may have become considerably 
recouped by the presents and gifts subse- 
quently, liberally it would appear, brought 
to him (see our ver. 23), and it is possible 
that this may give us some further clue to 
where it was that his heart strayed, while 
displaying his wealth and treasures to the 
messengers of Berodach-Baladau King of 
Babylon. 

Ver. 28. — Cotes for flocks should be ren- 
dered, conversely, flockt to the $talU, Le. stalls 
full of flocks. 

Ver. 30. — Stopped the upper wateroonrse, 
etc. (see our vers. 3, 4). What Hezekiah 
" stopped " was the spring, or more strictly 
access to it, and glided its prized waters 
down, probably by an underground channel, 
to Siloam, or else to the pool in the city 
which he had constructed and enclosed by 
that " another wall without " (ver. 5), west 
of the " city of David." 

Ver. 31. — Howheit; literally, and thui. 
The italic type dispensed with, the verse 
may be rendered. And thus with or among 
the ambassadors of the princes . . . Ood le^ 
him to, etc. The princes. This plural may be 
the pluralis excellentiss, and designate the 
king himself, who doubtless issued the ofScisd 
command to the messengers to visit Heze- 
kiah with gifts, etc., but not necessarily go. 
The word may betray the inquiries and 
curiosity of the princes of Babylon, under 
the king, the expression of which led to the 
embassy, so to call it. 

Ver. 32. — In the vision of Isaiah (so 
Isa. i. 1). 

Ver. 33.— In the ohiefest of the sepulchres ; 
literally, m the ascent of the sepulchre* ; i.e. 
in new burial-places, either on the ascent 
to the old ones, probably now full, or els* 
above them. 



HOMILETIOS. 

Vers. 1 — 23. — TTis vnakneit that bodes strength; the defiant strength that hodes "thama 
if facie" One of the most fruitful sources of strength in the individual character is 
according to the trustfulness that may be in it — the absence, or all but entire absence, 
of it on the one hand, and the larger or lesser bulk of it on the other. Trustfulness 
U * sure tuming-poiut — a determining feature in the original shaping and in the grow- 



BH. xxxn. 1— 33.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE JHBONICLES. 386 

ing formation of any character. The direction in which that trustfulness goes out to 
exercise itself, or goes iu quest of an object on which, in its lovingness, to lean, if 
watched often enough with trembling solicitude, and is a matter of intrinsic importance. 
It is undeniable that the trustful disposition often means that which is prone to trust 
too soon, too easily, and to its own hurt therefore. It often, also, goes with too little 
self-reliance. These are, however, the weaknesses incident to what is really a strong 
feature. Where a person is strongest, there, by many an analogy, may lurk some form 
of weakness, some snare. Once more, there is an opposite of trustfulness, that consists 
in suspiciousness, and not simply in too little trust. Of such an opposite nothing good 
can be said. But, even by the side of too little trust, the trustfulness that errs by 
excess must be considered to show to advantage, and really to gain advantage, unless 
the excess be to a manifestly foolish extent, and a thing of perpetual recurrence. The 
practical outcome of all is that, as between man and man, we distinguish the two 
expressions — ^trustfulness, and exercising trust — and we discriminate the two qualities 
which those expressions purport to describe. Such a distinction and such discrimina- 
tion are more than necessary as between man and God. Implicit trust, constant trust, 
and all the loving trust of trustfulness, can never be misspent, never misdirected towards 
God. The example outlined before us in the first eight verses of this chapter is an 
instance of a notaVile effort and enterprise of trust, as compared with perhaps that 
afforded us by the life of Abraham and many others, which illustrated an habitual 
trustfulness. Let us leam^ 

I. That the ultimate qbeatest material of strength is trust nf the Unseen. 
Such trust is not only a last resource, an ungrateful last resort ; it is the matter of 
strength, its material. " This is the victory that [even] overcometh the world , . . 
faith." This dictum of the apostle, who loved love so well, and was something less 
known for faith, may be held to carry the whole question. What a fine field of survey, 
what a wide horizon opens before us, when once we begin to try to count the achieve- 
ments of faith I This faith in the Unseen, and in the Unseen One, is no mere matter 
of high contemplation ; it works loith trust. 1. The trust that characterizes an honest 
consciousness of duty done to the best and utmost of human ability, becomes at once 
a strong incentive of faith. 2. So also that trust which comes of a clear discernment of 
the incompetency of self when alone and unaided. 3. The very craving of trust helps 
the grand quality of faith. And, on the other hand, the reacting of the intelligent con- 
viction of the existence and presence and favour of the great Master of all circumstance 
and all events is the very suggestion and nourishing of trust. These also have a very 
spreading nature (ver. 8). There are very many who learn trust and faith at second 
hand, if it may be so expressed, who have not/orc« enough apparently in and of them- 
selves, and without the inducement and encouragement of many examples, or, perhaps 
otherwise, of some very leading and remarkable example. And then, at the crisis — 
some crisis of great extremity — the sndden cry of prayer makes the whole scene burst 
into life; faith and trnst are exchanged for fruition (vers. 20, 21). It was so now with 
Hezekiah and his people ; it was often so in the history of other kings and people ; and 
it is often so — ^how much oftener might it be ? — in our individual life. 

II. That the exteemitt of weakness is defiant trust in self. Self-trust is, 
indeed, except under certain circumstances, nothing short of uiter weakness; but the 
daring, defiant form of it presented by the narrative before us exceedingly and actively 
aggravates the mischief. E.g. : 1. The defiance that comes of overweeuing conceit of 
self is certain to underrate the strength of others (vers. 9 — 19). 2. The cefiance that 
comes of an overbearing temper is certain to betray the owner of it into what must involve 
such moral fault as adds weakness to weakness. For instance, it does not faU short of 
mocking fellow-men, nor hesitate at all to do sol 3, The defiance that comes of impioiM 
disbelief of the one God, and infatuated reliance on no other but the god self, is merely 
another way of saying that the man guilty of it is already shut up within the smallest 
circle of resource. And with all this corresponds, again, the howl of the servants and 
soldiers of Sennacherib (ver. 18) against the besieged " people of Jerusalem that were 
on the wall, to affright them, and to trouble them," in some mocking imitation of their 
venerated language ; in place of the " prayer and cry to heaven " of Hezekiah the king 
snd Isaiah the prophet (ver. 20). That howl came of sense alone, and appealed to 
sense alone. So rude an attempt at intimidation of an enemy a very poor substituts 

n. oa°oNioL£s. 2 o 



386 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxxil 1—33. 

for "prayer" to God for strength to preTtul,and "cry" for his protecting and deliverinf 
mercy I 

Vers. 24 — 26, 31. — The shadow which Eezehiah casti on hi$ own life's history. The 
great commendation of Hezekiah, written in one word — his "goodness"— in our thirty- 
second verse, but somewhat more expressly in the parallel (2 Kings xviiL 5), which 
raised him to the very first rank with David and Jehoshapnat, may well be accepted 
as fully explained and sustained by the undeviating excellence of his administration of 
the kingdom. His reign is, at any rate, unsullied by any sins like those of David. 
Yet one error, one sin, and from its denunciation and punishment manifestly a grievously 
offensive one, is to be laid to his charge, and which seems to have consisted in a boast- 
ful ostentatiousness, on an occasion which presumably pre-eminently condemned it 
for untimeliness and inexpedience. The faithfulness, and yet the tenderness, of allu- 
sion to it, as made by our present writer (ver. 31), we cannot but notice, understand, 
and admire. But for the fuller suggestions that lie within it, they are to be sought and 
found in the parallel (2 Kings xx. 12 — 19), and in the writing of the Prophet Isaiah 
(xxxix., wonderfully prefaced by xxxviii.). From this part of the history of Hezekiah 
we may notice something to be learned as to — 

I. The seed op occasion. There are seeds — many, indeed — of occasion, besides 
those which, perhaps, we think more justly called seeds, viz. those of cause. They are 
to be thought on and feared, for they are the lighter and less visible; more approaching 
to a certain omnipresence, and wafted hither and thither on the gentlest of breezes, as 
well as the stiffest, they alight so softly, at most unsuspected times, and on spots most 
unsuspected. These occasion-seeds are, doubtless, often part of the very scheme and 
works of Providence. Designed to good, they are, like many of the completer mani- 
festations of Providence, warped and wrested to evil. The exact origin of the severe 
" sickness unto death " of Hezekiah is nowhere told us. It looks uncommonly like an 
earlier " thorn in the flesh." The thorn in the flesh, out of which St. Paul made for 
himself such good history, turns to all the reverse with Hezekiah 1 His " thorn in the 
flesh " was sent because the all-seeing Eye saw this — that there was already sign of 
Hezekiah being exalted above measure (ver. 25) through the long run of mercy and 
prosperity vouchsafed to him, even though vouchsafed in harmony with his own 
" goodness." Yet mercy strews " his path and his bed." Promise of recovery, sign and 
marvel — sign of recovery, and recovery itself — are all in early sequel. Mercies of kind- 
ness still follow and pursue him (Isa. xxxix. 1) — letters, presents, congratulations, 
flattering inquiries of the wonderful sign granted to Hezekiah, in a double sense, of 
Heaven itself — and the issue already declares itself! The net is not "spread in vain in 
the sight of this bird"! Sickness, warning, special kindness, special suggestions of 
dependence, and therefore of the appropriate humility ; of dependence most graciously 
remembered of Heaven, and therefore of gratitude, that should have been responsive ; — 
"all this array one cunning bosom-sin blows quite away." The occasion of sin came 
through the very warning against sin, and shows how sin will carve its own occasion 
right through aM occasion ! 

II. The sin itself kow in question. The careful study of this for our own warning 
is the more desirable, inasmuch as it is the one only recorded defection of Hezekiah. 
It comes on the page of his history unexpectedly, and must be supposed to come out 
of one of those most sunken and aside depths that give facility for sm to harbour, and 
for Satan to wurk his devices in the more difficult cases for him. The lesson is that with 
Satan, the expert in the ofiensive, it needs ever that with much prayer we strive to be 
experts in the defensive. The pomp of display and the vanity of ostentation by which 
and into which Hezekiah was now entrapped, were probably attended by aggravating 
circumstances, which, though not stated, may be surmised with no little probability; 
but, at any rate, they were penetrated by this aggravation — that they came from one 
who knew better, and had so well known and done better, that they could only be 
viewed as some very retrograde condition of heart, and, unless sternly checked, liable 
to lead to worse developments in practice. Civil words to Babylon, and civil deeds to 
tke ambassadors of her king, happened to be just the wrong thing, and not the right. 
A vain-glorio'is display of the treasures, that already excite the cupidity of plunder^- 
temptationn to our tempter and would-be betrayer and destroyer — was a giand mi» 



«. xixu. 1— 33.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 387 

take indeed. So are civil words to our souls' tempters, and civil deeds to our great 
enemy Satan ! If Hezekiah had known that " these men," and " the country whence 
they came " (2 Kings xz. 14), were going to be the capturers and the enforced home 
respectively of Ck)d'8 people, whom he hajd been set jealously to guard and watch over 
■8 the under-shepherd ; if he had known that all his " precious things, silver and gold, 
spices and ointment, armour and all treasures," were to be the sacrilegious plunder of 
Babylon and the King of Babylon ; — would he then have done as he did? These things, 
it may truly be said, he did not know now. But what did he know? And did he not 
know such things as these — that pride and vanity, vain-glory and ostentation, were not 
for him, who was the dependent servant of God, and the trustee of treasures, sacred 
treasures, also, that belonged to him to whom the earth and the fulness thereof and 
all its precious things, but especially Israel, belonged ? How often do we excuse our- 
selves, both for mere faults and also for sins, on tlie plea that we did not know certain 
exact facts, forgetful of these two things— ;/SrsJ, that we nevertheless did know, and do 
know, certain great general piinciples and rules which, had we observed them, would 
have covered and governed all individual cases; and, secondly, that though we may 
often say, " We did not know," there remains to be answered the question whether our 
ignorance was not nevertheless of our own making, or at least within the reach of our 
own removing! 

IIL The attitddk of Hezekiah to his faithful pbofhet. It certainly would 
appear (2 Kings xx. 14, 15; Isa. xxxix. 8, 4) that he was conscious of wrong in the 
presence of Isaiah, that he feared his interrogatories, that he equivocated in his reply, 
or, at any rate, concealed, or tried to conceal, some part of what had transpired in his 
interview with the ambassadors of Babylon, laying emphasis enough on the rest. So 
far as the narrative goes, he does not directly reply to what " these men " said. He was 
probably flattered by " great Babylon " coming at all, by the congratulations brought, 
by the inquiry respecting " the wonder that was done in the land," and — infatuation 
though it were, if so — by the presumable overtures on the part of the King of great 
Babylon to enter into some alliance with him. This all was emphasized greatly by the 
fact that the present visit was the first converse of the two kingdoms. Israel had 
heard of Babylon, of her " wealth," her " glory," her " beauty," and of her " sins " (Isa. 
xiii., xiv., xzi.) also, but up to this time had held no sort of communion with her. In 
an evil hour the "uplifted" (ver. 25) heart of Hezekiah answered to all the blandish- 
ments of the occasion, and the new and grand acquaintance which he has made is pro- 
phetically and positively set before him by Isaiah in a light which quickly disenchants 
him, as the conqueror and taker-captive of Israel, and the very master of his sons and 
humbled posterity. An hour ago it was his ambition to show all his " wealth " and all 
his " dominion," and watch whether they vied witli those of the great master of the 
"ambassadors." A moment's vision of the truth dashes all else to the ground; and 
Hezekiah becomes either the genuine resigned penitent — God having " tried him," left 
him " to himself, that he might learn all that was in his heart " (ver. 31) — or the alike 
obsequious and selfish receiver of the tidings of doom for his people, delayed till after 
his own death. If this latter be the position, the even grateful resignation to the 
Divine will, uttered by Hezekiah's lip, contrasts ill with the nobility we would wish 
to put to the credit of such a king, and the king of such a people. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — In face of the enemy. We do not know how long " after these things, 
and the establishment thereof," occurred the events whicli are here narrated ; but the 
connection of the two in the record of the Chronicler may suggest to us — 

I. That teouble mat follow faithfulness as it does follow sin. We never read 
of Israel's serious departure from their loyalty to Jehovah without reading of appropriate 
penalty coming in due course. Suffering always waits on sin — suffering in some form. 
But sometimes, as here, trouble comes to the right-hearted; to the nation which has 
Hezekiah for its king, and Isaiah for its prophet ; to the man who is zealous in the causa 
of his Divine Lord. " Many are the afiBictions [even] of the righteous," and sometimes 
great as well as many. They have a work to do within and beyond, the value of which 
will 'mmeasurably outweigh the " grievousness of the present" CH.eh. xii. 11). 



388 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxxn. 1—83. 

IL That it should be met with courage, energy, intelligence, aot) piett. 
These quiJities Hezekiah was now ihowincr. He had given way to trepidation, and he 
had reBoried to means which were unworthy of his position and his piety (see 2 Eingi 
xviii. 9 — 16). But now he was in a nobler mood. His courage rose to the occasion 
(jer. 7) ; his energy was manifested in the effective measures (vers. 4, 6) he took to 
distress and to disappoint the enemy ; his mtdligence was shown in his taking counsel 
with the strongest and wisest of his people, in the rapidity of the measures he adopted 
«nd in their sagacity, and also in his effort to inspire the people with confidence and 
security; his piety shone forth in his address to the people, calling on them to 
remember that they had not an " arm of flesh," but " the Lord their God," to lean 
upon. Let us meet any form of trouble — disappointment, loss, bereavement, sickness, 
or any affliction whatsoever — in this spirit and with these qualities, and it will not 
master us ; we shall prevail over it. It will not leave desolation and ruin in its track ; 
it will rather leave benefit and blessing behind it. 

III. That when we are attacked odb aim should be to depbat the enemy's 
intention. This is not altogether the truism it may seem. Too often men think that 
their duty and their wisdom under attack is to reply to the enemy in the same form 
in which he is assailing them. But that may be most unwise. Just as Hezekiah con- 
sidered what Sennacherib was aiming at, and took prompt and able measures to defeat 
that purpose ; so we should always consider, not the kind of warfare, but the " real 
objective," the ultimate purpose of our enemy, and should set to work to prevent iti 
realization. He may only be wanting to provoke and disturb us, and we shall abso- 
lutely defeat his purpose by not allowing ourselves to be provoked or disturbed : he 
may be desirous of inducing us to take some compromising step, and we shall gain the 
victory by refusing to be drawn in that direction ; he may want to bring himself into 
notoriety, and we shall defeat him by quietly letting him alone, etc. Consider his 
aim, and move so as to thwart that. 

IV. That rectitude is the strength op any cause ob kingdom. Sennacherib's 
multitude of soldiery was nothing whatever when he deliberately and ostentatiously 
arrayed them against the living God. Hezekiah's army was indifferent in size and 
(probably) in military equipment and training, but what mattered that so long as they 
had righteousness in their ranks and God for their Leader? We are not, indeed, to 
despise the means which we employ, but it is so much that we may say that it is every- 
thing to know and feel that our cause is just, that we ourselves are upright in our 
heart and character, and that, with perfect purity and simplicity of spirit, we can ask 
God's blessing on our efforts. — 0. 

Ver. 8. — Resting upon words. " And the people rested themselves upon the words 
of Hezekiah." How far are we right and wise in building upon words, upon the 
words of another? 

I. The folly of resting ok the ttbe of formula. There are some sacred forms 
or phrases, theological or scriptural, which have been much urged upon men, as if they 
had some very special potency in them ; as if we could be perfectly at rest, in regard 
to human souls, if they did but pronounce those particular phrases with their lips. 
Such superstition as this is pitiable and perilous. It is utterly without warrant, and 
it is likely to withdraw the soul from that true trust in which life is to be found. To 
believe in Jesus Christ can never be resolved into the use of any form of words, how- 
ever excellent or scriptural such form may be. 

II. The confidence which is fatal, viz. to rest upon the words of those who are 
unworthy of our trust. How many of the children of men have lost everything that 
is most precious because they have made this fatal mistake 1 Of those whose words 
should never be built upon are : 1. The ignorant, whose range of knowledge is very 
small, and who have not had the opportunity of learning the ascertainable truth and 
wisdom of Ghid. 2. The prejudiced and obdurate, who will not learn, and therefore do 
not know and cannot counsel. 3. The superficial, who are contented with a knowledge 
which does not reach "the deep heart of truth." 4. The false, who only say what 
they think is palatable and profitable. 6. The fickle, who have one doctrine to-day, 
but may have a different one to-morrow. 

IIL The tbcbt which is bound and wise. There are words on which we may 



OH. iixn. 1— «3.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHEONICLES. 381 

build. When God epeaks to us we know that we may rest on his Word absolutely ; w« 
know that we should heed his warnings, and that we may build on his promises. 
" Heaven and earth shall pass away," etc. But how shall we know when Christ i§ 
■peaking to us? Many speak in his name who do not speak on his authority. 1. We 
should pay regard to the words of those who profess to speak for him, and whose 
character for purity and unselfishness sustains their claim (Matt. vii. 15 — 20). 2. We 
should heed the words of those of his disciples who urge that which meets our spiritual 
necessities and accords with the deepest convictions of our nature. 3. We should con- 
sult the Master's own recorded words, always remembering that they are to be inter- 
preted in the spirit, and not in the letter. If we do this we shall not only be " resting 
on words," we shall be building on the rock, lor we shall be abiding in the truth ; we 
shall be grounded on the very wisdom of God itself, or (we may say) on the Wisdom 
of God himself (I Cor. i. 24, 30).— 0. 

Vers. 9—23. — Sennacherib and Eezekiah: alasemmit and exaltation. We hav« 
here brought out in very vivid contrast — 

I. The histoet op the haughty. 1. Appearances are all on its side. It has 
apparently overwhelming numbers, superior military training and equipments, the 
prestige of previous success and acknowledged worldly power. 2. It is honeycombed 
with spiritual eviL It is (1) lamentably ignorant of the truth which it distorts (ver. 12) ; 
(2) scornful (ver. 11), indulging in a contemptuous spirit and correspondingly con- 
temptuous language ; (3) pride, and its accompanying vain-gloriousness (vers. 13 — 15) ; 
(4) impiety, speaking of the living God as if he were to be classed with the gods of 
the heathen (vers. 13, 15). All these evil tempers and baneful utterances are serious 
sins, either against self or against others, or directly against God. 3. It draws down 
upon itself the decisive displeasure of the Divine Buler. For the vauntful Sennacherib, 
who made so sure of an easy victory and an added honour, there was reserved, in th« 
righteous providence of God, a calamitous disaster (ver. 21 ; and see 2 Kings xix. 16) 
and bitter shame. " So he returned with shame of face to his own land " (ver. 21). 
Thus he that exalted himself was abased ; and thus the haughty may expect to bt 
brought low, for there are two powers working against them. (1) The moral con- 
dition of haughty-heartedness is one that conducts almost certainly to negligence, to 
imprudence, to some fatal error of either action or inaction. (2) God's high displeasure 
is kindled against them. Again and again has he "revealed his wrath" against this 
evil and baneful passion. To fall under its power is penalty indeed, but it leads on and 
down to other sorrows. 

II. The history of the humblk. Humility, in the person of the godly Hezeklah, 
presents an opposite picture to that of his formidable and defiant enemy. 1. It is 
apparently in great peril. The outward and visible forces — those of this world — are 
decidedly against it. If the race were always to the swift and the battle to the strong, 
there would be no chance for humility. It would never clasp the goal, nor win the 
victory. 2. Its character is one of beauty and of piety. There is no little moral come- 
liness in humility ; it is " fair to see ; " it attracts the gaze of the purest eyes above 
and below. Moreover, its spirit is reverent ; it knows its own helplessness, and it looks 
upward for the aid it needs; it "cries to Heaven" (ver. 20); it leans on God. 3. Its 
end is not only deliverance, but honour. The Lord saved Hezekiah from the hand of 
Sennacherib (ver. 22) ; and to the King of Judah were brought valuable gifts, and "he 
was magnified in the sight of all nations" (ver. 23). Concerning humility now, as it 
may appear in all men's hearts, we may say that (1) it is a fair and beautiful grace in 
itself, most worth possessing for its own sake, really enriching its subject; (2) it brings 
with it the favour of God our Father (Isa. Ivii. 15; Matt. v. 3; xviii. 4; xxiii. 11; 
1 Pet. V. 5, 6) ; (3) it will be honoured in due time. Not only ig it the cage that 
humility introduces us into the kingdom of Christ, but it is also true that it leads us 
on to an advanced position in that kingdom. " The lowly heart that leans on thee " il 
not only " happy everywhere," but it is spiritually prosperous everywhere ; it is certain 
to receive proofs of Divine regard, probably in human estimation (as with Hezekiah); 
but, if not thus, in some other way of gracious and gladdening enlargement.— O. 

Vers. 24 — 26, 31* — The trial of restoration. The incident to which the text refert 



390 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [ch, xxxii. 1— 3i 

was a very small one when measured acrainst the magnitude of that with which the 
preceding verses deal. It concerns the sickness and the recovery of one man, together 
with a visit to the court at Jerusalem of a few ambassadors. But it was very much 
to Hezekiah himself, and it contains valuable lessons for us all. 

I. The incalculable element in our trials. This is large. 1. We cannot guess 
when they will come. What little reason had Hezekiah to anticipate that " sickness 
unto death"! It sprang upon him uuawares. So does our affliction. We are reckon- 
ing on prosperity, health, friendship ; and, behdlrl I immediately in front of us is trouble, 
sickness, loneliness. A few hours may make all the difference to us in the colour and 
complexion of our life. 2. We cannot calculate how far they will go. We expect the 
little ailment to pass away in a day or two, and it becomes a very grave and threaten- 
ing illness; we think we are stricken with a mortal blow, and we find that we have 
nothing that need seriously disturb us. And so with other troubles beside bodily dis- 
order. We cannot measure their magnitude or their gravity. 3. We cannot under- 
stand why they have come, or what they mean. Is it that we have sinned? or that 
others have erred, and we are "carrying their infirmity"? Is it a mark of Divine 
displeasure? or is it a sign of our Father's interest in us and care for our deeper and 
truer well-being? 4. We cannot enter, except in a very slight degree, into the serious- 
ness (^ others' sorrow. A very special gift of the grace and power of symjiathy will 
enable some men (and women) to umlerstand and feel much with others ; but those 
who have ordinary human faculties very imperfectly understand what other souls are 
•uffering, how much other hearts are bleeding. 

II. OuE REFUGE IN GoD. Hczeldah "prayed unto the Lord." We know, from the 
account in 2 Kings xx., how the afflicted man "poured out his heart" unto God, and 
how earnestly he besought the Divine compassion. In the day of our trouble — espe- 
cially "in the day of grief and of desperate sorrow" — ihere is nothing we can do that 
approaches the wisdom or that supplies half the relief of seeking and finding a refuge 
in God. Even if we do not expectantly ask for deliverance from our adversity, we 
appeal (and never vainly) for Divine sympathy and succour in it. This, we are sure, 
can never be denied us. " Like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth 
them that fear him " (Ps. ciii. 13). We have in Jesus Christ the " High Priest . . . 
touched with the feeling of our infirmities" (Heb. iv. 15). Our affliction tries us; it 
proves, not only to God, but to ourselves and to others, what is the spirit we are of; 
whether ours is, or is not, the spirit of filial trustfulness, of quiet aoquii scence, ot 
genuine piety, of openness of heart to learn, and of readiness of will to do, his holy wilL 
But there is another trial, which perhaps strikes deeper and proves us more thoroughly. 

III. The tbial op eestoration. Hezekiah bore well the trial of sickness ; it drew, 
or drove, him to tlie Eock of his salvation. He did not stand well the trial which 
came with his restoratior). Then came congratulatory embassage, and then the uplifted 
heart showed itself, and the unbecoming ostentation came forth ; and with it came the 
displeasure of the Lord. The king " rendered not again according; to the benefit done ; " 
he did not respond to God's especial grace (ver. 24) with corresponding gratitude, 
losing sight of self and keeping God's pitiful and powerful intervention in view. His 
heart was unchasti'ued and "lifted up." How do we bear ourselves when the cloud 
has departed and the sun shines again ? What is our spiritual attitude when we are 
strong again, or rich again, or again surrounded with friends? That is the trial-hour. 
Then God proves us ; then we show to him and to our neighbours what mind we we 
of — whether our affliction has permanently purified, or only temporarily touched us. 
Let those who have been cast down to the ground in any kind of affliction, and who 
have been raised up again by the g'lod hand of their God upon them, ask themselves 
the main question — Have they proved themselves to be docile children of their heavenly 
Father, apt disciples of the Lord of their life ? Have they learned humility, self-dis- 
trust, unworldliness, consecration? Or are they lapsing into that which is selfish, 
earthly, proud? God has been proving tiiem; let them examine their own hearts. 
"Let every man prove his own " heart. If he can, lei him " have rejoicing in himself,' 
in his spiritual integrity ; if he cannot, let him conaider well and act wisely before God, 
" lest a worse thing happen unto him." — 0. 

Vers. 27 — 30, 32, 33. — Eezekiah'$ happines*. 1. There can be no question at all as to 



OH. XXXII. 1—33.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 391 

Hezekiah's greatness. He was one of the greatest of the kings of Judnh ; not more 
than two, or three at the most, can he named as being greater than he. 2. Or as to 
the excellency of his estate (see text, vers. 27 — 29). He had all that his heart could 
wish, so far as temporal possessions were concerned. 3. Or as to the regard in which he 
was held by his subjects. They evidently " delighted to honour " him, as they showed 
by their action when he died (ver. 33). When the restraints of a great man's presence 
are taken away, we see what his fellows really ihink, and how they feel about him. 
But was he a happy man, an enviable man, one with whose condition — " state for 
state with all atteiidants" — we should like to exchange our own? That may well 
be doubted. Consider — 

I. The dbepentnq shadow that lay along his path. He knew that, .from the 
time of his sickness, he had fifteen years to live (2 Kings xx. 6). Now, with such 
a sensitive and thoughtful spirit as his was (Isa. xxxviii. 2, 3), we may be sure that he 
counted the years as they went by, and that he realized with painful force the diminu- 
tion of those that remained to him. How much more happy are we who are in ignor- 
ance of the number of the years before us I To know positively that only so many 
more remain must cast an ever-darkening shadow on the path of life. 

II. The lack op the light beyond the shadow. Hezekiah does not seem to 
have cherished any hope, to have entertained any expectation that could be truly called 
a hope, concerning the future (see Isa. xxxviii. 9 — 20). And to be drawing nearer and 
nearer, day by day, by a distinctly measurable distance, the hour when the light of 
life would go out into the thick darkness, — what a saddened life must that have been 
to a, thoughtful and imaginative spirit 1 

III. The fear he must have felt concebning his codntbt's FUTtmB. Manasseh, 
his son, may have been too young to have given any very decided intimation of his 
probable future. But, looking behind him, remembering the imperfections or the 
reactions and apostasies of Solomon, of Jehoram, of Ahaz, he must have been seriously 
concerned lest his son should undo what he himself had so laboriously done. What 
security was there that the evil and idolatrous practices he had so fearlessly and so 
faithfully suppressed would not be revived ? that the religion of Jehovah he had so 
carefully re-established would not be set aside, and thus his life-labour lost ? Such 
reflections — especially if he had any insight into, and therefore any foresight of, 
Manasseh's character and course — must have tinged his thought with a melancholy 
hue. Yet was there one compensating and reassuring thought, which may have 
balanced all others, and have brightened his latter days. That was — 

IV. The eeview of hts own life, and of the work he had wrought since he had 
occupied the throne. It was not the recollection of his prosperities (ver. 80) which 
would gladden his heart in the after-years ; they become of continually smaller con- 
sequence as we leave them behind us. It was the retnembiance ot his kindnesses (ver. 
32, marginal reading) and of his faithfulness as the chief servant of Jehovah, that 
would give gladness to his heart, as they gave lustre to his reign. Let us remember 
that physical enjoyments, mental excitements, earthly honours, human congratulations 
or laudations, — all these melt away into nothingness as time comes between them and 
our spirit. Soon the one vital ami only serious question will be — What have we done 
of all that God gave us to do? what have we achieved with the faculties and the 
facilities he placed in our charge? Prosperities and enjoyments do for the [lassing 
hour, but kindnesses and fidelities attend us to the dying pillow, and they cross the 
last stream and await us as we land on the other side. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — An Assyrian invasion of Judah. I. The date. 1. Indefinitely. 
" After these things, and this faithfulness " (ver. 1) ; i.e. after the gi eat Passover, which 
terminated in the destruction of the symbols of idolatry throufihout the land, with 
the restoration of the true worship of Jehovah in connection with the reopened and 
purifitd temple (ch. xxx., xxxi.), and after the singular display of zeal and piety on 
the part of Hezekiah in furthering that good work. How long after not stated ; the 
juxtaposition of the Passover and the invasion favours the idea that the former fell not 
in Hezekiah's first year, but after his sixth (see homily on ch. xxx. 2), since the latter 
cannot be placed earlier than eight years after the fall of Samaria, B.C. 720. 2. De/S- 
nitely. " In the fourteenth year of King Hezekiah " (2 Kings xviii. 13 ; Isa. xxxvi. 



392 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xxxn. 1— 3a 

1). If this date be correct, the invasion referred to cannot have been that of Senna- 
eherib (b.o. 701), eighteen or nineteen years after the capture of the northern capital, or 
in Hezekiah'g twenty-fourth year, but must have been an expedition of Sargon, who, 
ten years earlier (b.o. 711), marched against " the people of Philistia, Judah, Bdom, 
and Moab," who had formed an alliance with the King of Egypt — a monarch who 
could not save them; and in particular besieged and took Ashdod (Smith, 'Assyrian 
Discoveries,' pp. 291, 292). The expedition against Ashdod fisa. xx. 1) was conducted 
by Sargon's tartan, or commander-in-chief, " while Sargon himself overran ' the wide- 
spreading iand of Judah,' and captured its capital, Jerusalem." The invasion of 
Jerusalem is referred to in Isa. x., as Calno, Carchemish, Hamath, Arpad, Damascus, 
and Samaria, were conquests, not of Sennacherib, but of Sargon (Sayce, ' Fresh Light,' 
etc., p. 137) ; and beyond question this must be the invasion to which 2 Kings (xviii. 
13) and Isaiah (xxxvi. 1) allude, if the date given by them be correct. If, however, 
Sennacherib's invasion is meant, an error must have crept into the text with reference 
to the date, and "twenty-fourth" will require to be substituted for the "fourteenth." 
BLleinert, Sayce, and Professor Cheyne ('The Prophecies of Isaiah,' i. 201 — 210) 
adopt the former view, that in 2 Kings (xviii. 13), 2 Chronicles (xxxii. 1), and Isaiah 
(xxxvi. 1) "Sargon" should be read for "Sennacherib" — an opinion with which Q-. 
Smith appears to coincide (' Assyrian Discoveries,' p. 293) ; but Schrader (' Die Keilin- 
Bchriften,' pp. 309, 310), Robertson ismith ('The Prophets of Israel,' p. 295), Baw- 
linson (' Kings of Israel and Judah,' p. 187), and Canon Driver (' Isaiah : his Life and 
Times,' p. 49) regard this view as insufficiently established, and believe the invasion 
alluded to in all these passages to be that of Sennacherib. 

II. The invader. 1. Sargon (to adopt the alternative view above referred to). On 
the monuments, Sarrvr-hinu, " Strong is the king," or Sar-uhin, " He [God] appointed 
the king." One of Shalmaneser's generals, probably his tartan, or commander-in- 
chief, who, on Shalmaneser's death during the siege of Samaria (b.c. 723 — 720), 
seized the crown and assumed the name Sargon, " in memory of the famous Babylonian 
monarch who had reigned so many centuries before " (Sayce). Whether, like Tiglath- 
Pileser II., he had sprung from the ranks (Sayce), or was of kingly descent, probably 
proceeding from a collateral branch of the royal family (Schrader), cannot be decided; 
but he was one of the most brilliant potentates that ever sat on the Assyrian throne. 
A rough and energetic soldier, he conquered in succession Samaria, Egypt, Ashdod, 
(Jerusalem ?), and Babylon, and destroyed the independence of the Hittites at Car- 
chemish. The town of Khorsabad, Dur-Surrukin, the city of Sargon, opposite Mosul, 
and ten miles from Nineveh, "in the country which borders the mountains," wai 
founded by him (' Records,' etc., xi. 33). 2. Sennacherib. On the monuments, Sin-ahi- 
irib, or Stn-ahi-ir-ba, " (The god) Sin multiplies the brothers," — Sargon's son, who, 
after his father's assassination, ascended the throne of Assyria on the 12th of Ab 
(July), B.O. 705. " Brought up in the purple, he displayed none of the rugged virtues 
of his father. He was weak, boastful, and cruel, and preserved his empire only by 
the help of the veterans and generals whom Sargon had trained" (Sayce, 'Assyria,' 
etc., p. 41), This, of course, was not the opinion of Sennacherib, who, in an inscrip- 
tion on one of the gigantic bulls guardm? the entrance to his palace, speaks of himself 
•■^ " Sennacherib, great prince, powerful prince, prince of legions, king of the land of 
Assyria, king of the four regions, worshipped of the great gods, valiant, the manly, the 
brave, chief of the kings of disobedient people, subverter of evil designs " (' Records,' 
etc., vii. 59). Oriental sovereigns generally had not studied Prov. xxvii. 2, and had no 
notion of underratini; their own virtues, or modestly concealing their own merit. 

III. The object. 1. Proximate. "To besiege and capture or break down the fenced 
cities of Judah (ver. 1). According to 2 Kings (xviii. 13) and Isaiah (xxxvi. 1), 
Sennacherib (or Sargon) was in this successful (cf. Isa. x. 5 — 10). This, according to 
the monuments, Sargon did while his tartan was besieging Ashdod, B.o. 711 (Sayce), 
or in connection with his earlier expedition against Hanno of Gaza and Seveh the 
Sultan of Egypt in B.C. 720 (Schrader) ; and Sennacherib in b.o. 701 by besieging, 
capturing, and plundering forty-six of Hezekiah's cities, "strong fortresses and cities 
without number" ('Records,' etc., vii. 62). 2. Ultimate. To capture Jerusalem, which 
also, according to the monuments, was taken by Sargon, but not by Sennacherib. The 
Msertion of the Chronicler with reference to the Assyrian king, that " his face was to 



OH. xxxn. 1— 33.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHEONICLEa 893 

fight against Jerusalem," was applicable to both sovereigns, though only of Sargon 
waa it true that Jerusalem was taken. Sennacherib besieged Hezekiah, shutting him 
up " like a caged bird in the midst of the city of his royalty " (' Records,' etc., vii. 62) ; 
but Jehovah " put a hook into his nose, and a bridle into his lips," and sent him back 
the way by which he came, without permitting him to enter the city (Isa. xxxvii. 
29 — 37). If Isa. z. refers to Sargon's invasion (Sayce), it would seem as if the capital 
had been taken (see vers. 6, 12, 22, 24, 34). 

IV. The besistanob. Hezekiah adopted measures to meet the attack of Sargon, 
or of Sennacherib, on bis capital. 1. A council of war called. Attended by his princei 
and mighty nten, i.e. his statesmen and the generals of his army (yer. 3), who advised 
that steps should be taken to protect the metropolis, and lent him their aid for that 
purpose (ver. 3). Probably they also recommended Hezekiah, besides looking for help 
to Egypt, to join the league Merodach-Baladan of Babylonia was forming against 
Sargon ; or, if the later date be adopted, to seek the aid of Tirhakah agamst Senna- 
cherib. 2. The v>ater supplies outside the city stopped. (1) The reason — that the 
Assyrian kings should not find much water (ver. 4). Without water it would be 
impossible to conduct a protracted siege. (2) The mode — by covering up the fountains 
outsiile Jerusalem, and leading their waters by subterranean channels into the city 
(ver. 3 ; cf. 2 Kings xx. 20). " The brook that flowed through the midst of the 
land," t.e. the Gihon which flowed through the valley of that name on the west side 
of Jt-rusalem, connecting the upper pool of Gihon (Isa. xxii. 11 ; xxxvi. 2), the present- 
day Birkei Mamilla, with the under or lower pool (Isa. xxii. 9), the modern Birket- 
es- Sultan, was likewise dried up by the waters of the two springs being drained oflf 
by a conduit, and led into a great cistern within the city walls, called Hezekiah's 
pool, close by the gate of Gennath" (Weser, in Eiehm, art. "Gihon"); or, should the 
Gihon be sought in the spring Ain Sitti Marjam, outside the east wall (Miihlan, in 
Eiehm, art. " Jerusalem ; " Conder, ' Handbook,' etc., p. 339), then the reservoir into 
which the waters were conducted will have been one of the four smaller pools in the 
neighbourhood of the pool of Siloam, if not that of Siloam itself (Sayce, ' Piesh Light,' 
etc., pp. 97 — 107). Warren locates the Gihon spring in the Tyropoean valley, and 
says it has not yet been discovered (' Picturesque Palestine,' i. 113 ; cf. ' The Recovery 
of Jerusalem,' p. 237). That similar stratagems were adopted when Sargon's tartan 
was at Ashdod, and Sargon himself was expected at Jerusalem, may be inferred from 
the fact that Sargon says of the Ashdodites, " Their cities they prepared to make 
war . . . against capture they fortified its (capital) . . . around it a ditch they exca- 
vated. Twenty cubits (thirty-four feet) in its depth they made it, and they brought 
the waters of the springs in front of the city " (Smith, ' Assyrian Discoveries,' pp. 290, 
291). That corresponding measures were resorted to in the time of Sennacherib, 
Isaiah (xxii. 9 — 11) shows. (3) The urgency. So great and obvious that the inhabi- 
tants generally assisted in the work (ver. 4). 3. The city fortificatunis increased. 
(1) Hezekiah built up all the wall that was broken down, ».e. wherever he found a 
breach he repaired, or a weak part he strengthened it. "The prudence of this was 
apparent. The strength of a wall or fortress is not more than that of its weakest 
part, as the strength of a chain is that of its feeblest link. (2) He raised the existing 
wall to the height of the towers on it, or increased the height of the towers, or 
ascended the towers upon the walls to make a survey of the situation, and direct the 
labours of his masons and engineers. (3) Outside of the existing wall he erected 
another, which enclosed the lower city, Acra. (4) He repaired the castle-fortress Millo, 
in the city of David, which had been built by Solomon (1 Kings ix. 24). (5) He 
provided weapons and shields in abundance, as had been done by his grandfather 
Uzziah (cb. xxvi. 14), whom in military genius he considerably resembled. An 
inscription of Sennacherib mentions that Hezekiah " had given commandment to renew 
the bulwarks of the great gate of his city " (this may suggest that the bulwarks had 
suffered damage in an earlier siege), and that " workmen, soldiers, and builders for the 
fortification of Jerusalem his royal city he had collected within it " (' Records,' etc., 
i. 41). 4. The city population armed. All the able-bodied men of the metropolis 
were enlisted, divided into companies, placed under regular military commanders, and 
drilled, just as is done by modern i)eoples when expecting an invasion. 5. The extem- 
porized army reviewed. By the king's orders the troops were mustered in f ' •■ hroad 



394 .THE SECOND BOOK OP TUE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxxii. 1— 33. 



place at the east gate of the city (see on ch. xxix. 4). 6. The soldiers tuitably 
addressed. He encouraged them in their work of defence, as at the great Passover 
he had encouraged the Levites in their temple duties (ch. xxx. 32). (1) Spirited 
exhortations, (o) " Be strong." So the Philistine generals charged their troops when 
fighting against Israel (1 Sam. iv. 9) ; so David, dying, exhorted Solomon succeeding 
(1 Kings ii. 2); so Oded counselled Asa returning from war (ch. xv. 7); so Pard 
recommends Christians for the fight of faith (1 Cor. xvi. 13 ; Eph. vi. 10; 2 Tim. ii. 1). 
(6) "Be courageous." So Joab had encouraged David's army against the Syrians (2 
Sam. I. 12); and Jehoshaphat the Levites and priests in their duties (ch. xix. 11); 
BO Peter advises tlie followers of Christ (2 Pet. i. o). (c) " Be not afraid or dismayed." 
So Jahaziel to Jehoshaphat's troops (ch. xx. 15 — 17); and Isaiah to Ahaz when 
threatened by Bezin and Pekah (ch, vii. 4) ; so Christ to his disciples (John vi. 20). 
(2) Effective arguments, (a) General : that a Greater was with them than with the 
invader (cf. 2 Kings vi. 16 ; Rom. viii. 31 ; 1 John iv. 4). (6) Particular : that he 
had only frail human power to lean upon — men and horses without number, but still 
only "an arm of flesh" (cf. Jer. xvii. 5; Ps. Ivi. 5; Isa. xxi. 3); whereas they had 
Jehovah their God to keep them and fight their battles, as Moses (Exod. xiv, 14), 
Abijah (ch. xiii. 12), and Jehoshaphat (ch. xx. 17) had ; and as Christians may have 
(Matt, xxviii. 20; Eom. viii. 31). 7. The confidence of the people raised. They 
rested themselves upon the words of Hezekiah (ver. 8). In the face of Isaiah's accusa- 
tion (xxii. 11) this can hardly mean that they placed an unreserved and exclusive 
trust in Jehovah. The prophet rather charges them with trusting less to him than to 
their defensive preparations. 

Lessons. 1. The military spirit essentially an aggressive spirit. 2. The best 
bulwarks of a nation are the pious lives of its people. 3. The necessity of combining 
faith and works in ordinary matters as well as in things of the spirit. 4. Conflntnce 
in God the best protection against fear of man. 5. The certainty that none can be 
victorious who fight against God, or be defeated for whom God fights. — W. 

Vers. 9 — 16. — The invasion of Sennacherib : 1. A summons to surrender. I. 
Sennacheeib's encampment at Lachish. Fifteen or eighteen hours west-south-west 
of Jerusalem, in the low country of Judah, on the confinea of Philistia, fourteen miles 
north-east of Gaza, Lachish (see on ch. xi. 9 ; xxv. 27) — on the monuments Lalds — 
Recording to a slab in the British Museum, was a walled town with towers and battle- 
ments, whose power of resistance was so great as to dem^iiid a protracted siege. 1. 
Sennacherib's route thither. Prom the north — not by the military road through 
Nazareth, Jezreel, Siohem, Bethel, Ai, Michmash, Geba, Eama, Gibeah, Anathoth, 
Nob (Isa. X. 28—32), Sargon's route (Sayce, ' Presh Light,' etc., p. 137), but by Sidon, 
Akko, Joppa, Bene-herak, Beth-dagon, Ekron, and Ashdod (Schrader, p. 386). 2. 
Se/nnacheriVs employment there. (1) Besieging Lachish. Sennacherib's annals furnish 
no account of this siege ; but some sculptured slabs in the British Museum represent 
• large city "delended by double walls, with battlements and towers and by fortified 
outworks," for the capture of which Sennacherib brought up his whole army, " and 
raised against the fortifications as many as ten banks or movmts, completely built of 
Btones, bricks, earth, and branches of trees" (Layard, ' Nineveh and Babylon,' p. 149). 
Thart this was Lachish is rendered probable by the circumstance that one of these 
Blabs depicts the capture of Lachish, the inscription reading, " Sennacherib, the king 
of multitudes, the King of Assyria, sat on an upright throne, and the spoil of the 
city of Lachish passed before him " (ibid., p. 150). "The besieged defended them- 
selves with great determination, thronged the battlements and towers, showering 
arrows, javelins, stones, and blazing torches upon the assailants," while the Assyrians 
" poured water with large ladles upon the flaming brands which threatened to destroj 
their engines " (ibid., p. 149). The stubborn resistance of Lachish no doubt delayed 
the advance of Sennacherib's whole force against Jerusalem (' Eecords,' etc., i, 35). 
(2) Receiving Hezekiah's submission. Hezekiah had rebelled against the Assyrian 
supremacy in the days of Shalmaneser (2 Kings xviii. 7), but had again been placed 
under it by Sargon. On Sargon's assassination (b.o. 705) the kings of Sidon, Ascalon, 
and Judah formed an alliance with Egypt and Ethiopia to once more break the oppres- 
sive yoke of Assyria. The league «as joined by the Ekronites, against the will of 



OH. xxxii. 1—33.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONIOIES. 395 



Padi their prince, who remained faithful to Assyria, and whom they " placed in chaini 
of iron, and unto Hezekiah King of Judah delivered," who " shut him up in dark- 
ness (or prison)." Before the allies could unite their forces, Sennacherib appeared 
upon the scene, having obtained a hint of the confederacy being formed against him. 
First he swooped down upon Luliah the King of Sidon, who fled to a distant spot 
in the middle of the sea, leaving to the mercy of the conqueror " his strong cities and 
castles, walled and fenced, and his finest garrison towns." Next the kings of Samaria, 
Sidon, Arvad, Gubal, Ashdod, Beth-Ammon, Moab, and Edom, hastened to meet 
the invader with "great presents," and kiss his feet. Zerfek of Ascalon, who, along 
with Judah, still stood out, was, with his wife, sons, daughters, brothers, and gods, 
apprehended and deported to Assyria. At Laohish a halt was made to await the 
Ethiopian and Assyrian kings, who were soon after defeated at Altuku, the Eltekon 
of Josh. zv. 59. Dreading the fate he saw approaching, Hezekiah despatched an 
embassy to Lachish, profl'eiing submission, and agreeing to pay whatever tribute 
might be asked (2 Kinys xviii. 14). Sennacherib demanded three hundred talents 
of silver and thirty taleuts of gold. The monuments give the tribute as eight 
hundred talents of silver and thirty of gold, and state that it was sent to Nineveh 
after Sennacherib, with "woven cloth, scarlet, enibroiieied ; precious stones of large 
size, couches of ivory, movable thrones of ivory, skins, and teeth of buffaloes — all 
sorts of treasures, his (Hezekiah's) daughters, the male and female inmates of his 
palace, as also male and female slaves." The discrepancy as to the number of silver 
talents may be explained by supposing different standards of value to have been 
employed in reckoning, while the biblical account of the place to which the tribute 
was sent is clearly to be pieferreil. In order to pay the exaction Hezekiah appropriated 
all the silver in the temple, and the treasures in the palace, as well as stripped the 
gold from off the doors and pillars of the former (2 Kings xviii. 15, 16). (' Records,' 
etc., i. 33, etc.; Smith, 'Assyrian Discoveries,' p. 295, etc.; Sohrader, 'Die Keilin- 
Bchriften,' p. 291, etc. ; Sayce, ' Fresh Light,' etc., p. 139, etc.) 

II. Sennacherib's commission to his gbnbbals. These generals were three in 
number. 1. Their titles. (1) Tartan. In Assyiia, tur-ta-nu, commander-in-chief, 
or field-marshal (2 Kings xviii. 17; Isa. xx. 1). (2) Eabsaris, "chief of the 
eunuchs" (2 Kings xviii. 17), probably Sennacherib's lord chamberlain, whose duty 
was to act as official scribe. (3) Eabshakeh, " chief of the cup-bearers " (2 Kings 
xviii. 17 ; Isa. xxxvi. 2). As the inscriptions never speak of this court official as a 
military personage, it has been suggested (Schrader, p. 319) that Eabshakeh is a 
Hebraized or Aramaized form of Jiabsak, meaning " upper chief," " superior officer," 
perhaps Seun icherib's prime minister. Tiglath-Pileser II. had a general of this 
name, whom he sent to Tyre (Smith's 'Assyrian Diso'>verits,' p. 264). The Eabshakeh 
was obviously the orator of Sennacherib's three (2 Kings xviii. 19). The tartan 
was most likely too exalted a personage to hold either oral or written communications 
with the king's enemies. 2. Their commission. To advance, with a detachment of 
the army, against Jerusalem, with the view of intimidating it into surrender ; failmg 
in this, to prosecute against it a siege. Sennacherib was most likely moved to this 
by the report of the approach of the kings of Ejjypl and Ethiopia; before encountering 
these, it was clearly to his advantage to reduce both Ekron and Jerusalem. 

111. Sennachekib's address to the king and inhabitants of Jerusalem. Not 
delivered in person, but through " his servants " (ver. 9), and in particular Eabshakeh 
(2 Kings xviii. 19 ; Isa. xxxvi. 2 — 4). Nor spoken directly to Hezekiah and his people, 
but to Bliakim, Hilkiah's son, who was over the household, j.e. the king's high 
steward (Isa. xxii. 20), to Shebna the scribe, or king's secretary, who had lately been 
deposed from the office of high steward (Isa. xxii. 15 — 19) because of favouring the 
interest of Assyria, and to Joah, Asaph's son, the recorder, or king's annalist. Stand- 
in^s by the conduit of the upper pool in the highway of the fuller's field, where Isaiah 
and his son Shear-jashub had met with Ahaz when the Syro-Israelitish invasion was 
threatened (Isa. vii. 3), and where the Assyrian army was now encamped, over against 
the Gennath Gate, in front of which the envoys of Hezekiah stood, while the inha- 
bitants crowded round it and even sat upon the city wall, observing the scene 
(Isa. xxii. 1 — 13), — Eabshakeh, in the name of his master, called upon the king and 
hi» subjects to surrender, using the Hebrew tongue, that the inhabitants might imder- 



896 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxxii. 1—33. 

Btand, and becoming alarmed, induce their rulers to submit. The points in Rab- 
shakeh's harangue, considerably shortened by the Chronicler, were two. 1. That th» 
hope of deliverance held out by Eezekiah was a delusion. If their confidence was 
based upon expected assistance from Egypt, they would soon know that Pharaoh was 
" a bruised reed, upon which, if a man leant, it would go into his hand and pierce it " 
(2 Kings xviii. 21) ; if it was Jehovah to whom Hezekiah was persuading them to 
turn their gaze (ver. 11 ; cf. 2 Kings xviii. 22 ; Isa. xxxvi. 7), that source of succour 
would prove as little satisfactory. (1) Because it was not likely Jehovah would 
«itend aid to one who had so openly insulted him as Hezekiah had done by taking 
away his high places and altars, and commanding all Jerusalem and Judah to worship 
at one altar (ver. 12). Either the fame of Hezekiah's reformation had travelled to 
Nineveh, or Sennacherib had heard of it since coming into the country, if he had not 
learnt of it from Sargon his father. But Sennacherib either wilfully, or most likely 
ignorantly, misrepresented Hezekiah's action as one that would rather cause him to 
forfeit than gain the Divine favour. So the best deeds of men are often misunderstood, 
and their good conversation falsely accused by others who speak against them as 
evil-doers (1 Pet. ii. 12 ; iii. 16). (2) Because, even although Jehovah did extend aid 
to Hezekiah, it would come to nothing. Jehovah would prove as powerless as the 
gods of other nations had done. Not one of these had been able to oppose the resist- 
less march of Sennacherib and his predecessors on the Assyrian throne, or to deliver 
from destruction the peoples that served them ; and if these had failed to render 
effectual aid to their devotees, much more would Jehovah fail in protecting his (vers. 
13 — 15 ; cf. 2 Kings xviii. 33 — 35 ; Isa. xxxvi. 11 — 13). Sennacherib forgot, as 
Sargon had done before him, that the power of himself and his fathers over the 
nations and their gods arose from this — that Assyria was the rod of Jehovah's anger 
(Isa. X. 6 — 19), and that whensoever Jehovah pleased he could cause the Assyrian, 
who smote with a rod, to be beaten down (Isa. xxx. 31). 2. That their resistance 
would entail upon them all the horrors of a siege. They would certainly perish by 
famine and by thirst (ver. 11), if not by the sword, since their escape was impossible. 
Neither Sennacherib nor his generals guessed the resources of the God of Judah ; had 
they done so, their attitude would have been less defiant and their language less con- 
fident. Events were to teach them that what was impossible for man was both 
possible and ea.sy for God. 

Learn : 1. The presumption of some wicked men. 2. The impotence of all heathen 
gods. 3. The supremacy of the one living and true God, 4. The security of those 
whom Jehovah defends. — W. 

Vers. 16 — :23. — The invasion of Sennacherib : 2. The great deliverance. L Sbn- 
HACHEBIB AND HIS OENEBAL8. Their renewed efibrts to take the city. 1. The letter 
of Sennache/rib to Hezekiah. (Ver. 17.) The tartan with his assistants having failed 
to either storm Jerusalem or intimidate its inhabitants, returned, or more probably 
despatched, Rabsliakeh to his master for furlher instructions. Sennacherib was now 
at Libnah, a few miles nearer Jerusalem than Lachish, which in the interval had 
capitulated. Learning that the King of Egypt was on the way north to give him 
battle, he sent back Rabshakeh, accompanied by special messengers, bearing a letter 
to Hezekiah to expedite the taking of the city. The letter when received was read by 
Hezekiah with indignation and alarm. It contained a repetition with emphasis of 
what had been uttered by Rabshakeh in the heaving of the king's envoys and of the 
inhabitants of the city. Of course, the mere reassertion of Rabshakeh's boastin£;s, 
though in the form of a letter from Sennacherib himself, did not make them the less 
false, insolent, or blasphemous. 2. The railings of Sennacherib's generals. As before 
by Rabshakeh, so a second time by the generals and perhaps also the messengers 
(ver. 18). To the people on the town wall in their own tongue were addressed words 
meant to terrify and persuade to capitulation — loud, boastful, arrogant, blasphemous 
reproaches against Jehovah, putting him on a level with idols, the works of men's 
hands, and declaricg him to be as powerless as these (ver. 19), little dreaming they 
were so soon and so completely to be undeceived (ver. 21). So men often hug ta their 
bosoms the false ideas they have formed of the Christian's God, without thinking 
that in a moment, by being admitted through death's portal into his presence, they 
may lie proved to have been deceived. 



OH. xxxn. 1— 33.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHEO>«CLES. 897 

n. Hbzekiah and his peophbt. Their supplications to the God of heaven (ver. 
20). 1. The prayer of Hezehiah. Recorded in 2 Kings xix. li — 19 and Isa. xxxviL 
1^—19. (1) Where offered. "In the house of the Lord." Having read the Assyrian's 
letter, Hezekiah repaired to the temple and spread it before the Lord ; in which act 
lay a double propriety — Jehovah having invited his people to call upon him in the 
Jay of trouble (Ps. 1. 15), and promised to deliver them (Ps. xci. 15) ; and Jehovah 
being the One most insulted by Sennacherib's reproaches. (2) To whom addressed. 
To Jehovah, the covenant God of Israel, whose presence was with his people, who 
alone governed the nations, and was supreme Creator of heaven and earth (cf. Jchosha- 
phat'sprayer, cb.xx. 6 — 12). (3) In what terms couched. Earnest, reverential, direct, 
and hopeful. Bequesting a favourable audience for his intercession, he first called 
QxA to see and hear the reproaches of Sennaolierib, next acknowledged the truth of 
Sennacherib's language concerning the gods of tbe nations he destroyed, and finally 
besought God to show that he alone was God, by saving them out of the King of 
Assyria's hand. (4) With what result followed. It was answered by Isaiah, the 
son of Amoz, who, speaking in God's name, assured him that " Sennaolierib should 
not come into the city, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come before it with shield, nor 
cast a bank against it, but should return by the way that he came, and should not 
come into the city" (2 Kings xix. 32, 33; Isa. xxxvii. 33, 34). 2. The prayer of 
Isaiah. Though not recorded by the writer of 2 Kings that Isaiah prayed along 
with or in addition to Hezekiah, the fact mentioned that, on Babshakeh's first 
approach, Hezekiah requested Isaiah to " lift up his prayer " on their behalf (2 Kings 
xix. 4), renders it probable that on this occasion also he joined the king in crying 
unto Heaven. 

III. Jehovah and his anoel. Their interposition on behalf of Judah and Jeru- 
■alem (vers. 21,22). 1. The destruction of Sennacherib's army. (1) Where? "In 
the camp of the King of Assyria ; " most probably in that of the tartan lying before 
Jerusalem (Delitzsch), though it may have been in that of Sennacherib's army. Accord- 
ing to Herodotus (ii. 141), the disaster occurred at Pelusium, whither Sennacherib, 
" King of the Arabians and Assyrians," had marched with a great host on his way to 
Egypt. If so (Ewald, Cheyne, and others), then Sennacherib must have broken up 
his camp at Libnah, and moved south to intercept Tirhakah (cf. Driver, ' Isaiah : his 
Life and Times,' pp. 81, 82). (2) When? "That night" (2 Kings xix. 35); hut 
whether the night after Hezekiah's prayer (Bawlinson, Bahr) is uncertain. Hardly, 
if Pelusium was the scene of the overthrow; possibly, if the Assyrian camp still 
remained at Libnah (Keil). That the night was that in which Sennacherib, in the 
following year, sat down to besiege Jerusalem with his own army (Keil, Delitzsch) 
does not seem likely. (3) How ? By an angel — ^the angel of the Lord (2 Kings xix, 
35 ; Isa. xxxvii. 36). Whether the blow was supematur5 or natural cannot be deter- 
mined from the language of Scripture. The destruction of the firstborn of Egypt 
(Exod. xii. 29) and the diminution of David's army (2 Sam. xxiv. 15, 16) were both 
accomplished by the angel of the Lord ; yet the former only appear to have been sud- 
denly smitten, while the latter were cut off by pestilence. Herodotus's notion, that th« 
bow-strings, and shield-straps of Sennacherib's soldiers were gnawed through during tho 
night by innumerable field-mice, favours the pestilence-theory — among the Egyptians 
the mouse having been the hieroglyph of devastation by pestilence (J. D. Michaelis). 

(4) To what extent? To the cutting off of " all the mighty men of valour," with " the 
leaders and the captains " (ver. 21) ; in all, 185,000 (2 Kings xix. 35 ; Isa. xxxvii. 86). 

(5) With what effect? The return of Sennacherib to Assyria with shame of feoe, 
because of having failed to effect the object of his expedition. Whether the fleeing 
Assyrians were pursued by the liberated Judahites (Ewald) is not stated by the Chro- 
nicler, and is only a doubtful inference from Ps. xlvi. 7, 8; Ixxvi. 3, 5. That the Assy- 
rian monuments have preserved no record of Sennacherib's humiliation is not surprising. 
The Egyptian moniuients of the nineteenth dynasty contain no memorial of Meneph- 
tah's overthrow in the Red Sea. Nations, like individuals, do not publish their 
misfortunes, least of all perpetuate the remembrance of their defeats. 2. Tlie assassina- 
tion of Sennacherib himtdf. The usual end of kii^s in Assyria (Sargon, and probably 
Shalmaneser n. and Assur-nirari), no less than in Israel and Judah. " Within the 
hollow crown that rounds the mortal temples of a king keeps death his court," etc. 



398 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xxxn. 1— Sa 

('EicViard II.,' act iii. sc. 2). (1) Where Sennacherib was murdered. "In his own 
land," in " the house of his god " (ver. 21) ; i.e. in Nineveh, in the house of Nisroch his 
god (2 Kings xix. 37 ; Isa. xxxvi. 37)— a divinity not yet identified in the Assyrian 
pantheon. (2) When? Not immediately on returning to Nineveh, since, according to 
the inscriptions, he lived twenty years alter the Egyptian and Jewish expedition, and 
undertook five more campaigns in other parts of his empire. (3) By whom ? " They that 
came forth of his own bowels " — " Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons " (2 Kings xix. 37 ; 
Isa. xxxvi. 38); the former in Assyrian Adar-maUk, " Adar is prince," also the name 
of an Assyrian god (2 Kings xvii. 31); and the latter in Assyrian Sar-usur, a shortened 
form of an Assyrian word, of which the first part was probably Aisur, Bil, at Nergal, 
meaning " Assur (Bel or Nergal) protect the king" (Schrader, p. 329). Nergal-sarezer 
occurs as a proper name in Jeremiah (xxxix. 3, 13). This may have been the full 
designation of Seimacherib's son (Alexander on ' Isaiah,' ii. 74 ; Cheyne, ' The Prophecies 
of IsMiah,' i. 225). 

IV. The peoples and theib pbbsents. The effect produced by this deliverance 
ou surrounding nations. 1. Oifts unto Jehovah. Brought not by Judahites alone, but 
by the inhabitants of nations who had been delivered from the Assyrians' yoke, and 
were designed as a grateful recognition of Jehovah's hand in effecting their emancipation. 
No benefactor more deserving of man's thanks than God (Ps. cxxxix. 17, 18) ; no duty 
more frequently urged upon men than gratitude to the Supreme Giver (Ps. 1. 14 ; c. 4 ; 
cvii. 1 ; Eph. v. 20; Phil. iv. 6; Col. i. 12; 1 Thess. v. 18); yet no bestower of good 
receives less thanks than he. 2. Precious things to Jffezekiah. As the Philistines and 
Arabians had brought presents to Jehosha[ihat (ch. xvii. 10), so now the inhabitants of 
heathen countries, among whom may have been the Babylonians — though ver. 31 ; 
2 Kings XX. 12 ; and Isa. xxxix. 1 refer not to this (see below)— sent gifts to Hezekiah 
in recognition of his greatni-ss, as attested by the Divine deliverance wrought on his 
behalf. 

Learn : 1. The heinousness of scoCBng at religion. 2. The impotence of human rage 
against God (Ps. iL 1 — 5). 3. The superiority of the true God over all divinities wor- 
shipped by the heathen (Ps. cxv. 3, 4). 4. The efficacy of prayer (Jas. v. 16). 5. The 
advantage of social supplication (Matt, xviii. 19). 6. The command of God over the 
resources of nature (Numb. xi. 23). 7. The ability of God to save his people out of 
any sort of peril (1 Cor. x. 13). 8. The sad fate of the ungodly (Ps. Ixxv. 8, 10). 
9. The indebtedness of the world to the Chtuch's God. — W. 

Ver. 24. — Hezekiah' s sickness and prayer. I. Hkzbkiah's sickness. 1. Hie Ume 
of it. "Ill those days" (ver. 24; 2 Kings xx. 1; Isa. xxxviii. 1) — an indefinite 
expression, differently understood. (1) In the days of Sennacherib's invasion, either 
at its beginning (Keil), during its continuance (Thenins), or after its close (Ewald) ; but 
as, according to the monuments, this occurred b.o. 701, or in Hezekiah's twenty-fourth 
year, either Hezekiah lived more than twenty-nine years in all, or his sickness must be 
placed earlier. (2) In the days of Sargon's invasion in b.o. 711, and therefore in Heze- 
kiah's fourteenth year (see preceding homilies). 2. 'fhe nature of it. A boil (2 Kings 
XX. 7; Isa. xxxviii. 21); but whether an ordinary abscess or a carbuncle cannot be 
determined, though there is no ground for connecting it with the pestilence that cut otf 
Sennacherib's army. It probably arose out of the bodily weaknei-s induced by long 
labours in reforming religion, and heavy anxieties in meeting and resisting the Assyrian 
invasion. 3. The severity of it. "Even unto death." It had all the appearance of 
being fatal. Hezekiah himself expected nothing else than that " in the noontide of his 
days he should depart unto the gates of Sheol, and be deprived of the residue of his 
years" (Isa. xxxviii. 10). Even had his malady not suggested this to his mind, 
Jehovah's message to him by Isaiah (xxxviii. 1) would have done so. All sickness 
a prelude to, and premonition of, the last. 

II. Hezekiah's pbatbr. 1. To whom directed. The Lord; the only living and 
true God, as well as the only Hearer of prayer (Ps. Ixv. 2). Doubtless Hezekiah also 
recognized Jehovah's hand in his a£9iction, and understood that he alone could remove 
the malady by whose permission it had come. Asa, in his disease, sought not t» 
Jehovah, but to the physicians (ch. xvi. 12) ; and the result with him was different. 
2. By what tupported. (1) Bitter grief. " Hezekiah wept sore " (2 Kings xx. 8). 



OH. XXXII. 1—33.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHKONICLBS. 399 

Lik« Antigone (line 198, etc.), he lamented his sad fate, not merely because he was to die, 
but because he was being cut off in the middle of his days, and when as yet he had no 
heir (cf. Gen. xv. 2). (2) Strong arguments. He had walked before Jehovah in truth 
and with a perfect heart, and bad done what was good in his sight ; and was thus in 
a manner entitled to the blessing of long life (Deut. xxv. 15 ; Ps. xxxIt. 12). 3. Jn 
what ended. Jehovah spake unto him, granting his request, adding fifteen years to his 
life, and gave him a sign. The cure was effected by Isaiah laying a cake of figs upon 
the boil — the vis medicatrix, however, proceeding not from the fruit, but from him who 
had said, "Behold, I will heal thee." Jehovah-rophi (Exod. xv. 26) one of Jehovah's 
names. The sign granted at Hezekiah's request was the turning back of the shadow 
upon the sun-dial, or step-clock, of Ahaz (2 Kings xx. 11 ; Isa. xxxviii. 8). This sun- 
dial, or step-clock, was probably " an obelisk upon a square or circular elevation ascended 
by steps, which threw the shadow of its highest point at noon upon the highest steps, 
and in the morning and evening upon the Inwest, either on the one side or the other, so 
that the obelisk itself served as a gnomon." How the shadow was turned back is best 
explained by " the assumption of a miraculous refraction of the sun's rays, effected by 
God at the entreaty of the proiihet " (Keil on 2 Kings xx. 11 ; cf. Delitzsch on Isa, 
xxxviii. 8), though it has been well said, "refraction to the extent required would be 
very strange and abnormal" (Eawlinson, 'Kings of Israel and Judah,' p. 199). 

Lessons. 1. The liability of all to afSiction. 2. The certainty of death. 3. The 
contingency of many of the Divine decrees. 4. The efficacy of prayer. 5. The weak- 
ness of faith in some good men — Hezekiah needed a sign. 6. The condescension of 
God — in stooping to regard faith's infirmity. 7. The Divine control over nature's 
resources. — ^W. 

Vers. 25, 26. — EezehiaKsfaU and repentance. I. Hezekiah's bin. 1. It» character. 
(1) Ingratitude. " He rendered not again according to the benefit done unto him." 
That benefit had been great — deliverance from a more powerful assailant than the King 
of Assyria, even from the king of terrors (Job xviii. 14) — and ought to have awakened 
undying thankfulness in Hezekiah's bosom, as, indeed, he promised it would (Isa. xxxviii. 
20). But it did not. Ingratitude, a sin of which Uzziah (ch. xxvi. 16) and Eehoboam 
(ch. xii. 1) before him had been guilty, with which men in general are often chargeable 
(Luke xvii. 17 ; Eom. i. 21 ; 2 Tim. iii. 2), and into which the best of men occasionally 
fall (2 Sam. xii. 7, 8, 9). (2) Pride. " His heart was lifted up." Like other good 
men before and since, his vows upon his sick-bed were better than his performances 
when health was restored. He had engaged " to go softly all his years, because of the 
bitterness of his soul " (Isa. xxxviii. 15) ; but instead, his heart was lifted up, not as 
Jehoshaphat's had been, " in the ways of the Lord " (ch. xvii. 6), but as Uzziah's (ch. 
xxvi. 16) and Amaziah's (ch. xxv. 19) had been, in self-sufiiciency — the allusion being 
to his behaviour in connection with the Babylonian envoys, who shortly after his 
recovery visited Jerusalem, and endeavoured to enlist him in a league against Assyria 
(see homily on ver. 31). 2. Its punishmmt. The wrath of Jehovah was threatened 
(1) upon himself, the immediate offender, which was righteous (ch. xix. 2 ; xxiv. 18 ; 
cf. Rom. i. 18) ; and (2) upon Judah and Jerusalem, by the law of imputation, and in 
accordance with the solidarity of nations. The punishment of sin often falls on the 
innocent, because of their connection with the guilty. Children suffer for the evil-doing 
of their parents, and subjects for that of their rulers. "The fathers have eaten sour 
grapes, and the children's teeth are set on edge " (Jer. xxxi. 29 ; Bzek. xviii. 2). 

II. Hezekiah's bepentanoe. 1. The self-abasement of the king. " He humbled 
himself for the pride of his heart." The wrath of Jehovah, pronounced against hin\ 
and his people by Isaiah, was the Babylonish captivity. When Hezekiah heard the 
prophet's threatening, he realized that he had sinned, and humbled himself hefuie 
Jehovah, saying, " Good is the word of the Lord which thou hast spoken " (2 Kings 
XX. 14 — 19; Isa. xxxviii. 3 — 8). 2. The concurrence of the people. '"He and the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem." Probably they had not been unfavourable to a Babylonian 
alliance against Assyria, and were really "art and part" co-criminals with Hezekiah; 
if they had no share in Hezekiah's action, they had still cause to humble themselves 
before God on account of Hezekiah their king. 3. The clemency of Jehovah. The 
judgment was to fall on Hezekiah's sous rather than on himself, which Hezekiah recog- 



400 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHKONICLES. [ch. xxxn. 1— 3S. 

nized as a mercy, and acknowledged by adding, " Is it not so [ix. good] if peaca and 
truth shall be in my days ? " 

Lessons. 1. The possibility of spiritual declension. 2. The duty of repentknea. 
3. The obligation of gratitude. 4. The sin of pride. — W. 

Vers. 27—30. — The greatness of Sezekiah. I. His wkalth. 1. Large. "Much 
riches" (ver. 27); "very much substance" (ver. 29). In this he resembled Solomon 
(ch. Lx. 22) and Jehoshaphat (ch. xvii. 5). 2. Varied. (1) Precious nietals. "Gteld, 
silver, precious stones." (2) Flocks and herds. " All manner of beasts and flocks " 
(ver. 28). Cf. the wealth of Abraham (Gen. xiii. 2) and Lot (Gen. xiii. 5). (3) Mis- 
cellaneous articles. Spicei, shields, goodly vessels. (4) Field produce. Com and 
wine and oil (ver. 28). 

II. His woeks. 1. Treastiries. For his gold, silver, precious stones; for spices, 
shields, and goodly vessels. 2. Storehouses. For his corn, wine, and oil. 3. Stalls, 
For his beasts and herds. 4. Folds. For his flocks. 5. Cities — i.e. either watch- 
towers for his shepherds (ch. xxvi. 10) or dwelling-places for his herds and beasts. 
6. Reservoirs. Containing water for the use of the inhabitants, especially in the time 
of a siege (ver. 30). 

III. His honoub. 1. 7n life. (1) By Jehovah, who had exalted and prospered him 
in all his undertakings, public and private, military and commercial (ver. 30). (2) By 
his subjects, who trusted, obeyed, revered, and loved him. (3) By foreign princes and 
peoples, who brought presents to him in Jerusalem (ver. 23). 2. At death. (1) By 
his people — all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem— who buried him in the cMefest, 
or in the ascent, of the sepulchres of the sons of David ; i.e. in a special grave prepared 
for him and succeeding kings, and did him honour, most likely by burning spices (ch. 
xvi. 14; xxi. 19). (2) By God, who gave him a son to reign in his stead. His throne 
passed not to a stranger, but continued in the line of David's house, according to the 
promise. 3. After death. By receiving a double, yea, a threefold memorial : (1) in the 
vision of Isaiah the prophet ; (2) in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel ; and 
(3) in the chronicles of the kings of Judah. 

Lessons. 1. The best wealth — grace. 2. The noblest deeds — ^works of faith. 3. Tht 
highest honour — salvation and glory. — W, 

Ver. 31. — Hezekiah's mistake. I. Its ocoasioh. "In connection with the business of the 
ambassadors of the princes of Babylon." 1. The senders of this embassy. " The princes of 
Babylon;" more particularly Berodach-Baladan, the son of Baladan, King of Babylon 
(2 Kings XX. 12); or Merodach-Baladan (Isa. xxxix. 1) — undoubtedly the correct form, 
•• Merodach has given a son." Three bearers of this name in the cuneiform inscriptions. 
The first, a king of South Ghaldea and son of Jakin, with whom Tiglath-Pileser II. had 
warMke dealings (G. Smith, 'Assyrian Discoveries,' p. 256); the second, also a son of 
Jakin and King of the Chaldeans, whom Sargon defeated, dethroning him and burning 
his city of Dur-jakin, b.o. 710-9 (' Records,' etc., vii. 46—49) ; and the third, a King of 
Babylonia, whom Sennacherib overthrew in the vicinity of Kish (' Records,' etc., i. 26; 
G. Smith, ' Assyrian Discoveries,' p. 297). The Merodach-Baladan who sent ambassadors 
to Hezekiah wiis not the first, unless all three were the same person, but the son and 
successor of the first (Sohrader). The sole question is whether the second and the 
third were the same, and, if not, which of them it was that despatched envoys to Heze- 
kiah. Schrader distinguishes the two because the Bible describes Hezekiah's Merodach- 
Baladan as the son of Baladan ; while the monuments designate Sfirgon's as the son of 
Jakin ('Die Keilinschriften,' p. 342); but Sayce(' Fresh Light,' p. 135) identifies the two, 
and explains " the son of Baladan " (2 Kings xx. 12 ; Isa. xxxix. 1) as due to the error 
of a copyist, like "Berodach" for "Merodach." An absolute decision is meanwhile 
impossible. 2. The date of the embassy. (1) The sacred narrative appears to connect it 
with Hezekiah's sickness, and this again with Sennacherib's invasion (Ewald, Schrader, 
Delitzsch). But if Hezekiah's sickness occurred after the invasion, the arrival of the 
ambassadors must have taken place before it, as otherwise he could not have shown 
them the treasures of the palace which, prior to their coming, had been despoiled to 
appease Sennacherib. (2) Hence the opinion has gained ground that, as Hezekiah's 
Kickness must have occurred about the time of Sargon's invasion of Ju(^ea, the mission 



OH. XXXII. 1—53.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 401 

of Merodach-Baladan must be placed in connection with that event, and that both the 
sickness and the mission should be dated about b.o. 712-10 (Sayce, Cheyne, Driver). 
3. Tlie pretext of this embassy. (1) Friendship. To congratulate Hezekiah upon his 
recovery from what had seemed a fatal malady (2 Kings zx. 12). A proper thing for 
friends and acquaintances, especially if Christian, to do— to congratulate each other on 
restored health, provided always such congratulations be sincere, not like those of Joab 
to Amasa (2 Sam. xx. 9), but like those the patriarch of Uz received from his friends 
(Job xlii. 11). (2) Scientific research. To inquire of Hezekiah concerning the wonder 
that was done in the land (ch. xxxii. 31). According to the view taken of the date of 
this embassy, the wonder referred to will be the destruction of Sennacherib's army, or, 
what is more probable, the miraculous phenomenon connected with the step-clock of 
Ahaz (Delitzsch, Keil, Stanley). There is, however, no ground for thinking that either 
of these formed the real reason. 4. I%e object of this embassy. Political. Perhaps 
(1) with aL aye to future expeditions, "to investigate a little more closely the condition 
of the forces of Judah " (Ewald) ; but also (2) with a view to present needs, to concert 
measures against the King cf Assyria by forming a league between Babylon and the 
Palestinian statei (Sayoe, Rawlinson). 

II. Its nature. The discovery to Sargon's (or Sennacherib's) envoys of all the 
treasures in his palace and in his kingdom (2 Kings xx. 13 ; Isa. xxxix. 21). A twofold 
indiscretion. 1. A political blunder. So Isaiah warned Hezekiah. The days would 
come when these very treasures wliioh Hezekiah had so good-naturedly exhibited to 
the ambassadors of the Babylonian king, or others in their room, would be carried into 
Babylon (Isa. xxxix. 3 — 8). The prophet saw that " from Babylon especially Judah 
had nothing good to hope for, inasmuch as that state, though often in dispute with 
Nineveh, was yet by its peculiar position too closely entwined with Assyria ; and it 
was really only a question whether Nineveh or Babylon should be the seat of universal 
dominion. . . . Accordingly, it flashed like lightning across Isaiah's mind that Babylon, 
attracted by those very treasures which Hezekiah, not without a certain complacency, 
had displayed to the ambassadors, might in the future become dangerous to that same 
kingdom of Judah it was now flattering " (Ewald, ' The History of Israel,' iv. 188). 
" Even political sharp-sightedness might have foreseen that some such disastrous con- 
sequences would follow Hezekiah's imprudent course " (Delitzsch on ' Isaiah,' ii. 126). 
2. A personal U-ansgressiori. That Hezekiah's indiscreet conduct was the outcome of 
mingled motives is hardly doubtful. Amongst these were (1) vanity, or a feeling 
of inward complacency — in fact, he felt flattered by the attentions of a great Oriental 
prince like Merodach-Baladan; (2) pride, or a sense of his own importance, arising 
from the fact that his military resources — his wealth, weajious, and war-chariots — were 
so abundant ; and (3) self-sufficiency, which made him set a higher value on himself 
than on Jehovah as an Ally. 

III. Its cause. "Jehovah left Hezekiah to try him, that he might know all that 
was in his heart." 1. The fact stated. " Jehovah left Hezekiah." (1) He did not 
warn Hezekiah by sending Isaiah to him before the Babylonian ambassadors had 
arrived at Jerusalem, or before the evil had been done. God is under no obligation to 
his intelligent creatures, or even regenerate children, to adopt special means to warn 
them of approaching danger in the shape of temptation, seeing that the faculties they 
possess, aided by the light of natural and revealed truth, should suffice to apprize them 
of the imminence of peril. (2) He did not supernaturally enlighten Hezekiah, either 
as to the secret designs of the ambassadors or as to the disastrous consequences that 
should in after-years result from the false step he was about to take. The former 
Hezekiah should have suspected — Times Danaos et dona ferentes ; knowledge of the 
latter was not requisite for determining the course of action which duty prescribed. 
(3) He did not exceptionally reinforce Hezekiah in the moment of trial, so as to pre- 
vent him from falling. Had Hezekiah sought grace, he would have got it ; Jehovah 
was under no obligation to extend it unasked. 2. 2%e reason given. " That he might 
know all that was in his [Hezekiah's] heart." The heart the proper seat of relinon 
(Deut. XXX. 6 ; 1 Kings viii. 58 ; Jer. xxxii. 39 ; Bzek. xi. 19). The character of "the 
heart in every instance known to God (oh. vi. 30 ; 1 Kings viii. 39 ; Ps. vii. 9 : cxxxix. 
1 — 4; Jer. xvii, 10; Luke xvi. 15). Yet this character not always visible to others 
or even to one's self (Jer. xvii. 9). Hence God is wont, when his wisdom deemi it 

n. oBBonoLKs. 2 p 



40:s 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxxiu. 1—25. 



necessary, to withhold reinforcements of grace from the individual, that this discovery 
— the unsuspected ohai acter of the heart — may he thereby brought to the light. So 
Christ dealt with Peter (Luke xxii. 31, 32). 

Lessons. 1. The danger of flattery. 2. The sin of ostentation. 3. The feebleness 
of good men when left by God. 4. The necessity of having the heart right in religion. 
6 The certainty that God tries klL — ^W. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTEE XXXin. 



The first twenty Terses of this chapter 
are taken up with the accouat of Manasseh, 
the son of Uezekiah and Hephzibah, who, 
beginning to reign at the early age of 
twelve years, reigned in all fifty-fire years; 
the remaining five verses with the account 
of the reign of liis eon Amon. The parallel 
to this chapter is 2 Kings xxi. The re- 
peated references in this chapter to Manas- 
eeh'a neglect, and to his people's neglect, 
after his example, of injunction, promise, 
and threat of the Word of the Lord and of 
the Law, make it a prominent instance of 
the spirit of the compiler, and an indication 
of one of the main objects he had in view, 
and kept in view in writing these chronicles. 

Ver. 1. — The parallel adds the name of 
Manasseh's mother, the well-omened name 
Hephzibah, "My delight is in her" (Isa. 
Ixii. 4). 

Ver. 2. — The abominations of the heathen 
(see Dent, xviii. 9 — 14). 

Ver. 3. — He built again ; literally, returned 
and built — the ordinary Hebrew idiom for 
" took again to building," etc. Hade groves ; 
i.e. as often before the stocks that set forth 
Aahtoreth (Deut. xvi. 21). The parallel 
gives prominence to the one Asherab, ten 
times ofienaive, as set up in the house of 
the Lord (vei. 7 there). The mention of 
hii pantheon of the host of heaven is an 
addition to the wickedness of former wicked 
kings. It is also noted in the parallel. 

Ver. 4. — In Jerusalem (so oh. vi. 6 ; vii. 
16). The quotation is from Deut. xii. 11. 

Ver. 6. — Cansed his children. Parallel 
(2 Kings xxi. 6), "his ton," in the singular 
numlwr (see also 2 Kings xvi. 3 compared 
with our oh. xxviii. 3). There can be no 
donbt that this worst of cruel abominations, 
learned from Ammon and Moab, amounted 
to nothing less than the sacrifice of the 
ehild in the fire. It is, perhaps, something 
rpmarkable that we do not encounter any- 
where any description of the exact manner 
of administration of this cruelty, and of its 
taking effect on the pitiable victim. The 
solemn eommandsof Lev xviii. 21 and Uent. 
zviii. 10 beupeak sufiiciently distinctly the 



prevision and earnest precaution of the 
Divine Ruler of Israel, through Moses, on 
behalf of his people. The following refer- 
ences all bear on the subject, and will be 
studied with advantage in order given : 
2 Kings iii. 27; xvii. 17; Ezek. xx. 26; 
Micah vi. 7 ; Amos v. 26 ; Jer. vii. 32 ; xii. 
4; Ezek. xvi. 20; xx. 26. In the valley of 
the son of Hinnom (Josh. xv. 8 ; xviii. 16). 
On an elevation at the eastern extremity 
of this valley it was that Solomon erected 
" high places " to Moloch, entailing on him- 
self a long and dire responsibility (1 Kings 
xi. 7). Consult also our ch. xxviii. 3 and 
note there; with added reference, Stanley's 
'Sinai and Palestine,' pp. 172, 482. Also 
he observed times ; Revised Version, and he 
praetiaed augury. The Hebrew word is |:iy.i. 
This root is found once in piel infinitive 
(Gen. ix. 14), and is rendered (Authorized 
Version), "when I bring a cloud," etc.; 
beside, it is found in all ten times, always in 
poel, in preterite twice (the present passage 
»nd parallel), future once (Lev. xix. 26), 
participle seven times (Deut. xviii. 10, 14 ; 
Judg. ix. 37, margin), in which six places 
it is rendered (Authorized Version) "observ- 
ing times," once in Isaiah and Mioah with 
rendering " soothsayers," again in Isaiah 
"sorcerers," and in Jeremiah "enchanter." 
There is difficulty in fixing its exact mean- 
ing, though its general meaning may be 
embraced in the words of the Revised 
Version. A likely meaning, judging from 
derivation, may be the practising augury from 
observing of the eloadt. The passages in 
Leviticus and Deuteronomy are those that 
of old solemnly prohibited it. And used en- 
chantments ; Hebrew, vfny\ ; the root is the 
familiar word for "serpent." The verb 
occurs eleven times, always in piel. The 
prohibition to practise such " enchantment " 
or divination is found in Lev. xix. 26 and 
xviii. 10; the five occasions of the use of 
the word in Genesis, however (xxx. 27; 
xliv. 5, 15), argue that it was not a thing 
intrinsically bad, but bad probably from 
certain, so to say, simoniaoal possibilities to 
which it lent itself. There lay in it some 
assumption, no doubt, of superhuman help, 
and the wickedness may hare consisted in 
assuming it where it was not real. And 
used witchcraft ; Hebrew, W2-j ; Revised 
Version, cmd praetiaed loreery. The word 



CH. xxxin. 1— 25.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



403 



ia found six times in piel. The prohibition 
ii found iu Deut. xviii. 10; the rendering 
of the word (Authorized Version) is by the 
term "sorcery" three times, and "witch" 
or "witchcraft" the other three times. 
Dealt with a familiar spirit, and with 
wizards. The prohibitions are in Lev. xix. 
31 ; zx. 6, 27 ; i)eut. xviii. IL See as illus- 
trations 1 Sam. xxviii. 3 — 21; and notice 
the language of Isa. vlii.- 19, " that chirp 
and mutter ; " and xix. 8. 

Vers. 7, 8.— (Comp. Ps. cxxxli. 13, 14; 
2 Sam. vii. 10.) 

Ver. 7. — A carved Image, the idol ; trans- 
late, a carved image of the idol; ie. the 
Asherah ; for see the parallel (2 Kings xxi. 
7). The idol ; Hebrew, "jDO. This name is 
found here and in ver. 15 ; in Beut, iv. 16, 
translated (Authorized Version) "figure;" 
and Ezek. vlii. 3, 5, translated (Authorized 
Version) " image." 

Ver. 10.— (See parallel, vers. 11—15.) 

Ver. 11. — The contents of this and the 
following six verses (to the seventeenth) are 
not in the parallel, though their place there 
is plain. That parallel, however, supplies 
in its ver. 16 a very forcible narration of 
the evil conduct of Manasseh in Jerusalem 
itself, so that he " filled " it with " innocent 
blood" from "one end to another." The 
King of Assyria; i.e. either Esarhaddon, 
B.C. 680, or (though it is not probable) his 
son, Assur-bani-pal, B.o. 667 — 647. Among 
the thorns; t.«. with hooks or rings (so 
2 Kings xix. 28, where the same word is 
nsed; as also in Exod. xxxv. 22 ; Isa. xxxvii. 
29 ; Ezek. xix. 4, 9 ; xxix. 4 ; xxxviii. 4). 

Ver. 13. — And prayed unto him. The 
apocryphal " Prayer of Manasses" is not at 
bU likely to be authentic. And bronght 
him again to Jerusalem. The Targum 
gives many mythical tales as to how this 
deliverance was effected. Then Uanasseh 
knew that. Did he not know, well know, 
beforel So far as the mode of expression 
may in any degree warrant such a stretch 
of charity, what an idea it gives of the force 
with which grossest error will captivate 
even the taught ; and with what force of a 
furious wind did the contaminating infiurnce 
of idolatries all around sweep betimes before 
them — these very kings and chief men of 
Judah and Jerusalem I It is evident that 
there was always among the people a "rem- 
nant " who kept the faith. See here, e.g., 
the reference to the " innoeent blood" shed 
in Jerusalem, no doubt blood of those who 
would not consent to idolatry — blood of 
noble martyrs. 

Ver. 14. — The wall without; or, Bevised 
Version, the outer waU, is probably one with 
that of Hezekiah (oh. xxxiL 5), which now 
Manasseh repairs, oi rebuilds, and perhaps 
lengthens as null as heighten*. The fish 



gate (Veh. xiii. 16), left on the north of 
Jerusalem, and opened on the main road for 
the sea (Condor's ' Handbook,' etc., p. 343> 
The wall traversed the north and east sides 
to Ophel, "on the wall" of whicli, it is said 
(ch. xxvii. 3), " Jotham built much." Heze- 
kiah also built much there, and now Manas- 
seh .raised it np a very great height. 

Ver. 15. — ^It will be noted how the mount 
of the house of the Lord is here differenced 
from the city, •* The city " seems to have 
comprised the two hills east and west of 
the Tyropoean valley, and the " fore " city 
enclosed by the new wall (see Dr. Murphy's 
valuable little 'Handbook to Chronicles'). 
The strange gods, the idol, and the altars 
have .ill been ment'oned in vers. 3 — 7. 

Ver. 17. — Compare Hezekiah's good work 
(ch. xxxi. 1) with his son's bad work (ch. 
xxxiii. 3) ; the latter could undo his father's 
good, but now could not undo his own evil I 
The illegitimate worshippings and offerings 
of high places, though they had been 
" winked at " from time to time by some of 
even the better of the kings, were of course 
essentially counter to the one national wor- 
ship in the one temple, and to the offerings 
and sacrifices of the one national altar. 

Ver. 18. — The parallel again obtains (2 
Kings xxi. 17, 18), but in shorter form. His 
prayer. This is for the present, at any rate, 
los^ the apocryphal and the Septuagint 
manuscript version of it alike not genuine. 
The words of the seers. So again our 
compiler shows undesigned correspondence 
with the writer of the parallel, as above 
quoted (2 Kings xxi 10 — 15). As to the 
original authorities quoted here, hook of the 
kings, etc., and next verse, "ilie sayings of 
the seers," see Introduction, vol. i. § 5. 

Ver. 20. — In his own house. The parallel 
has, "In the garden of his own house, in 
the garden of Uzza ; " t.e., with little doubt, 
what had been formerly the garden uf one 
Uzza. 

Ver. 21. — The long reign of Manasseh 
of fifty-five years — a signal and merciful 
instance of space given for repentance — 
ended, his death met him presumably at the 
age of sixty-seven. The son who succeeded 
liim was twenty-two years old, born there- 
fore not before his father was forty- five years 
old. This may be an indication that it was 
indeed not one son only whom Manasseh 
" caused to pass through the fire " (ver. 6). 
He emulated the sins of the former life of 
his father, but did not, like him, repent It 
will be noted that in ver. 19 of the parallel 
his mother's name is given as "MeshuUe- 
meth, the daughter of Haruz, of Jotbah," of 
whom nothing is known. 

Ver. 24. — His servants conspired. So also 
Joash and Amaziah had been punished, the 
latter aveuging the death of his father on 



404 



THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxxiii. 1—26 



those Bervants who bad caused it (2 Kings 
xiv. 5 ; ch. xxlv. 25, 26 ; xxv. 27). 

Ver. 25.— The people of the land. The 
emphatic expression here used (as also in 
tlie parallel), with its repetition in same 
verse making it more so, may either hetray 
tlie unfortunate sympathy that the worse 
element of the nation felt with tlie bad king 
and his evil ways, or it may mean that the 
healthier element of the people insisted on 
the right respect being observed to the 
proper succession. The conduct of Josiah 



from very tender years, which could not 
have been entirely his own, but must be 
credited in part to those who taught and 
influenced him, throws the balance of pro- 
bability, perhaps, into tliis latter and more 
charitable view. The | arallel contains two 
closing verses (25, 26) additional to what 
we have, giving the authority as the "book 
of the chronicles of the kings of Judali," 
and stating that Amon also " was buried in 
his sepulchre, in the garden of Uzza." 



HOMILETICS. 

Vera. 1 — 20. — Uncertain repentances. While the father Hezekiah filled one of the 
niches of the three typical best kings, his son Manasseh, the thirteenth King of Judah, 
by mournful contrast, occupies one of those of the three worst of all the kings of both 
lines, the other two being Jeroboam and Ahab. His reign, filling the longest space of 
all, viz. fifty-five years, occtipies but a very unequal space on the page of the present 
history, and a \ et shorter in the parallel (2 Kings xxi. 1 — 18). Eventful as it was, 
its evuntfulness was of such a character that the hi.stcirians may be pardonably credited 
with the very natural disposition to get over it as quickly as was possible. But from 
anotlier point of view, the brevity marks significantly enough one unrelieved tale, one 
catalogued accumulation of personal sin, and sin against his high ofiice and position, 
sin against his nation, and that sin — some of the worst of all sin — which consisted in 
seducing (ver. 9 and 2 Kings xxi. 9) others to sin. The phenomena spread before the 
student in this chapter exhibit the King Manasseh — 

L TOUCHINO THE LOWEST DEPTHS OP SIN THAT HAD DISTINGTJISHED BITHBB THRONE 

OF THE KENDED KINGDOM. Thu following particulars may be identified, as e.g. : 1. The 
general type of his evil work resembled him to "the heathen, whom God" had actually 
driven out as intolerable, while making room in the land for his own people. 2. The 
evil work which he did was an iwidoing of good work, and that the good of his own 
father before him. " He built again what Hezekiah his father had broken down " 
(ver. 3). 3. The evil work which he did was so much worse than that of King Ahaz 
(ch. xxviii. 24), who shut up " the house of the Lord," in that it proceeded to the 
sacrilegious profanity of "building altars" for idolatrous worship, and " for all the host 
of heaven " in that house itself, " whereof the Lord had said. In Jerusalem shall my 
Name be for ever." In " that house" also he set "a carved image . . . iilol." 4. The 
evil work which he did was a persuading and seducing of the people (over whom he 
was presumably shepherd) to sin, so strong as to amount to little less than cumjiulsion. 
Note how often the peculiar circumstances surrounding a tempter's templing make 
the tempting so called, in nothing appreciable to fall short of compulsion. The serpent's 
tempting of Eve was discretion itself as compared with the brute force and the over- 
powering force with which evil and sin itself are proffered (?) to the mind, heart, hand, 
of many a lielpless one, many a helpless thousand in the vortex of modern civilization, 
its methods and systems. 5. The evil work did not shrink or stay before the enormity 
of "shedding innocent blood" (2 Kings xxi. 16) — that triumph of devili.shness — but 
e'en carried it to such excess that could make it possible for the historian to write, that 
with the wickedness "he filled Jerusalem from one end to another," making it to ring 
again with its sorrows and " cries from the ground," and with his sin. 

II. Warned in an exceptionally forcible manneb. Allusion is made to this 
interposition in our vers. 10, 18 ; but fuller information respecting it is given in 
2 Kings xxi. 10 — 15, and especially vers. 12, 13, in language that has indeed made iti 
mark. For the expression (ver. 12), " both his ears shall tingle," see 1 Sam. iii. 11 ; 
Jer. xix. 3 ; and upon the latter verse (ver. 13), see Rogers's ' Superhuman Origin of 
the Bible,' p. 268 (1st edit., 8vo). Note what a real force, though so often neglected, 
' warning " should be. 



CH. xxxiii. 1— 25.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 405 

ni. Suffering the most abject deobadation or capture and humiliation 
or punishment. This is expressed in ver. 11, compared with 2 Kin<;s xix. 28; Amos 
iv. 2 ; Job xli. 2 ; see also again Rogers's ' Superhuman Origin of the Bible,' p. 286. The 
retribution in the mode and the place of punishment is to be observed. It is the 
Assyrians who carry him away, but his captivity is to Babylon. 

IV. His exceeding humbling or himself with entreaties and prater before 
God in his affliction, and because of affliction. There are sufficient reasons for 
believing that there were present alike some penitence and some repentance in this 
humbling of himself, and beseeching " of the Lord his God," and " prayer to the God 
of his fathers." For God heard the prayer, in some sense also undeniably answered it, 
— brought Manasseh again to Jerusalem and to his throne there. It is also said that 
Manasseh came to be convinced of what he should never have doubted, that " the 
Lord he was God " (ver. 13) ; that he reversed his former idolatrous practices and com- 
mands, Cast out idols and altars from the city, repaired God's altar and offered peace 
offerings and thank offerings (vers. 15, 16), and began other useful works for the defence 
of Jerusalem and his country. If he cleared himself, however, it is ^lain that he 
could not succeed in winning the people away with a perfect heart from " the high 
places," and their sacrifices and worship there (ver. 17), which temptation it was 
he who had again put in their way at the biginning. How often has God's ready 
mercy and abundant pity run to meet and to help and to receive a penitence that did 
not prove itself after all pungent and intrinsically deep and lasting ! How often does 
he still manifest himself thus " ready to forgive," while the strictest and severest self- 
searchings of our own hearts as to their sincerity and purity remain to be challengi dl 
It is indeed to be noted, and it is a thing unexplained, and painfully, warningly sujgi s- 
tive, that one of the inspired histories (our parallel) has not a single word to say of his 
repentance and amendment ; as though, whatever it were personally, and not a case 
" where tears of penance came too late for grace" for the individual, yet such 'repent- 
ance was all too late to rehabilitate his character, redeem his reign, oi undo for a 
miserable nation the worst of his sins' consequences I 



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 9. — Th« apostate. Well indeed was it for King Hezekiah that he did not 
foresee, though he may have /eared (see previous homily), the character and the course 
of his son and successor. Had he done so, not all his riches and honour, not all his 
treasuries and storehouses, not all his flocks and herds, not all his watercourses and 
other works, would have removed sorrow from his heart. There has never, in any Und, 
been a greater change, a .sadder reaction, than thsit experienced by Judali when the 
godly Hezekiah was succeeded by the apostate Manasseh. It is true, indeed — 

I. That pity as well as blame mat be extended to the young king. He 
was but twelve when he ascended the throne ol' Judah. He was far too young to 
encounter the peculiar temptations of sovereignty ; and there was much excuse for 
him if, at that tender age, he allowed his own youthful inclinations to be overborne 
by the counsels of those so much older and so much more experienced than himself. 
In view of his circumstances, we may commiserate as much as we condemn him. No 
one need wish to occupy a higher position than his years, his experience, his training, 
have fitted him to fill. Its honours and its emoluments, however great ibey may be, 
are of no account at all in view of the immense disadvantage at which Buch a one is 
placed, and of the temptations to which he is exposed. Let youth wait its time ; let 
it not seize the opportunity before the hour is ripe ; let it undeistand that the position 
of subjection, of apprenticeship, of culture (special or general), is a far happier and 
far wiser one for the present, and that it is the one hope of a really prosperous and 
honourable career. 

II. That moral evil mat be hit vert hard, and tet not be blain. Nothing 
will account for the speedy apostasy of Judah but the supposition that there was a 
vigorous idolatrous party at court, or that beneath the outward conformity of the 
previous reign there was a secret and yet strong inclination toward the practices of th« 
time of Ahaa. Hezekiah did well to put down the altars and the " high places " with 



106 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xxxin. 1— 25. 



the ungparing energy he showed. But it was proved once more that it !s one thing to 
remove the temptation and another thing to change the character. No ieformer must 
be satisfied until he has reason to be convinced that sin is rooted out of the heart as 
well as taken out of the hand, that righteousness is loved within as well as manifested 
without. 

III. That bin leads bapidlt down feom bad to worse. It is painful, indeed, 
to think of the lad carefully cultured in Hebrew ways of piety and morality going 
down into such sad depths of sin and shame as are indicated in the text (vers. 3, 4, 
5, 7). Not all at once, but by somewhat rapid stages, he went on and down from the 
piity and purity of his boyhood to the "depths of Satan," as they may be called. 
Thai is too often the lamentable course of sin. It takes but a few years for the soul 
that was taught to hate iniquity and to shrink from its touch to become familiar with 
its phases and to become an adept in its practices. The " monster of the hideous 
mien," when we have become * 

"... familiar with its face. 
We first endure, then pity, then embrace." 

Shun the first step that leads down the evil slope. 

IV. That sin beclouds the intellect while it dbgkadbs the sottl. Manasseh 
" used enchantments, and used witchcraft, and dealt with a laniiliar spirit," etc. (ver. 6). 
When men leave the rational service of the one Lord of all, and betake themselves 
either to superstition or to unbelief, they are very apt to yield themselves up to the 
greatest follies ; to accept theories and to practise arts which a very moderate share of 
intelligence condemns as childish and vain. Only in the way of Divine truth shall 
we tread the path of human wisdom ; once out of that track we lose our way, and 
wander in labyrinths of folly and of error. With Jesus Christ for our Teacher, we 
shall shun those byways of folly which would dishonour and degrade us. 

V. That one sinful soul mat wobk a world or harm. " So Manasseh made 
Judah and the inhabitants of Jeiusalem to err, and to do worse than the heathen," 
etc. (ver. 9). Perhaps those who first used their influence to withdraw him from the 
service of Jehovah shrank from some of the " developments " of their own work ; but 
when we send a human spirit on a downward course, we little know whither that 
course will lead, or in what it will end. There are scarcely any limits to the evils 
which one bad life may work or start. Heavy indeed is the responsibility, great is the 
guilt, of those who lead the young astray, and send them along a path where they not 
only err and fail themselves, but scatter broadcast the seeds of sin and sorrow. — 0. 

Vers. 10 — 17. — The p^iitent. In these words we have — 

I. The last and worst symptom of depaetuee from God — obduraot. "The 
Lord spake to Manasseh, and to his people : but they would not hearken " (ver. 10). Sin 
reaches its extremity when it deliberately and determinately closes its ear against the 
recognized voice of God. A defiant refusal to listen when God is speaking to us is 
surely the neplus vltra of iniquity ; guilt can go no further (see Prov. i. 24—33). 

II. The descent of the Divinb penalty. When other means of instruction 
and of influence have been tried and failed, God visits in severe discipline. To Manasseh 
this came in defeat, humiliation (he was bound in fetters), and captivity ; he had to 
leave the city of David and the land of his fathers, and become a show in the distant 
land of the enemy. To us the Divine discipline comes in various ways, of which the 
most common are bodily aflBiotion, the vision of death, substantial loss, the estrange- 
ment of those who had been near and dear to us, some form of bitter hr'.miliation, 
bereavement and consequent loneliness. 

III. The rise of true penitence in the human heart. At length Manasseh 
had his eyes opened, and hp saw his folly and his sin ; at length he learnt that he had 
not only forsaken the good way of his father Hezekiah, but had grievously and guiltily 
departed from the living God. We can never tell what will humble the heart of a 
man ; one is affected and subdued by one affliction, another by another. But at length 
the blow falls, and the edge of the sword enters in, and the heart bleeds, and it ig 
wounded not unto death, but unto life. 1. Then comes recognition of the truth. Then 
Ood is recognized — his nearness, his claims, his displeasure, his fatherly purpose. 



oa. xxxiii. 1-25.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 401 

Then guilt also is discerned — its greatness, its heinousness. 2. Then comes acknow- 
ledgment and appeal. The heart humWes itself before God, even as Maiiasseh now 
" humbled himself grea'tly before the God of his fathers " (ver. 12) ; and the soul prays 
for mercy, asks that its guilt may be forgiven, and itself restored. 3. And then comes 
selfswrrendeir ; for if there be not a willingness, a readiness to yield ourselves unto 
God, an exhibition of penitence is only an affectation ; it is unreal and untrue. If it 
is genuine, it must be accompanied by a pure desire and a firm resolve to return unto 
him whom we have guiltily forsaken. 

IV. The bestowal of Divine merot. Manasseh soon found how immeasurable 
had been his mistake in his great apostasy. For the God of his fathers proved to be 
a God full of compassion and of great mercy, and he heard the humbled suppliant and 
restored him, and brought him back to his kingdom. So God now hears and pardons 
and restores ; he forgives us our sin, and he takes us back to his Divine favour, and he 
restores to ns our peace, our hope, our joy, our life in him and with him. For there is 
one invariable and inseparable sequence, viz. — 

V. Newness op life on the part op the foboiven. Manasseh goes back to 
Jerusalem, takes away the strange gods and the altars he had built, and oasts them 
out of the city ; and he repairs the altar of the Lord, and re-establishes the worship of 
Jehovah (vers. 15, 16). We return unto God, and at the same time to all purity, to 
all temperance, to all uprightness, to all reverence both in spirit and in action, to all 
piety of thought and of behaviour. This is precious indeed, beyond all price, this 
restoration to God and to our true self ; yet is there — 

VI. One serious drawback. Manasseh could not altogether undo what he had 
done. " Nevertheless the people did sacrifice," etc. (ver. 17). He could not, by one 
enactment or by a number of them, bring back the situation he had so completely 
broken up. It takes a long time to restore a people to the habits they have forsaken. 
Nor could Manasseh recall to life the brave and faithful men whom he had " done to 
death " with his cruelties (2 Kings xxi. 16). There are some things which the most 
genuine repentance will not effect. It will not recall the wasted years ; nor undo the 
malign and death-bearing influences which have been at work in human heart-i and 
lives; nor compensate the wronged for the injuries they have suffered in body or in 
spirit. Therefore let all rememljer that, while repentance and restoration are blessed, 
a life of holy service from the beginning is far more blessed still. — 0. 

Vers. 21 — 25. — The forfeited heritage. It is but very little we know or think of 
Amon : his name is unfamiliar, for his life was uneventful. And yet why should not 
he have had as happy, as glorious, as useful a career as David, or as Hezekiah, or as 
Josiah ? He had a very fair opportunity before him, but he lost it by his own folly. 
Let us look at — 

I. The golden chance that was before him. He was heir to the throne of 
Judah. Measured by some monarchies, ancient and modern, that was small enough. 
But it was no despicable fortune. As our own country's history shows, we must not 
reckon the worth of a kingdom by its geographical dimensions. Under David and 
Solomon the kingdom of Israel was a real power, if not a " great power" in that age. 
And then it was open to Amon to conciliate the tribes of Israel as his noble grandfather 
had done, and perhaps to win them back. At any rate, the kingdom of Judah was 
itself no mean heritage ; its men and women were far above the average of humanity 
in intelligence, in civilization, in an appreciation of freedom, in courage, in all the 
elements of human power. To govern Judah might well satisfy the ambition of a 
strong and aspiring mind. And there was one thing about Judah that could not be 
claimed either for Assyria or Egypt. It was the chosen dwelling-place of God ; if he 
were but worshipped and honoured there, his presence and his power would be a more 
sure guarantee of national independence and prosperity than countless hosts of armed 
men or of chariots of war. Judah was the home of God, and therefore of truth and 
of heavenly wisdom. To reign there was a choice heritage for a true man. 

II. The recklessness with which he threw it away. 1. He deliberately chose 
the evil course. At two and twenty he had nut his father's excuse for being led astray. 
The stem discipline through which Manasseh had passed, and the mercy he had found 
in a forgiving CK)d, surely should have affected and controlled his son. But he dis- 



403 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xixni. 1—25. 



ngarded and defied the lessons which were written in snch large characters before his 
f»ee, and chose the evil way (ver. 22). 2. He declined to bo corrected and restored ; 
he persbted in the path of wrong (ver. 23). 3. He excited the hatred of those whom 
he governed, and brought about an early and ignominious death, enjoying but two 
brief years of kingly rule (ver. 24). Thus, after a dishonourable and reactionary reign, 
he came to a miserable and inglorious end, and thus he forfeited his heritage. 

I. There is a very goodly heritage before us as the children of men. It will probably 
Include something fair and bright of this world's estate, some pure enjoyment of which 
we may partake gladly and gratefully. It will certainly include the knowledge of God ; 
the opportunity of worshipping and of serving him everywhere and in every relation 
we sustain ; the means of cultivating ft holy and a noble character ; openings for use- 
fhlness in many ways, and particularly in the way of helping others on in the path of 
life ; the opportunity of preparing for a far broader sphere and a far fuller life in the 
kingdom of heaven. 2. We may find ourselves tempted to forfeit this good estate. 
It is alienable by a sinful preference of the lower good, by a guilty disregard of Divine 
voices, by a perilous postponement of sacred obligation to some future time. 3. It is 
our true wisdom and our bounden duty to take at once that decisive step (of self- 
(uirender to our Lord) which places us within the kingdom of Ood, and secures for na 
the lasting friendship of a Divine Bedeemer. — 0. 

Vers. 1 — 20. — The reign of Manasseh. L Its eaelt comstencement. Manasaeh, 
" One who forgets " (Gesenius)— an exceedingly appropriate name for one who in hi> 
lifetime 'forgat Gtod and every good thing ; in the inscriptions Minasi ; perhaps so called 
" in allusion to the zeal with which the northern tribe had joined in Hezekiah's reforms " 
(ch. XXX. 11), or to the desire which prevailed in Hezekiah's reign for a union of the 
two kingdoms" (Stanley) — was twelve years old when he ascended his father's throne 
(ver. 1). A wise child may be better than a foolish king (Eccles. iv. 13) ; but, as a 
rule, "foolishness is bound up in the heart of a child " (Prov. xxii. 15), while wisdom 
is the ripe fruit of age and experience (Job xxxii. 7). The experiment of boy-kings — 
unless wkere these have been placed under regents or guided by wise counsellors, as 
were Joash (ch. xxiv. 2) and Uzziah (ch. xxvi. 6) — has seldom been successful (Eccles. 
x. 16) ; though Manasseh's grandson, Josiah, must be pronounced an honourable and 
brilliant exception (ch. xxxiv. 2). 

II. Its evil obabacteb. Manasseh " did that which was evil in the sight of the 
Lord " (ver. 2). 1. In imitation of the heathen. Whether he endeavoured to become 
acquainted with all the heathen religions he could find, and to introduce them into 
Judah, and " for this purpose sent into the most distant lands where there was any 
famous cultus, and grudged no pains for his one object" (Ewald, 'History of Israel,' 
iv. 208) — which seems a piire conjecture on the part of the learned author who pro- 
pounds it — it is undoubted that he resuscitated paganism and carried it to a higher 
degree of prevalence than it had ever before attained in Judah. (1) He restored all 
the Canaanitish abominations, i.e. the ancient worship on hill-tops, which had flourished 
under Ahaz, but which his father Hezekiah had destroyed (vers. 2, 3). (2) He revived 
the Baal and Moloch worship of Fhcenicia, which Ahab had introduced into Israel, 
rearing up altars for the Baalim, making Asheroth, or male and female statues, with 
their accompanying abominable houses (ver. 3), and setting up a Moloch idol in the 
vale of Hinnom, to which he sacrificed one, if not more, of his own sons (ver. 6), and 
encouraged his people to offer theirs (Jer. vii. 31, 32 ; zix. 2 — 6 ; xxxii. 35). (3) He 
extended the Assyrio-Chaldean star-worship, which his grandfather Ahaz had introduced 
(2 Kings xxiii. 12) ; he " worshipped all the host of heaven, and served them " (ver. 3). 
(On the nature of this worship, consult Exposition.) (4) " He plunged into all the 
mysteries of sorcery, auguries, and necromancy " (Stanley) ; " he practised augury, and 
used enchantments, and practised sorcery, and dealt with them that had familiar 
■pirits " (ver. 6). " Magio occupied an important place in the regards of the upper 
classes in Assyria, Babylonia, and Egypt. At Babylonia the interpretation of omeni 
was reduced to a science " (Bawlinson, ' Kings of Israel and Judah,' pi 206). 2. In 
dishonour of his father. " He built again the high places his father Hezekiah had 
thrown down " (ver. 3). Two things may have accounted for this sudden outbreak of 
paganism aftei' Hezekiah's death. (1) The superficial character of Hezekiah's refor* 



OH. xxxra. 1— 25.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 409 

matinn, which, though extensive enough, reaching to the furthest limits, of Judah 
(ch. xxxi. 1), does not appear to have heen sufficiently intensive (see Isa. xxviii. — xzxii.). 
The heathen party which had the upper hand during Ahaz's reign, though suppressed 
hy Hezekiah with Isaiah's help, was not destroyed. The spirit of idolatry, compelled 
to he quiet and in a measure hold itself in aheyance, was neither eradicated from the 
community nor greatly weakened in its energy — merely it was waiting a convenient 
opportunity to start up with renewed life and vigour. To this party belonged Sheboa, 
the treasurer whose deposition Isaiah demanded (Isa. xxii. 15 — 25). (2) The youth 
of Manasseh on acceding to the throne. Whether Hezekiah's only son (Josephue, 
' Ant.,' X. 2. 1) or not (Ewald, ' History of Israel,' iv. 206, note), Manasseh was only 
twelve yean of age on assuming the regal dignity, and must have been horn three 
years after the illness referred to in the preceding chapter (ch. xxxii. 24). His father's 
death, therefore, having thrown him into the hands of the heathen party at a tender 
and susceptible age, he was quickly perverted from the right way of the Lord. Even 
the example, teaching, and prayers of his mother, Hephzibah (2 Kings xxi. 1), tradi- 
tionally reported to have been Isaiah's daughter, were powerless to resist the corrupting 
influences of the statesmen and courtiers who surrounded him. " The young years of 
Manasseh gave advantage to his miscarriage; even while he might have been under 
the ferule, he swayed the sceptre. Whither may not a child be drawn, especially to a 
gairish and puppet-like superstition ? As infancy is capable of all impressions, so 
most of the worst" (Bishop Hall). 3. In defiance of Jehovah. Not content with 
re-establishing idolatry in general, he proceeded to put a special affront upon Jehovah. 
(1) He built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts (outer and inner) of the 
house of the Lord (ver. 5), thus desecrating the city of which Jehovah had said, "In 
Jerusalem shall my Name be for ever" (ver. 4). (2) In the house of God, perhaps in 
the holy place, he set the graven image of the idol he had made (ver. 7), i.e. of the 
Phoenician Astarte, so dishonouring the city and the temple of which God had said, 
"In this house and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen before all the tribes of Israel, 
will I put my Name for ever " (ver. 7), and braving the Divine threatening Jehovah 
had pronounced against apostasy from his Law and worship (ver. 8). That he " went 
■o far as to remove the altar from the forecourt of the temple, and the ark from the 
holy of holies" (Ewald), though not certain, is at least probable (cf. ver. 16 ; xxxv. 3; 
Jer. iiL 16). (3) He along with his people rejected the admonitions of Jehovah's 
prophets (ver. 10; cf. 2 Kings xxi. 10). Whether one of these was Hozai, who sur- 
vived Manasseh's reign and recorded its chief events (ver. 19), whether Isaiah lived 
into the times of Hezekiah's son, and whether Habakkuk was one of those who remon- 
strated with Manasseh, cannot be determined. Their message, however, has been 
recorded (2 Kings xxi. 12 — 15) — a prediction of impending destruction for Jerusalem 
because of her wvereign's and her people's sins. Yet neither Manasseh nor his people 
would hearken. " They loved the darkness rather than the light, because their deeds 
were evil." They refused to be warned of the perilous career upon which they had 
entered. "They hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord : they would 
none of his counsel ; they despised all his reproof" (Prov. i. 29, 30). (4) He employed 
against the prophets and professors of the true religion the unhallowed instrument of 
persecution. " He shed innocent blood very much, till he had filled Jerusalem from one 
end to another" (2 Kings xxi. 16). " He barbarously slew all the righteous men that 
were among the Hebrews ; nor would he spare the prophets, for he every day slew 
some of them, till Jerusalem was overflown with blood" (Josephus, 'Ant./ x. 3. 1). 
Not the first instance in Scripture of a state persecution on account of religion (1 Kings 
xviii. 13) ; unhappily not the last (ch. xxxiv. 5). 

III. Its long coNTmuANOB. The worst king had the longest reign — fifty-five years. 
Perhaps : 1. To discover the true character of the natio'a's sin, to reveal the essentially 
evil nature of idolatry, the inherent wickedness of such apostasy from Jehovah as 
Manasseh and his subjects had been guilty of. For this reason God bore long with the 
antediluvian world, and still at times permits wicked men to cumber the ground through 
long years, while good men, on the other hand, appear to be cut off before their time, 
2. To signalize the Divine forhea/rance, to make known to Manasseh and his subjects 
the Divine long-suffering, the desire on Jehovah's part that he and they should repent ; 
as God still, for a like reason, exercises patience with wicked men (1 Tim. L 16 ; 2 Pet. 



410 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxxm. 1— 26. 

liL 16), being unwillins; that any should perish, but that all should turn unto him and 
live (Ezek. xviii. 23, 32 ; xxxiii. 11 ; 1 Tim. ii. 4 ; 2 Pet. iii. 9). 3. To vindicate the 
Divine justice, in case the threatened judgments against Judah and Jerusalem should 
come to be fulfilled. After such an exhibition of the hideous character and bitter 
fruits of idolatry as had been given by Judah's king and people, and after such a display 
of patient toibearance on the part of Jehovah, when the stroke of judgment fell upon 
the apostate land, it would be impossible to say that it was either undeserved or prema- 
ture; that either Judah's cup of iniquity was not full, or everything had not been done 
to secure her recovery from the evil path upon which she had entered (Isa. iv. 3 — 7). 

IV. Its PEACEFtTL CLOSE. 1. The king was converted. " Manasseh humbled him- 
self greatly before the God of his fathers" (ver. 12). "Manasseh knew that the Lord 
he was God" (ver. 13; see next homily on vers. 11 — 17). 2. T%e people were 
reformed. In part at least a check was given to their idolatry. Though they con- 
tinued to sacrifice on the high places, they did so " unto the Lord their Gkid only " 
(ver. IT). 

Learn: 1. That early promotion, except in grace, is frequently a grievous mis- 
fortune. 2. That piety in parents is no guarantee of piety in children. 3. That the 
alternation of good and evil rulers in the Church and in the state is not vrithout its 
uses — on the one hand of comfort, on the other hand of trial. 4. That "length of 
days is no true rule of Gtod's favour " (Hall). 5. That " we may not measure grace by 
means" (ibid.). 6. That "that mischief may bo done in a day which many ages 
cannot redress" (ibid.). 7. That no degree of wickedness is beyond the reach of grace 
to forgive or remove. — W. 

Vers, 11 — 17. — Manasseh's repentance. I. Its impellins cause. 1. TTie grace of 
God. That the regeneration and conversion of a soul is a work of Divine grace is 
taught hardly less clearly in the Old Testament (Deut. xxx. 6; 1 Kings viii. 58; Ps. 
ex. 3; Isa. xxvi. 12; Jer. xiii. 23; xxiv. 7; xxxi. 33; Ezek. xi. 19; Zech. xii. 10) 
than in the New (John i. 13; iii. 3; vi. 44, 63, 65; Eph. ii. 1—10; v. 14; Phil. i. 6). 
2. The judyments of Providence. "The Lord brought upon him and his people the 
captains of the host of the King of Assyria" (vcr. 11). (1) The King of Assyria here 
referred to was either Esarhaddon (b.c. 681 — (;68), who succeeded Sennaohtrib, and 
therefore was contemporary with Manasseh during the first years of his reign (Sayce, 
'Fresh Light,' etc., p. 152; Rawlinson, 'Egypt and Babylon,' p. 25); or Esarhad- 
don's son and successor, Assur-bani-pal, B.C. 668 — the Sardanapalus of the Greeks 
(Schrader, 'Die Keilinschriften,' p. 367; Kleinert, in Riehm's ' Handworterbuch,' p. 
948). An inscription of the former monarch mentions Manasseh King of Judah as one 
of liis tributaries (' Records,' etc., iii. 107), while a similar inscription of the latter 
sovereign introduces as one of his tiibutaries the same Manasseh King of Judah 
(Schrader, p. 355). (2) The occasion of this expedition against Manasseh is not 
specifiid. if it happened under Esarhaddon, the monuments afford no information of 
any rising of the Palestinian states against Assyrian supremacy during his reign — 
Rawlinson ('Kings of Israel and Jurfah,' p. 207) conjectures that he may have 
" entered into negotiations with Tirhakah of Egypt ; " if under Assur-bani-pal, Manasseh 
may have been suspected of sympathizing with Saulmugina of Babylon, Assur-bani-pal'a 
rebellious brother, who abmit B.C. 648 (and therefore when Manasseh had been forty 
years upon the throne) endeavoured to assert his independence. (3) The capture and 
deportation of Manasseh, whom the Assyrian king's generals " took in chains," or 
" with hooks," and " bound with fetters," accords exactly with the representations 
given by the monuments. " The practice of bringing prisoners of importance into the 
presence of a conquering monarch by means of a thong attached to a hook or ring 
passed through their upper or their under lip, or both, is illustrated by the sculptures 
both of Babylonia and Assyria. Sargon is seen in his palace at Khorsabad receiving 
prisoners whose lips are thus perforated ; arid one of the few Babylonian sculptures 
still extant shows us a vizier conducting into the presence of a monarch two captives 
held in durance in the same way. Crnel and barbarous as such treatment of a captured 
king seems to us, there is no doubt that it was an Assyrian usage. To put a hook in 
a man's mouth and a bridle in his jaws (2 Kings xix. 28) was no mere metaphor 
expressive of defeat and capture, but a literal description of a practice that was common 



on. xxxiii. 1—25.] THE SECOND BOOK 0? TttE CHK0NICLE& 4ll 

in the age and country — a practice from which their royal rank did not exempt even 
captured monarohs" (Rawlinson, 'Egypt and Babylon,' p. 27). The 'Annals of 
Assur-hani-pal ' speak of two Cimmerian chiefs whom Gyges King of Lydia, " in strong 
fetters of iron and bonds of iron, hound and with numerous presents caused to bring 
to his (Assur-hani-pal's) presence" ('Records,' etc., i. 70). (4) The destination of 
Manasseh's deportation — Babylon instead of Nineveli, as one might have supposed — is 
explained by the circumstnnoe that Esarhaddon and Assur-bani-pal both assumed to 
themselves the title of "King of Assyria and Babylon," and instead of governing 
Babylon by means of a viceroy, themselves resided there a part of the year in a palace 
built by the former (Sayce, ' Fresh Light,' p. 152 ; Rawlinson, ' Egypt and Babylon, 
p. 25 ; Smith, 'Assyrian Discoveries,' p. 316 ; Schrader, ' Keilinsohriften,' p. 368). 

II. Its ACC0MPANTIN8 SIGNS. 1. Humility. " He humbled himself greatly before 
the Lord God of his fathers " (ver. 12). This grace, beautiful in all who come before 
God (Job XXV. 5, 6 ; Eccles. v. 2), is absolutely indispensable to a penitent (Job xl. 4 ; 
Isa. vi. 5; Rom. vii. 18), and is the certain highway to spiritual promotion (Prov. 
XV. 33 ; Isa. Ixvi. 2 ; Luke xviii. 13, 14). 2. Prayer. " He besought the Lord his 
God" (ver. 1'2); "he prayed imto him" (ver. 13) — no doubt with the language and 
feeling of (1) confession, acknowledging his trespasses (Job vii. 20; Ps. xxxii. 5; li. 3; 
Isa. lix. 12 ; Ezek. ix. 6; Dan. ix. 6) ; (2) submission, owning the just judgment of 
God upon himself and his people, without which no repentance can be sincere (Ezek. 
ix. 13; Ps. li. 4; Dan. ix. 7); (3) supplication, entreating Jehovah's favour and for- 
giveness, and in proof thereof restoration to his land and kingdom (compare Manasseh's 
prayer in the Apocrypha). 

III. Its coksbquent fruits. 1. Acceptance. Jehovah " was entreated of him, and 
heard his supplication, and brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom " (ver. 
13). So God still listens to the cries of sincere penitents when they call upon him for 
forgiveness and salvation, for emancipation from the condemnation of the Law and the 
enslaving yoke of sin (Job xxxiii. 27, 28 ; Isa. Iv. 6, 7 ; Ivii. 15 ; Jer. iii. 12 — 14 ; 
Luke xviii. 14; Jas. iv. 8). That Manasseh should have been restored to his throne 
and kingdom harmonized well with the mild character of Esarhaddon, who appears 
from the monuments to have accorded similar treatment to a son of Merodach-Baladan, 
and to an Aramaean chief of the Gambalu, both of whom on submitting to his authority 
were forgiven and reinstated in their former positions (Rawlinson, ' Egypt and Babylon,' 
pp. 27, 28). Like clemency was extended by Assur-bani-pal to the King of Arvad's 
Yakinlu's sons, who, on kissing the great king's feet after their father's death, were 
favourably received — Azibahal the eldest being appointed to the kingdom of Arvad, and 
the others presented with clothing of linen and bracelets of gold (' Records,' etc., i. 69). 
Tammaritu King of Elam likewise experienced the great king's favour on making 
humble submission and acknowledgment of his offence (ibid., p. 78). 2. Illwmination. 
" Then Manasseh knew that Jehovah he was God " (ver. 13). (1) The discovery 
Manasseh made was true even before he made it, at the very time when he thought 
it to be false. That Jehovah alone was God had been distinctly claimed by Jehovah 
himself (Exod. ix. 14 ; xx. 3), by Moses (Deut. iv. 35), by Hannah (1 Sam. ii. 2), by 
David (2 Sam. vii. 22), by Solomon (1 Kings viii. 23, 60), and by Isaiah (xlv. 6, 6, 21). 
So the fact that men may sometimes say or think there is no God (Ps. xiv. 1) does not 
prove that there is none. (2) The ignorance of this sublime truth of the unity and 
soleity of Jehovah lay at the basis of Manasseh's devotion to idolatry. So the " Gentiles 
walk in the vanity of their minds . . . through the ignorance that is in them " (Eph. 
iv. 17, 18). (3) Manasseh's apprehension of this truth was rather the result than the 
cause of his repentance. Manasseh turned to God when in distress out of a sense of 
sin, with an earnest desire after mercy, and (it may be assumed) with a sincere resolu- 
tion after new obedience. It is not certain that at that stage he realized the theological 
fact that Jehovah alone was God. This dawned on him first, it would seem, in all its 
clearness when, in answer to his prayer, he became a conscious recipient of the Divine 
mercy. His experience in dealing with Jehovah — so different fi-om that ho had been 
acquainted with in serving idols — convinced him that these were nothing, and that 
Jehovah alone was God ; and the discovery of this truth rendered his relapse into idolatry 
impossible. So men never clearly know God till they become participants of his mercy, 
3. Se/ormation. " He took away the strange gods, and the idol out of the home ot 



412 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxxiii. 

the Lord (ver. 7), and all the altars that he had huilt in the mount of the honse of the 
Lord, . . . and cast them out of the city " (ver. 15). Compare the earlier reformations 
of Joash (ch. xxiii. 17), and Hezekiah (ch. xxxi. 1), and the later of Josiah (ch. xxxiv. 
3, 4). So in every case of true conversion there must be a putting away of known sin 
(Isa. i. 16; Iv. 7 ; Matt. iii. 8). 4. Separation. The people continued to sacrifice on 
the high places, though only unto the Lord their God (ver. 17). On their part it was 
a compromise. Willing to advance half-way on the path of reformation, they would 
not make a clean severance between themselves ami idolatry. Manasseh did not so. 
5. Consecration. " He repaired the altar of the Lord, and sacrificed thereon peace 
offerings and thank offerings" (ver. 16). So far as he himself was concerned, he was 
done with the high places ; and his regal authority, backed up by his personal example, 
he faithfully employed to induce his subjects to have done with them also. 

Lessons. 1. The benefits and design of affiiction. 2. The value and use of prayer. 
3. The graciousness of God towards penitents. 4. The marvellous illumination that 
comes with the new life. 5. The certainty that holiness will flow from a personal 
experience of mercy, 6. The intermixture of imperfection with the best services of 
saints. — W. 

Vers. 18 — ^20. — Lessons from the life of Manasseh. 1. A lurid light upon thb 
NATURAL HiSTOKT OF SIN. Manassch's career brings into prominence certain truths 
upon the subject of human depravity which in these days of so-called culture and 
refinement are prone to be pushed aside, ignored, and forgotten. 1. That sin, wicked- 
ness, a disposition to go astray from, the paths of virtue, is an inborn characteristic of 
the human soul in its fallen condition; is a native product springing up out of the 
soil of man's interior being, and does not simply come upon him from without as the 
result of his environment, as the combined effect of the circumstances by which he is 
surrounded and of the exampk'S by which he is directed. This is what theologians 
are accustomed to call the doctrine of original sin — a doctrine which Scripture with 
perfect clearness announces (Ps. li. 5), which experience everywhere attests (1 Kings 
viii. 46 ; Eccles. vii. 20), which modem science with its law of heredity strikingly 
confivms, and which lends peculiar emphasis to the teaching of Clirist as to the new 
birth (John iii. 7). 2. That this inborn principle of sin frequently reveals itself at 
unexpected times and under totally unlooked-for conditions. Concerning Manasseh 
one would have felt disposed to reason that if ever a child had the chance of being 
good, or at least of keeping down the evil that was in him, that child was the son of 
Hezekiah. Yet scarcely had he come to the throne at the early a;;e of twelve than 
the wickedness of his nature began to break forth in almost full-blown violence. It 
is a warning to parents not to slacken in their diligence or abate in their efforts to 
promote the godly education of their children, since the season for impressing them 
with right views of truth and instilling into them right principles of action is at the 
longest extremely short, and if neglected may lead to irreparable disaster in after-life ; 
while it is a much-needed reminder that not even pious parents can infallibly secure 
the conversion of their children, and that after all these have the determination of their 
future characters and destinies largely in their own hands. 3. That the development 
of evil in human hearts and lives is often rapid and always downward. At least it 
was so with this infatuated prince, who began by exhibiting a singular precocity in 
sin, and ended not until he had all but exhausted the catalogue of crime. If he pro- 
ceeded no further in his downward career than sacred story represents, the reason 
likely was that his ingenuity could devise nothing more atrocious. Indeed, one cannot 
help discovering in him a prototype of Shakespeare's Aaron, who says— 

" Tut I I have done a thousand dreadful things 
As willingly as one would kill a fly ; 
And nothing grieves me heartily indeed, 
But that I cannot do ten thousand more." 

(' Titus Andronicus,' act T. so. 1.) 

n, Vawjablk conssBL as to the moral and spiritual uses of adversity. 
1. It is always intended as a means of religious and moral improvement, whether it be 
laid on laint m sinner. The Lord doth not afBict men willingly, but for their profit, 



OH. xxxni. 1— 25.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 4U 

that they might be partakers of his holiness (Lam. iii. 33 j Heb. xii. 10). In the case 
of saints it has this for its primary end (Heb. xii. 11); but even in the case of sinnera 
this end is not neglected or overlooked. Calamity may fall on them directly as punish- 
ment ; yet it always aims at their arrestment, reformation, and conversion. 2. /( 
frequently succeeds when every other means of improvement fails. In the case of 
Manasseh nothing appeared potent enough to arrest him on his mad career — not the 
memory of his good father or of his pious mother, not the infinite folly of the idolatries 
he was keeping up, not the shame in which his immoralities involved him hefore the 
people, not the blood of his innocent victims, not the mourning and lamentation of his 
bereaved subjects, not the feelings of his own parental bosom, not the reproofs of 
Jehovah's prophets, not the terrors of his own conscience. Not until God put a hook 
into his nose and led him off to captivity in Babylon did he pause and begin to reflect 
on his wickedness. And the same function is performed by affliction yet. God 
frequently employs it to pull up those whom he perceives rushing headlong to perdition, 
when other and milder methods have been used in vain. 

III. A SPLEKDID ILLUSTBATION OF THE FEBENESS AND THE POWER OF DiVINE OBACE. 

1. The steps of Manasseh's recovery. (1) Penitence. He was awakened to a sense 
of his by-past ungodly career, and filled with sincere and heartfelt contrition on its 
account. (2) Prayer. He was moved to cry for mercy from that God against whom 
he had offended. (8) Pardon. The Lord was entreated of him, and he was forgiven. 
He was restored to his kin.^dom. 2. The ground of Manasseh's recovery. (1) Certainly 
not good works in the sense of meritorious actions, because penitence and prayer are 
both good in the sense of being commanded duties. (2) Solely the grace or loving- 
kindness of God, which besides was magnified in pardoning so great a transgressor. 

IV. Necessary instruction ab to the only sufficient evidence of conveb- 
siON AND salvation. 1. Illumination. "Then Manasseh knew that the Lord he 
was God." This was true all the same, whether Manasseh knew it or not, and all the 
while Manassfh was doing his best by the worship of idols to show that he believed 
the opposiie. That which convinced him of his error was his experience of the Divine 
clemency. Whereas his service of idols had not been able to prevent his deportation 
to Babylon, no sooner had he transferred his allegiance to Jehovah than his captivity 
was ended. This sufiSced to draw the veil from Manasseh's eyes. So men never really 
come to know God till they have been made partakers of his mercy in Christ. That 
which renders nugatory and worthless much of present-day objection to God and Christ, 
the Bible and the gospel, is that it commonly proceeds from them that know neither 
the one nor the other. 2. Reformation. Manasseh's conversion was authenticated 
by change of behaviour as well as change of mind. He took away the foreign gods 
out of the house of the Lord, and removed from both the temple and the city all the 
altars he had built for their worship. He repaired also the altar of the Lord, and com- 
manded his subjects to serve the Lord God of Israel only. So in all cases of true con- 
version there must be the putting away of every known sin, the consecration of every 
individual power, and the performance of every known duty. — W. 

Vers. 21 — 25. — Manasseh and Amon— father and son: a parallel and a contrast. 
I. Manasseh and Amon resembled bach other. Both were : 1. Men. No higher 
dignity attainable on earth than that of manhood ; higher than any purely temporal 
or social distinction is that of having been made in the Divine image. 2. Kings. 
Though often desecrated and abused, the position of a sovereign is one of great honour 
and responsibility. As vicegerents of Jehovah, the theocratic potentates of Israel and 
Judah stood upon the highest possible pinnacle of kingly renown. 3. Idolaters. 
Amon did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, as did Manasseh his father 
(ver. 22). "Like father, like son," is the common experience — the exceptions only 
proving the rule. 4. Sufferers. Manasseh taken captive by Esarhaddon or Assur- 
bani-pal ; Amon conspired against and killed by his own servants. 

II. Manasseh and Amon diffebed fbom each other. They contrasted in : 1. 
Names. Manasseh was so called (probably, at least) after an Israelitish tribe (see 
homileticB on vers. 1 — 20) ; Amon was named after an Egyptian god. The first was 
111) it likely truceable to Hezekiah's piety; the second due to Manasseh'a impiety. 
Z. Meiijns. Manasseh ruled Judah for fifty-fiv years; Amou for two. God determines 



414 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xxxiv. 1—33. 



to nations and individuals, to kings and subjects, the bounds of their habitations and 
the length of their days (Acts xvii. 26). 3. Careers. Maaasseh repented, turned to 
Jehovah, and lived ; Amon died as he bad lived, an insensate idolater and hardened 
transgressor. 4. Ends. Manasseh died a natural, Amon a violent death. 

Learn (1) the resemblances and (2) the differences which exist between man and 
man, in the home, in the world, in the Church. — W. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 



This chapter, with the followingf, em- 
braces the entire of the beneficent reign of 
Josiah, son of Amon — the son an illustrious 
contrast to the father. The parallel (2 
Kings xxii. — xziii. 30) is less full, and also, 
80 far as chronology goes, less clear in the 
earlier verses. For once the writer of Kings 
spends his strength more largely than our 
compiler on the moral and religious aspects 
of Josiah's work, and is rather scantier in 
the detail of his external works for his 
uiition, city of Jernsalem, and temple. He, 
however, gives very much less prominence 
to the matter of the celebration of the 
Passover. 

Ver. 1. — Again the name of the mother 
is omitted. From the parallel we learn she 
was " Jedidah, the daughter of Adaiah of 
Boscath." 

Ver. 3. — This, with tlie following four 
verses, forms tUe commentary on the statu- 
ment of ver. 2, that Josiah " declined neither 
to the right hand, nor to the left." We 
cannot mistake the allusion in this verse to 
his persotud religion at, say, sixteen years 
of age, as the foundation of his religious 
reign and of the practical devotion to refor- 
mation, instanced as commencing with his 
twentieth year. It may be here noted that 
the Prophet Jeremiah was called to his 
work in the year following thereupon, or, 

ferhaps, the very same year (Jer. L 1, 2). 
t is highly likely that Josiah and Jeremi^ 
were given to one another providentially, 
to co-operate in ail good woika. now so 
needed for Church and state. The three 
dates of the eighth, twelfth, and (ver. 8) the 
eighteenth year of Josiah's reign were dates 
memorable in his life. For the two kinds 
of images of this verse, see succeeding note. 
Ver. 4. — Note references in Lev. ixvi. 1, 
80. The images, that were on high above 
them ; t.«., as Bevised Version, the $un- 
images (D'^i^n). The word and name 
occur only eight times — in Leviticus as just 
quoted; in oor Second Book of Chronicles 
three times; in Isaiah twice; and in E/,r- 
kiel twice. The gloves; i.e. the Atherim; 



again as last verse. The carved images; 
Bevised Version, graven images; Hebrew, 
D'^Dsn. This word is found twenty-two 
times, occurring in Deuteronomy, Judges, 
Kings, Chronicles, Psalms, Isaiah, Jeremiah, 
llosea, and Micah. The molten images; 
Hebrew, niDBSij. This word also occurs 
just twenty-two times, from Exodua down- 
wards. Made dust of them and strowed it 
(so Exod. xxxii. 20 ; 2 Kings xxiii. 6). 

Ver. 5. — Note herein the striking fulfil- 
ment of 1 Kings xiii. 1 — 3, of which our 
parallel (2 Kings xxiii. 12—14, 16 -20) 
gives a more detailed account, especially as 
regards Israel, though not failing to recog- 
nize Judah and Jerusalem's share iu the 
need of piirgation and punishment. 

Ver. 6. — In the cities of Manasseh, . . 
Ephraim, . . . Simeon, even unto Naphtali. 
Manasseh and Ephraim lay very nearly in 
the centre of the whole land, while Simeon 
and Naphtali were respectively at the 
southern and northern extremities. With 
their mattocks. This rendering; may be 
correct, and cannot be said to be foreign to 
tlie sense and connei'tiou of the p.issage, 
the Hebrew word in that case being the 
feminine plural of 3Tn. Perhaps, however, 
the word is one with that found in Ps. cix. 
10, and may be rendered " in their ruined," 
i.e. semi- ruined, "condition." Note Keri 
also, which favours the latter reading; the 
Septuagint shows simply words which may 
best translate, and in their neigtibourhouds 
respectively. 

Ver. 7. — When. Cut out this word, which 
represents nothing in the original. 

Ver. 8. — It is iu some sense as though 
the work of purification, atoning, penitence, 
must precede that of practical repentance, 
of repairing, restoring, rebuilding. The 
original, however, does not warrant the 
laying of any stress on the when, found again 
in the Authorized Version. Shaphan. In 
the parallel (2 Kings xxii. 3) Sliaphan is 
designated " the scribe." His descendants, 
to the second generation, at all events, did 
him honour (Jer. xxvi. 24 ; xxix. 3 ; xxxvi. 
10, 12, 2.") ; Ezek. viii. 11 ; sre also 2 Kings 
XXV. 22). The names of Uaaseiah (Jer. 
XXXV. 4) and Joah (2 Kings xviii. 18) are 
known, but not mirlfing tlio present persons. 

Vur. £>. — Hilkiah the high priest. Of 



OH. XXXIV. 1—33.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHEONICLBS. 



415 



Hilkiah't ancestors and descendants we 
learn something in the following references: 

1 Chron. vi. 13, 11; ix. 11; 2 Kings xxv. 
18 ; Neh. xL 11 ; Ezra vii. 1. They delivered. 
This means that Hilkiah'g people delivered 
of what they had collected to Shaphan and 
bis colleagues, who again in their turn (ver. 
10) " put it into the hand of the workmen," 
etc. This is certainly the meaning of 

2 Kings xxii. 4—9. And they returned to 
Jerusalem ; translate, and of the dwellers in 
Jerusalem. Note Keii, and see oh. xxxv. 
18; and Septuagiut rendering here and 
there. 

"Ver. 10. — And they put it ; <.«. Shaphan 
and colleagues, acoordiog to the parallel. 

Ver. 11. — The exact work done we are 
unable to follow with precision. The 
parallel describes it, in more general terms, 
as "repairing the breaches." The repairs 
here spoken of, however, betoken, to say 
the least the rough usage, as well as 
" negligence," of kings like Manasseh and 
AmOD, and suggest a further question as 
to the nature of those heathen and idola^ 
trous practices, which cost so much to the 
very structure of temple and houses, i.e. 
prohibly the contiguous chambers of the 
main building (1 Kings vi. 5), the exact 
style of which, however, is very doubtful. 

Ver. 12. — Faithfully. Eefer back to note, 
ch. xxxi. 12. To set . . . forward ; Hebrew, 
ns)^ ; the idea, of course, not so much that 
of expediting, as of guiding and instructing. 
The mention of those Levites whose busi- 
ness was musio is rather a surprise, and is 
not found in the parallel. 

Ver. 13. — Scribes. Considering the men- 
tion of " scribes " in the plural in 1 Kings iv. 
3, although it stands alone, till, at all events, 
the time of Hezekiah (as testified by Prov. 
xxv. 1), it is at any rate not improbable 
that an order of scribes was instituted by 
Solomon; that it fell into desuetuile iinme- 
diately under the divided kingdom, and, 
coming into vogue again undej- Hezekiah, 
is now mentioned in the natural way we 
here find it. The mention of the " scribe " 
in the singular number is of frequent occur- 
rence in the historic books, and in Isaiah 
(xxxiii. 18; xxxvi. 22). The officers. This 
word reproduces, in the Hebrew, the familiar 
ihoterim of Exod. v. 10 (see also 1 Chron. 
xxiii. 3-6). 

Ver. 14. — The time of this verse is not 
free from ambiguity, which the parallel does 
not remove. It purports either that, on 
occasion of " bringing out the money," Hil- 
kiah providentially lighted on his find, or 
that he availed himself of that occasion to 
report and give up the find made some time 
or other previously. The italio-type word 
" given," in this verse, it is bitter to discard, 
and to restore the omitted words, " by the 



hand of; " i.«. the book was either Moses' 
original handwriting and solemn deposit 
(Deut. xxxi. 26) — in that case nearly eight 
centuries and a half old — or, at any rate, the 
standard copy and authorized successor of 
it, though we nowhere read of such a copy 
having been made, nor is it necessary to 
doubt the durability of the original. A 
book should be rendered the book. 

Ver. 18. — The implication on the face of 
this verse as of the parallel (2 Kings xxii. 
10), is that Shaphan leaves the king to 
surmise (which he very quickly does), from 
hearing a portion (Hebrew here, read in it ; 
in parallel, "read it") of the book, what 
it was. 

Ver. 19. — With one insignificant excep- 
tion (the omission here of the word isd), 
the words of this verse are identical with 
the parallel in its ver. 11. The same, to all 
purposes, may be said of our twelve suc- 
ceeding verses, compared with the parallel 
in its ver. 12 — oh. xxiii. 3. The king rent 
his clothes, in grief that the practice of his 
nation had diverged so terribly from their 
ever-to-be-venerated Law. 

Ver. 20. — Ahikam the son of Shaphan 
(see Jer. xxvi. 24 ; xl. 5). Abdon the sou 
of Mioah. The parallel (2 Kings xxii. 12) 
and the Syriac Version have "Achbor the 
sou of Miohaiah " (see also Jer. xxvi. 22 ; 
xxxvi. 12). 

Ver. 21. — For me, and for them that are 
left in Israel and in Jadah. The parallel 
shows, " For me, and for the people, and for 
all Judah " (2 Kings xxii. 13), without any 
apparent specific reference to Isr.iel. Our 
present passage may intend to glance at the 
fact that the better part of Israel were in 
captivity ; and it will be possible, at any 
rate, to read the last clause as intending, 
not " for them that are left in Judah," but 
" and for them in Judah." That is poured 
out ; Hebrew, n^nj. The parallel shows, 
"that is kindled;" Hebrew, nnxj. The 
considerable resemblance between the 
Hebrew words is worthy of passing note. 

Ver. 22. — The question may suggest itself, 
Why was not Jeremiah (ch. xxxv. 25 ; xxxvi. 
21) at once consulted? Probably he was at 
Anathoth, and nut immediately accessible. 
Tikvath. In Hebrew, Tokhath ; anil in pa- 
rallel, Kfewafe. Hasrah. Inparallel.flarAas. 
In the college ; Revised Version, following 
Hebrew, in the {Mishneh) second quarter 
(see Zeph. i. Ill; Condor's 'Handbook to 
the Bible,' p. 312). Nothing is known of 
Huldah, nor of Suallum her husband, except 
what lies in this and the parallel pluce. 

Ver. 23.— The oracular answer of Huldah, 
contained in this and tlie following five 
verses, is very closely paralleled by the six 
verses of 2 Kings xxii. 15 — 20. 

Ver. 25.— Poured out. So here again, m 



416 



THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHKUNICLES. [oh. xxxiv. 1—33. 



aboTe (ver. 21). Tet onr Septnagint has 
"kindled;" and also the parallel in the 
Hebrew. The word "quenched," which 
immediately followB, Buits the word "kin- 
dled," and what with the testimony of the 
Septuagint, both here and in ver. 21, and 
the Hebrew in both passages of the parallel, 
suggests that " poured " is the substitution, 
by some mishap, of a copyist — a mishap, for 
instiince, that might result from the copyist 
writing from the speech of some one, and 
not from his own inspection. Exactly 
siiiiilar mistakes may often be seen in our 
maps, where the spelling and misspelling 
of the name of some place seem only to be 
accounted for by the same supposition. The 
catastrophe now foretold befell the nation 
manifestly in the reigns of the succeeding 
sovereigns, whose days were emphatically 
both few and evil, viz. the two sous of 
Josiah, Jehoahaz and Eliaklm, whose name 
was changed to Jelioiakim ; and the two 
sons of this latter, Jehoiachin and Zedekiah 
(according to 2 Kings xxiv. 17, the same 
with Mattaniah, and sou of JosiaJi). 
Ver. 29. — The wise, religious, and nn- 



■elfish conduct of tha king is clearly be- 
tokened in the course he took, as narrated 
here and in the succeeding three verses. 

Ver. 30.— The Levltes. The parallel 
mentions " prophets " and omits " Levites," 
which latter our compiler is safe not to for- 
get When it is said in this verse, he read, 
the meaning, of courie, is "the priests" 
read (Beut. xxxi. 9). 

Ver. 31. — The king stood in his place; i.e. 
not simply in his order, but upon his royal 
pedestal, or platform; possibly following a 
mere suggestion, originating with the wdnl 
used in the parallel, "by his pillar" (so 
Revised Version). 

Ver. 32. — Some think the text here cor- 
rupt, both for the presence of the words, 
and in Benjamin, and the absence of the 
words, " in the covenant." Their case, how 
ever, is scarcely conclusive (see 2 Kings 
xxiii. 3). 

Ver. 33.— The parallel (2 Kings xxiii. 
4 — 20) gives some succinct account of Jo- 
siah's removal of abominationi, here glanced 
at so briefly. 



HOMILETICS 

Vers. 1 — 33. — TTie reign of Josiah — its unexpected boon, in a repuocteation of 
revealed religion, with the legitimate and happy results following thereupon. In the 
reign and person of Josiah, once more and for the last time in the now numbered years 
of the kingdom of Judah, the light of piety and " goodness " flickered up in the socket. 
His reign. began when his years numbered but eight; it lasted thivty-one years. Four 
reigns succeeded his to the date of the destruction of Jerusalem, but the four together 
occupied but twenty-two or twenty-three years in all. The term of life is run, there- 
fore, within a very short length, and the pensive sadness of the coming end falls upim 
us before the horrors of the end itself overwhelm us. Josiah's care for the reformatiun 
of the national religion emulated, rather exceeded, that of any predecessor (2 Kings 
xxiii. 22, 25). He boldly denounced and destroyed, enlisted help and spiritual 
sympathy, and reconstructed. And, both by word and deed, laid most solemn stress 
on the immaculate celebration of the sacred Passover. And explain it as we may^ 
there was granted to him and his reign an opportunity, and it not neglected, which 
bid fair, going to the root of the matter, to promise brighter days — days of more lasting 
brightness for the welfare of the people, in the true security of religion. But the 
knell of doom was already clanging. To the piety of Josiah, it was hot so much that 
respite of the dread sentence on Judah was given, but this was given, the condescend- 
ing information and merciful assurance that it was dated to a time when he would be 
" gathered to his fathers, and gathered to his grave in peace, and his eyes not see all 
the evil " (vers. 27, 28). This, with some special emphasis, came true ; for Josiah, 
though slain in battle, and so far not dying " in peace," did die in peace, so far as the 
end or captivity of Judah was concerned; and he was the last of the kings who 
received honourable burial in Jerusalem. Three of his successors and descendants 
died in captivity, and if Jehoiakim, the other of the four last kings, eventually " slept 
with his fathers" (2 Kings xxiv. 6), in the sense of his dust resting with theirs, it was 
not so at first (Jer. xxii. 19 ; xxxvi. 30 ; Bzek. xix. 8, 9). The remarkable opportunity 
already spoken of, which was granted to Josiah in the interest of religion for his 
nation, which came on him so unexpectedly, which made such deep impression on 
him, and which he endeavoured with all his might to turn to the greatest and best 
advantage, may be dwelt upon, in all its lasting ligniflcance. for every time of day. 



OH. XXXIV. 1—33.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 417 

The fact of the sudden discovery of "the book of the Law of the Lord by Moses" 
(Deut. zxxi. 26 ; also 10 — 13) loses its wonder perhaps for ourselves, as we look back 
on that history, as compared with the other extraordinary fact and appalling thought, 
that it had been lost, so lost that its very existence, the tradition of it, seemed as a 
thing unknown to Josiah. Counting the years of the reign of Manasseh, of Amon, 
and those which had already elapsed of Josiah, we may gay that the sacred manuscript 
had been lost for some eighty years. In point of fact, some pioua priest among the 
degenerate rank-and-file of the priests had probably carefully hidden it at the begin- 
ning of the iniquities of Manasseh. The wonder nevertheless is still left, that no quest 
of it, no literal active search for it, seems to have been made, and no perpetuation of 
the tradition of it even, by priest or prophet, seems to have been at hand, for Josiah 
to have had the opportunity of availing himself of it. It is not impossible to surmise 
partial explanations to meet the difficulty, but the surprising fact is full of significance. 
Practically the incident amounted to this — that to Josiah was vouchsafed some 
"republication of revealed religion." And his treatment of the novel, the startling 
message of revelation is a very parable in itself. We may for the text of this parable, 
to call it such, be reminded of the reputed words of " father Abraham," in our blessed 
Lord's parable of the rich man and Lazarus, when he says of the five bretliren of the 
rich man in torments, " They have Moses and the prophets ; let them hear them." 
They had not heard them, i.e. had not practically heeded them. But Josiah hears and 
heeds. And are we not confronted very happily and very suggestively, though in 
very brief, with these examples of the just demands of revealed religion, justly met ? 
viz. when we read how — 
L Josiah "hkabs" it. 

II. Believes it. 

III. Reverently feabs it, as he febsots it to sink into his vebt soul, and 

DOES not resist IT, NOB TBY TO DROWN IT, NOB PUT IT OFF TO BK TAKEN INTO 
consideration at a MORE CONVENIENT SEASON. 

IV. With all ubgbncy makes pull inqdiry, and that in the right quabtbbs 

EBSPECTINa ITS FULL AND MOMENTOUS IMPORT. 

V. Diligently guides himself pbaotioally by it. 

VI. Calls with the voice of a true preacher all abound him to eeab and 
heed the same, and without a quibble ob delay to enter into covenant with 
that God, who so reveals himself, his truth, his will, his commands, and the 
feabfdl or otherwise the awe-inspiring sanctions by which they abe accom- 
PANIED. The rich man, the five brethren of the rich man, Judah and Israel, and 
countless millions upon millions of others, would have been saved and blessed had 
they been followers of Josiah. How many of modem days, how many of ourselves 
have neglected, are ne.slecting, and are making a mock of sin, because of neglecting 
the simple, faithful example of Josiah, as to the way to receive God's revelation ci 
his truth and will for our lives I 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS, 

Ver. 8 (first part). — Fiety in youth. That Josiah " while he was yet yonng . . . 
began to seek after the God of David his father" is to ns an interesting fact; it 
provides an example to the young and an incentive to those who have charge of their 
welfare. Respecting piety in youth it is well to consider — 

I. How much there 18 TO COMMEND IT. 1. All life belongs to God, and therefore thit 
part of it. Unto him who gave us our existence and all our powers, and in whom we 
live and move and have our being, surely the whole of our life belongs; it cannot be 
withheld without wrong, without keeping back the "glory due to his Name," the 
gratitude and the love and the service due to himself. Therefore does this part of it 
•long with the rest. And it is oertain that when life ia past and we come to have it 
in review we shall be most happy in the thought, if we can but cherish it, that ouir 
youth also was spent in the fear of God, in the love and service of Jesus Christ 

"'Twill please ns to look back and sea 
That our whole lives were thine." 

n. OBBOKIOLES. S ■ 



418 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. Foh. xxxit. 1—33 

2. Each, period of life has its own peculiar offering to bring. If age has its patience 
and submissiveness, and if elderliness has its experience, and if prime has the fulness 
of its strength for service, and if young manhood has its hopefulness and its ardour, 
then has youth also its especial offering to bring to its Bedeeiuer ; it has its affectiou- 
ateness, its trustfulness, its docility, its readiness to obey, its beauty. Truly, the 
"flower when offered in the bud'ti "no vain sacrifice." 3. It saves the growth of 
injurious weeds in the garden of the soul. When the sense of sacred obligation is 
absent, youth is apt to let various evil habits grow up — habits which choke much that 
is good, which constitute a serious drawback to Christian worth, and which require 
much effort and much time also for their extraction. But wlien the early days are 
spent in the service and in the friendship of Christ, his holy will being the one rule of 
the heart and life, such evil habits are unformed, and all the aftei-days are stronger 
and better and more beautiful lor their absence. 4. Each period in life is a stepping- 
stone to the next, is a preparation for the next. We sow in youth what we reap in 
young manhood ; as we go on our way we gather in the harvest of the thought and 
toil of the years that came before it. But this applies to our moral and spiritual 
character more perfectly than to anything else. How, then, can we afford to lose the 
great advantage of building up from the beginning ? Our manhood will be much the 
weaker for an ill-spent youth, and much the stronger for a well-spent one. Our whole 
life will be greatly impoverished by the one, greatly eniiched by the other. 5. Godly 
youth is a source of pure and deep joy to those whom the young should be most 
desirous of pleasing — to those that have loved them and served them with tenderest 
solicitude and unfailing devotion. 

II. OuB DUTY IN BEGABD TO IT. 1. To abstain most carefully from forcing it. No 
deadlier injury can be done to the young thaa forcing a religious habit; constraining 
them to affect a language and to make a profession which is unreal, which will soon 
break down, and which will leave the heart far less open to all heavenly influences than 
it would have been. 2. To encourage it in every way that is in our power ; more 
particularly by the exhibition of a consistent life and the manifestation of a loving 
spirit toward them. Whom we win for ourselves we may lead to our Lord. 

III. The wisdom and the duty of the young. This is to enter the service of Jesus 
Christ without delay. He does not require of them anything they cannot offer. He 
does not demand of them that they should use the language or do the work which is 
appropriate to other conditions ; he asks them to receive him as their Divine Teacher, 
as their Divine Friend, as their Divine Lord. He asks them to trust, to love, to servt 
him to the height of their present power. This they can do ; this they should do ; 
this they will be traly and deeply wise if they do. "Seek ye the Lord while he may 
be found, call ye upon him while he is near." — 0. 

Ver. 12. — Faithful work. " And the men did the work faithfully." It became a 
godly King of Judah to do anything and everything that was required for the strength 
and beauty of the temple. For in that sacred edifice centred the religious life of the 
nation, and there God manifested himself as nowhere else. With us religious thought 
and spiritual earnestness are not thus localized ; and though, after the manner as well 
as in the spirit of Josiah, we may concern ourselves much with the erection or the 
repair of some " house of the Lord," yet Christian zeal now shows itself in a hundred 
ways ; it branches and bean fruit in all directions. There is, however, a sense in 
which it is all huilding. We who are at work for our Lord and for our neighbour are 
building up the kingdom of Christ, and, at the same time, are building up a peaceful, 
happy, holy community. It is probable that we have all undertaken some specific 
work of this kind, some ministry ; that we have committed ourselves to some office 
which makes certain demands on our intelligence, our strength, our time. That being 
so^ it is well that we realize the importance of " doing the work faithfully " which we 
have in hand. 

L What oonbtitutxs rAiTEFCLNESS. To he faithful is clearly a very different 
thing from being successfuL Some men are successful, as men count success, who 
are not faithAil in the sight of God ; others are faithful who are not " successful.'' 
To be faithful is to act with rightful, earnest, patient effort in the sphere in which our 
Lord has placed us. 1. Di^'ing our work honestly, fairly, conscientiously, keeping in 



OH. XXXIV. 1—33.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 419 

view the revealed will of God and the claims of men (see 2 Tim. ii. 5). 2. Acting 
with earnestness; not languidly and listlessly, but devotedly and energetically. 3. 
With patient, persevering effort ; not daunted by the first nor by the fiftieth difficulty 
that presents itself, not eilenced by clamour, not forsaking the path of holy service 
because prosperity seems long in coming ; but calmly, patiently, thoroughly proceeding 
with and completing our work ; holding on and bearing up until we can say, thank- 
fully and reverently, " It is finished." 

II. What induobmentb we have to be PArrHruL in otm wokk. 1. Ow Lord 
requires it. "It is reqrUred in stewards that a man be found faithful" (1 Cor. iv. 2). 
"Be thou faithful unto death," says the ascended Lord with commanding voice. 
There were "overseers," our text says, to "set forward" the work in which these 
artificers were engaged. We have one great Divine Overseer, who is ever looking on 
and taking account, desiring of us that we "do the work faithfully," and it behoves us 
to do everything we undertake, both that which does and that which does not directly 
belong to the affairs of his kingdom, " as ever in the great Taskmaster's eye." 2. By 
80 doing we take rank with the best of the sons of men. Of Moses we read that " he 
was faithful in all his house" (Heb. iii. 2). He did not seem to be remarkably success- 
ful ; probably in the eyes of his contemporaries he appeared positively unsuccessful. 
But when he lay down to die on Nebo he could feel that he had done his work faith- 
fully. And thus with Paul. And so with the best and worthiest of our race. To be 
faithful in our work is to stand with the best of men. 3. Thus only can we secure 
the approval of our own conscience. But thus we shall ; and how great a victory it 
will be to be able to feel as Paul felt when his course was run, " I have fought a good 
fight,. ... I have kept the faith " ! 4. We shall receive a large reward. If we are 
but faithful in a few things here, we shall be rulers over many things hereafter 
(Matt. XXV. 21). If faithful unto death, Christ will give us "a crown of life" (Rev. 
ii. 10). Life in all its glorious fulness, in all its perfect blessedness, will be ours for 
ever. — C. 

Vers. 14 — 28. — The hidden treasure. Whether this " book of the Law of the Lord " 
was indeed the original copy in the handwriting of Moses is a matter of sacred curiosity ; 
but it is nothing more than that. The surprising and all but incredible thing is that 
Judah should have been reduced to any one copy of the " Law of the Lord." This 
discovery of Hilkiah and the surprise and the eagerness it occasioned speak to us of — 

I. The odiltt negligence op which nations and men abe capable. Judah had 
been concerning itself, had been " careful and troubled " about many things, but it had 
not thought it worth while to multiply copies of the " Law of the Lord," of its own 
sacred books ; so negligent had it been that when one is accidentally discovered its 
warnings are read for the first time by its own sovereign in his manhood 1 Of what 
great and guilty negligence are we capable! We may be spending our time and 
strength, we may be exhausting ourselves and endangering our health and life in all 
kinds of unprofitable occupation, in fruitless labour or in amusement which begins 
and ends in itself, and all the time may be neglecting that one study or that one 
habit in the pursuit of which " standeth our eternal life." There are many men in 
Christian countries who expend their substance upon, and occupy their very life with, 
horses, or dogs, or guns, who do not afford even a few hours a year to the serious study 
of the will of God as revealed by his Son and recorded in his Word. The treasure which 
cannot be estimated in gold or silver lies untouched, as much buried from sight and 
use as if it had been hidden in some crypt of the temple. It may not be our deeds, 
but our negligences, that we shall most fear to face in the great day of account. 

XL The melancholy use we may make of Divine tbdth. In that book of the 
Law of the Lord there were instructions and admonitions which, if duly heeded, would 
have ensured abiding peace and honour to the inhabitants of Judah. These had been 
waywardly and flagrantly disregarded. And now the time for employing them had 
well-nigh gone. What was left was the sad opportunity of verifying by bitter 
experience the truth of its threatenings. This was the alternative now open to Judah. 
Let us take care lest, by our disregard of the promises, we bring upon ourselves the 
warnings of the Word of God. " If we will not be ruled by the rudder, we must be 
ruled hj the rock." If we will not take advantage of the beneficent laws and the 



420 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHKONICLBS. [oh. xxxit. 1— 33. 

gracious overtures of Qo6, we most " show forth " the severity of those righteous laws 
which attach suffering and shame to vanity and guilt. 

III. The ubgent kebd of kebpino an open mind and a sensitive spirit. We 
are almost startled when we read of Josiah's vehemence (ver. 19). These solemn 
threats do not affect us in that degree. But we have to consider that he was hearing 
tlicm rend for the first time; to him they were new and fresh, and therefore striking 
»nd forcible. Here lies one of our great perils. Faniili;irity covers the truth of God 
with its own veil, so that we do not see what we are looking at. We want to read the 
words of Jesus Christ, to listen to the story of his gri at sacrifice, to hearken to his 
words of gracious invitation, as if we had never met with them before; we want to 
bring to them all the force of au unclouded intelligence, of an unduUed interest. And 
so with the warnings as well as with the promises of Scripture. 

IV. The attention G-od pays to individual souls. (Vers. 26 — 28.) Wrath was 
to be poured out upon Judah, but Josiah was to be treated mercifully because he had 
acted rightly. Whatever penalties are due to our country, however we may be, as we 
are, suffering as the members of a guilty race, we may be quite sure that God has 
regard to the life we aie living, to the choice we are making. If our heart is tender, 
and if our will is obedient and submissive, we also shall find mercy of the Lord. God 
has his dealings witii communities and with Churches ; but his most constant relation 
is with men, with individual souls. "The Lord looketh upon me;" "Christ dieil for 
me;" "What wilt thou have me to do?" And according to our individual choice 
will be our destiny. " Every man must bear his own burden." — C. 

Vers. 29 — 33. — Communication and continuance. Josiah's wise and devout concern, 
when he discovered the Word and knew more fully the will of God, was to communi- 
cate his own earnestness to others, and to secure for future years this new and goud 
departure. He took the most natural and wise measures to attain his object. 1. He 
summoned all the elders in particular and all the people who could meet together, and 
iiiade known to them in its fulness the truth that had been revealed to himself (vers. 
29, 30). 2. He pledged all those who were with him, and who represented the nation, 
to continuance in the service of Jehovah (vers. 31, 32). 3. He took away the standing 
tem[>talion from the [>ath of the people. He thus made obedience easier while he 
made the sense of obligation firmer. 

I. Cue duty to communicate Divine truth. When wo consider: 1. How 
essential to life and all that life includes is the familiar knowledge of the will of God. 
2. How possible and how practicable it is for all who know the will of God in Jesus 
Christ to pass it on to others. 3. How willingly men will listen if we give them the 
simplest and best guarantee of our sincerity — consistency of conduct and excellency of 
spirit; we shall see how right and how urgent it is upun us that we should all "hold 
forth the Word of life," make known the goodness and the grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. 

IL Odb duty to secure it 80 FAB A8 LIES IN OUR POWER. The text suggests three 
ways of doing this. 1. Pledge ourselves to abide in its light. Josiah covenanted /or 
himself to "kee|) his commandments . . . with all his heart ... to perform the 
words . . . written in this book." That was his first, plain duty. And that is ours 
also; to undoitake, solemnly and openly before God and his people, to walk in 
righteousness and in holy service ; to " take the vows of the Lord " upon us. By so doing 
we give the strongest possible and ihe greatest practical encouragement to all others to 
come and " do likewise." 2. Induce others to enter into the same solemn undertakini;. 
As the king with his countrymen (ver. 32), so we with our kindred and friends, wiih 
our fellow-worshippers and neighbours, should do all in our power to pledge them to 
tho service of God. "Join us," we should say, "in taking a solemn and sacred pledge 
to live consciously in the presence and continuously in the service of the Diviue 
Saviour." In every considerable company of worshippers there are those who are 
unpledged, but who, for their own sake and for that of others related to them, ought to 
be the avowed disciples of Christ. It is our sacred duty, it is our high privilege, it 
will prove a service rich in the best reward, to speak the encouraging and invitmg 
woid which will lead them to take this important step. 3. Remove temptation from 
the path of those who might not be able to resist it. This is ground on which W6 



OB. xxxiT. 1— 33J THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 42V 

most exhibit both understanding and earnestness, both sagacity aa& self-fsacrifice. 
There are things which may be said to be "abominations" (ver. 33) because they 
prove to be irresistible and ruinous temptations to some sincere disciples. In these 
cases, it is not enough to warn against them — we must go further than that ; we must 
do anything and everything that is needful to get the temptation as much out of the 
path of our neighbours as the images which were ground to dust (ver. 4) were removed 
from the way of the people of Judah. We may add a fourth measure which may be 
suggested by the twenty-ninth verse : 4. Prevail upon our friends to come into the 
near presence and under the power of the truth of God ; and this not (as in the text) 
on one particular occasion, but frequently and regularly. For much fellowship with 
Chiist and much hearkening to his voice as be speaks to us in the sanctuary will give 
strength unto the soul, — 0. 

Vers. 1 — 7. — Josiah the good. I. His eablt accession. " Josiah [' Whom Jehovah 
heals *] was eight years old when he began to reign " (ver. 1). Manasseh, Uzziah, 
and Joash had been twelve, sixteen, and seven respectively when they ascended ttie 
throne. Generally speaking, it is perilous to have greatness thrast upon one at too early 
an age; sometimes premature responsibilicy calls forth capacities that might otherwise 
have continued latent, Edward VI., who assumed the crown of England in his tenth 
year, Charles IX., who was of the same age when he was raised to the throne of France, 
and Kang Hi (a.d. 1661), who became Emperor of China in his seventh year, were 
examples of the truth here stated. 

II. His feevent religion. Josiah's piety was : 1. Ancestral. If his father Amon 
was not a good man, but the opposite — an insensate idolater and a hardened trangressi ir 
(ch. xxxiii. 22, 23) — his mother Jedidah, " Beloved," the daughter of Adaiah of Boscath 
(2 Kings xxii. 1), may have been a good woman, who, like Eunice of later timex 
(2 Tim. L 5), nurtured her son in the fear of Jehovah. Besides, as that son was si^i 
years of age before Manasseh died, he may have received from his aged grandfather sucli 
instructions as disposed him to the choice of the true religion of Jehovah. In any case, 
in him was reproduced the pie'y of the best sovereigns that had preceded him — in par- 
ticular of Hezekiah, Jothara, Jehoshaphat, and David. 2. Early. " In the eighth year 
of his reign, while he was yet young, he began to seek after the God of David his 
father " (ver. 3). Youthful piety, of which Scrijiture furnishes numerous examples — 
Samuel (1 Sam. ii. 26), Abijah (1 Kings xiv. 13), Obadiah (1 Kings xviii. 12), John 
(Luke i. 80), Jesus (Luke ii. 52), Timothy (2 Tim. i. 5) — while beautiful in all, is 
specially attractive in princes. King Edward VI., besides being a good linguist, "haci 
a particular regard for the Holy Scriptures " (Bishop Burnet). That religion which 
begins in youth is most likely to be permanent, and certain to be most useful. Christ 
commends religion to the young (Matt. vi. 33). 3. Sincere. (1) Earnest and active, 
not merely nominal and formal : " He began to seek after the God of David his father," 
which meant that he inquired after and practised the rites and commandments of the 
true religion. (2) Humble and obedient, not proud and self-willed : " He did that which 
was right in the eyes of the Lord, and walked in the ways of David his father " (ver. 2), 
in so far, e.e., as he walked in the ways of Jehovah. (3) Persevering and thorough, 
not intermittent and incomplete : " He turned not aside to the right hand or to the 
left "(ver. 2). 

III. His ZEALOUS BEFOBMATioN. 1. The period of it. Beginning in his twelfth 
year of reign, i.e. the twentieth of his life, and terminating in his eighteenth year of 
reign, or the twenty-sixth of his life, it occupied six years in all (vers. 3, 8). 2. The scene 
of it. (1) Jerusalem, the metropolis of the kingdom. Reformations, like charity, should 
begin at home. Many would reform others who have no heart to reform themselves 
(Song of Sol. i. 6). (2) Judah, of which Jerusalem was the capital. Though " begin- 
ning at Jerusalem,'' Josiah's reformation should not end there. A good king will give 
his first thoughts to the improvement of himself; his second, to the improvement of his 
capital, where his court sits and whence his laws proceed; his third, to the improvement 
iif his land and people ; his fourth, to the improvement of cities, empires, nations beyond, 
M far as lies within his power. (3) The cities of Manasseh, Ephraim, and Simeon, even 
unto Naphtali, in their ruins round about. A good king will extend his influence as 
widely as possible, and in particular strive to be helpful to those peoples in his vicinity 



422 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHEONICLES. [oh. xxxiv. 1— Sa 

that are less enliirhteTied or more necessitous than himself. 3. The manner of it. With 
violence — probably hinted at in the phrase, " with their axes" (ver. 6, margin). "The 
reformation executed by the king was earnestly intended ; it was thorough, it was com- 
prehensive ; but it was above everything violent " (Bwald, ' History of Israel,' iv. 237). 
This appears more distinctly from 2 Kings (xxiii. 4 — 20). But the extirpation of 
religious, no more than of political abuses, can be carried out without a degree of 
harshness. Privileged iniquity in Church or in state is always difficult to dislodge. 
4. The extent of it. Judah, Jerusalem, and the Israelitish cities already mentioned 
were purged from high places, Asherim, images and altars (vers. 3 — 7). Particularly (1) 
the altars of the Baalim were broken down in the young king's presence, the sun- 
images above them being hewn down at his command (ver. 4); (2) the Asherim or 
" pillars and trees of Asherah " (Keil), with the graven and molten images connected 
with the impure worship of Astarte, were broken in pieces, and their dust (after burn- 
ing) strewn upon the graves of them that had sacrificed unto them (ver. 4) — the Book 
of Kings speaking of the removal of the Asherah from the house of the Lord, and the 
destruction of the houses of the infamous women who wove tents for the idol (2 Kings 
xxiii. 6, 7) ; and (3) the bones of the priests who had sacrificed at the heathen shrines 
having first be,en exhumed from their graves, were burnt upon the altars at which the 
priests had ministered before these were destroyed. 

Lessons. 1. The beauty of early piety. 2. The excellence of Christian zeaL 3. 
The difBoulty of executing reformations. — W. 

Vers. 8 — 13. — 7%e repairing of the temple by Josiah. 1. The comhibbionebs. 1. 
Their names. Shaphan the son of Azaliah, the king's secretary (ver. 15) ; Maaseiah 
the governor of the city ; and Joah the son of Joahaz, the recorder or chronicler. 2. 
Their husinest. To repair the house of the Lord. This had been done two centuries 
before by Joash (oh. xxiv. 12), and nearly one century before by Hezekiah (ch. zxix. 
12 — 19). During the reigns of Manasseh and Amon it had fallen into such disorder 
that it a third time demanded renovation. In this respect the temple was a melan- 
choly symbol of all human institutions — not excepting such as are religious — which 
constantly exhibit a tendency as they grow old to become degenerate, and, as a conse- 
quence stand in need of periodic reformation and rejuvenescence. 3. Their pi'oce- 
dure. Along with Hilkiah the priest — as Joash had acted in concert with Jehoiada, 
and the king's scribe had co-operated with the high priest's ofBcer (ch. xxiv. 11, 12) 
— they received the money which the Levites that kept the temple doors bad col- 
lected from the people of Manasseh and Bphraim, and of all the remnant of Israel, 
and from the inhabitants of all Judah and Benjamin, who, following the plan in vogue 
since the days of Joash and Jehoiada, cast in their free-will offerings into a box placed 
in the temple court for the purpose of receiving the voluntary contributions of the 
faithful towards the good end the king had in view, the repairing of the temple. 
Having received this money, the three commissioners, along with the high priest, paid 
it over to the superintendents who had the oversight of the house of the Lord. 

IL The overseers. 1. Their names. (1) Jahath and Obadiah, two Levites of the 
family of Merari ; (2) Zechariah and MeshuUam, two Levites of the house of Kohath ; 
and (3) others unnamed, but specified as " Levites, all that could skill of instrument* of 
music " (ver. 12). 2. Their duties. (1) To exercise supervision over the workmen, 
over the bearers of burdens, and all that wrought in any manner of service (ver. 13), 
over the carpenters, builders, and other artisans engaged in the undertaking (ver. 11). 
(2) To set forward the work (ver. 12), or " to preside over it " (margin). (3) Perhaps 
also to do both, t.«. incite and cheer the workmen, and so prosper the work, by music 
and song (Bertheau). " Orpheus and Amphion, by their music, moved the workmen to 
diligence and activity, and lessened and alleviated their toil. May we not suppose, 
then, that skilful musicians among the Levites did exercise their art among the work- 
men who were employed in the repairs of the house of the Lord ? " (Adam Clarke). (4) 
To distribute the moneys received from the commissioners to the different tradeeman 
that these might procure the necessary materials for the building (vers. 10, 11). 

III. The AKTI8ANS. 1. Carpenters, or workers in wood, whose business was to pre. 
pare timber for couplings and to make beams for the houses, i.e. for the temple and its 
courts, which the kings of Judah had permitted to fall Into decay. 2. Masons, or 



OH. xxxiv. 1—33.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLBa 428 

workers in stone ; not to hew, since the stones were already hewn when purchased, but 
to build — in this perhaps desigrjedly following the example given in the building of th« 
temple (1 Kings vi. 7). 

IV. The assistants. 1. Scribes, who kept a record of the progress of, as well as 
the necessarj' accounts connected with, the work. 2. Officers, who served in different 
capacities under superiors. 3. Porters, who watched at the several gates of the temple 
while the work was going on. 

Lkssons. 1. The Ijeauty of order. 2. The efSciency seciu'ed by division of laboor. 
3. The value of co-operation. — W. 

Vers. 14 — 28. — The book of the Law. I. The finding of the book. (Vers. 14, 
15.) 1. The finder. Hilkiah the priest (ver. 18), the high priest (ver. 9), the son of 
Shallum (1 Chron. vi. 13), the son of Zadok ; not to be identified with either the 
father of Jeremiah (Jer. i. 1) or the father of Gemariah (Jer. xxix. 3) ; and certainly to 
be distinguished from the father of Eliakim, Hezekiah's house-steward (Isa. xxii. 20). 
2. The place. The temple (ver. 15), though in what part is not stated (ver. 14) ; perhaps 
the treasure-chest out of which Hilkiah was fetching gold to make cups and other 
vessels (Josephus, ' Ant.,' x. 4. 2), but more probably the vicinity of the ark in the 
holy of holies. 3. The time. The eighteenth year of Josiah's reign, when he was in 
the middle of bis reformation work (ver. 8), and just before the celebration of the Pass- 
over (ch. XXXV. 1) — a circumstance calculated to suggest the presence of God's finger in 
the opportune discovery of a book which exercised so powerful an influence upon the 
religious life of the nation at this critical juncture in its history; though the same 
circumstance has been used (Wellhausen, Kuenen, Ewald, Colenso, E. Smith, Gheyne) 
to support the theory that the book was now or shortly before for the first time written, 
by either Hilkiah himself, Jeremiah, or some other unknown prophet, as the legislative 
programme of the reformino; party. 4. The book. (1) Deuteronomy alone (De Wette, 
Bohlen, Kuenen, etc.), or the original kernel thereof (Cheyne) ; maintained chiefly on 
these grounds : (a) 'The title of the book — " the book of the Law " (ver. 15), " a book 
of the Law of the Lord " (ver. 14) — a designation which appears to be reserved for the 
fifth alone of the so-called Mosaic books (Deut. xxviii. 61 ; xxx. 10 ; xxxi. 26). But 
it is likewise styled " the book of the covenant " (ver. 30) ; and this phrase occurs only 
in the second of the Pentateuchal books (Exod. xxiv. 7). Whence, by parity of reason- 
ing, the book found must have been the Book of Exodus alone. The probability, how- 
ever, is, that the volume contained both the second and the fifth books of Moses ; in 
other words, that it was the whole Pentateuch. (6) The size of the book. As 
Shaphan is said to have read it through at a sitting (ver. 18), it is hardly likely to have 
been the whole Pentateuch, but may have been Deuteronomy. But the revised trans- 
lation, " therein " (ver. 8), has deprived this of the force it was formerly sup- 
posed to possess as an argument, (c) The teaching of the book. The principle of 
Josiah's reformation, which it is argued was based upon the book — the principle, via., 
of the abolition of local sanctuaries and the centralization of worship in the temple at 
Jerusalem — corresponds exactly with the legislation of the Deuteronomic code, which 
declares the law ol one central altar, and forbids the erection of local sanctuaries (Deut. 
xii. 5 — 8). This, however, may be conceded without holding that Hilkiah's Law-book 
contained nothing but Deuteronomy or the original draft thereof — unless, indeed, it be 
assumed that Deuteronomy wns only then for the first time written — against which 
stands the fact that the law of the king (Deut. xvii. 18) appears to have been known 
and observed in the days of Jehoiada and Joash (ch. xxiii. 11 ; 2 Kings xi. 1 2). 
Besides, it is too readily assumed that Josiah had no knowledge of the sinfulness of 
local sanctuaries and the imperative obligation of a central altar until he heard Hilkiah's 
book read, and that from the hearing ol that book he derived his impulse to destroy the 
heathen altars in Jerusalem, Judah, and certain cities of Israel. As to the first, if 
Josiah had no acquaintance with the law of one altar, it would seem that Hezekiah 
had (2 Kings xviii. 4 — 6); while, with reference to the second, the Book of Kings 
indeed adopts the view here stated ; but the Chronicler represents the finding of the 
book as having taken place after the purgation of the land (ver. 8). (d) The style of 
the book. On the ground of certain linguistic resemblances between Deuteronomy and 
Jeremikh, it i» argued that the former must hare been Hilkiah's book, and composed 



424 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xxxiv. 1—83. 

about Josiah's time. But this reasoning is not good. As Hilkiali's book contained 
Deuteronomy, whatever else it contained, it would most likely make on Jeremiah, as on 
Josiah, a deep impression, which would reflect itself upon his own writings. Hence, 
from mere verbal correspondences, it cannot be inferred that Deuteronomy was not 
written till the age of Josiah ; and if this position be abandoned, it will not be necessary 
to maintain that Hilkiah's book was only the last of the (so-called) books of Moses. 
(2) The entire Pentateuch (Keil, Bahr, Havernick, and others). Besides being borne 
out by the failure to establish the preceding alternative, this opinion is confirmed by 
the facts that the book was found in the temple by the high priest ; that it is stated to 
have been " by Moses ; " that it was recognized as such by Hilkiah, Shaphan, and Josiah ; 
and that it made a profound impression on them all. (a) The fact that " it was a 
common practice of Egyptian scribes to insert in their transcripts of great religious or 
scientific works a statement that the writing in question had been ' found ' in a temple," 
hardly warrants the suggestion that Deut. xxxi. 6 was " an imitation of this custom," 
or that Hilkiah's book "was not lost by accident, nor yet placed in the sanctuary with 
the intention to deceive, but simply taken to the temple and formally placed there, ai d 
then communicated to Josiah with a view to its promulgation " (Cheyne, 'Jeremiah : 
his Life and Times,' p. 85). (6) The phrase, "by Muses," is not sufficient!)- explained 
by saying that the author meant that Moses, had Ine been alive, would have so written 
(ibid., p. 78). (c) It is difficult to perceive why Hilkiah, Shaphan, and Josiah 
should have given out that the work was by Moses, if they really knew that it was 
not, but was merely an " imitation " of the great lawgiver. (c[) It is too much to ask 
any but the credulous to believe that Josiah was not acting a part in pretending to be 
impressed by the contents of the book, if he knew it was not by the lawgiver, but by 
an unknown and recent author. That it was the autograph copy of the lawgiver's 
work (Kennicott) is an unverifiable surmise; that it was " the three middle books of 
the Pentateuch " (Bertheau) or only the second (Gramberg) does not seem likely. 

II. The beading of the book. (Vers. 18, 19.) 1. The reader. Shaphin the 
scribe, the son of Azaliah (ver. 8), the son of MeshuUam (2 Kings xxii. 3), one of 
Josiah's commissioners for the repairing of the temple. 2. The auditor. J osiah (ver. 18), 
to whom Shaphan carried the book in obedience to Hilkiah's instructions. 3. The 
lesson. " It " or " in it " (Revised Version). Not necessarily the whole book, but only 
portions of it, as e.g. those containing the curses against disobedience (Deut. xxvii. — 
xxxi. ; Lev. xxvi. 14 — 46), warnings against idolatry (Lev. xxvi. 1 — 30 ; Deut. iv. 15 ; 
xxvii. 15), and perhaps also the directions relating to the observance of the Passover 
(Exod. xii.) and the making of a covenant (Exod. xxiv.). 4. The impression. Josiah 
rent his clothes (ver. 19). (1) In astonishment (cf. Gen. xxxvii. 29 ; xliv. 13) at the 
teaching rather than at the finding of the book. Many persons still would be surprised 
at the contents of the Bible if they only read it. The Bible is often rejected by those 
who are entirely ignorant of it. (2) In self-abasement (ver. 27), as an acknowledgment 
in outward action of the sense he had of his own and his people's shortcominus (cf. 
Numb. xiv. 6; 2 Sam. iii. 31), in respect of both their idolatries and their continued 
maintenance of local sanctuaries — an acknowledgment the sincerity of which was 
attested by the tears with which it was accompanied (ver. 27). So does no reading of 
the Bible accomplish its highest aim or produce its best effect unles.s it humbles the 
hearer before God, and causes him to weep for his sins (Job xlii. 5, 6 ; Ps. xxxviiL 18 ; 
Jer. xxxi. 18, 19 ; 2 Cor. vii. 9—11). 

III. The inquibino abodt the book. (Vers. 21 — 28.) Done at Josiah's instance. 

1. ITie reason of this inquiry. The terror in which the king was about the wrath of 
Jehovah against himself and people on account of the failure of their fathers to do after 
all that was written iu the book. Josiah recognized the solidarity of the race, accord- 
ing to which the proverb held good, " The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the chil- 
dren's teeth are set on edge " (Ezek. xviii. 2). Besides, Josiah must have known the 
reforming zeal of the people was at best but superficial (Jer. iii. 10). Hence, though 
the land and the house had been purged, he was uncertain whether the curses denounced 
■gainst idolatry might not still overtake them. It is good when "the terror of the 
Lord " (2 Cor. v. 11) persuades men to inquire about escaping from the wrath to come. 

2. 2%e quarter at which this inquiry was made. (1) Jehovah. " Inquire of the Lord 
lor me ' (ver. 21). God is the only Being competent to direct how man may escape the 



•H. XXXIV. 1—33,] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 425 

inaction of Divine wrath on account of sin. Schemes of salvation only of man's 
devising are of no value. Salvation, in its conception, inception, conduction, and per- 
fection, belongeth unto God (Ps. iii. 8 ; xixvii. 39 ; Isa. xliii. 11 ; Jer. iii. 23 ; 2 Cor. 
V. 18 ; 1 Tim. ii. 3). The soul that would he saved must apply to him (Isa. xlv. 22 ; 
Amos V. 4 ; John iii. 16 ; Rom. iii. 22 — 30 ; 1 John v. 11). (2) Huldah the prophetess 
— a title given to Miriam (Exod. xv. 20) and Deborah (Judg. iv. 4) — the wife of Shal- 
lum the son of Tikvath, the son of Hasrath, keeper of the wardrobe, who dwelt in 
Jerusalem in the second quarter (ver. 22), i.e. of the city, probably the " other city " 
(Joaephus, 'Ant.,' xv. 11. 5), situated on the hill Acra. 1'hat the king sent not to 
Jeremiah may be explained by supposing Jeremiah was not then in Jerusalem, but at 
Anathoth (Kimchi) ; that he sent to Huldah shows he recognized the nfcessity as well 
as propriety of consulting God through his appointed media of communication. Not 
even under the gospel can God be approached directly (John i. 18), but only through 
Christ (John xiv. 6), the Prophet like unto Moses (Deut. xviii. 15 ; Acts iii. 22), and 
yet greater than all prophets by so much as a son is greater than a servant (Heb. i. 1 ; 
iii. 5, 6). 3. The persons through whom this inquiry was made. The deputation sent 
by the king consisted of five individuals, most liktly all high officials connected with 
his court. (1) Hilkiah the priest ; (2) Ahikam the son of Shaphan (not the scribe), 
afterwards the friend and patron of Jeremiah (Jer. xxvl. 24 ; xxxix. 14), and father 
of Gedaliah, whom Nebuchadnezzar appointed deputy-governor of the land after the 
destruction of Jerusalem (2 Kings xxv. 22 ; Jer. xl. 5) ; (3) Abdon the son of Micab 
— Achbor (2 Kings xxii. l2), probably the correct reading (see Jer. xxvi. 22 ; xxxvi. 
12)— whose son Elnathan was afterwards one of Jehoiakim's and Zedekiah's courtiers ; 
(4) Shaphan the scribe, or king's secretary; and (5) Asaiah the king's servant. The 
centurion of Capernaum sent a deputation to entreat the help of Christ, whom he 
regarded as a Prophet (Luke vii. 3). No intermediaries are required by such as would 
consult him whom the Father hath appointed the one Mediator between God and man 
(1 Tim. ii. 5). 4. The answer returned to this inquiry. (1) Concerning the city and 
the temple a sentence of doom (ver. 24). The inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem had 
provoked Jehovah to anger by their senseless and shameful idolatries, had turned a 
deaf ear to the warnings of Jehovah's prophets, had not even profited by the judgment 
already fallen on the northern kingdom, and had terribly abused the privileges they 
had enjoyed and the patience that had been exercised towards them. Their day of 
grace was past. The night of doom was at hand (ver. 25). Had Josiah consulted 
Jeremiah, the reply would in all probability have been similar (Jer. v.). Of correspond- 
ing severity is the sentence pronounced by Christ upon them who love the darkness 
rather than the light, who adhere to sinful ways in spite of his calls to repentance, 
who despise his offered mercy and trample on his laws (Matt. xxi. 41 ; xxiv. 51 ; John 
T. 29 ; Rom. i. 18 ; Eph. v. 6 ; 1 Pet. iii. 12 ; Jude 13). (2) Concerning the kin?;, a 
message of grace (ver. 27). The ground of it, Josiah's repentance ; the substance of it, 
Josiah's deliverance. In the gospel repentance and salvation are always conjoined. 
Repentance a condition of salvation (Matt. iv. 17 ; Mark vi. 12 ; Luke xxiv. 37 ; Acts 
ii. 38) ; salvation a consequent of repentance (Luke xv. 7 ; xviii. 13, 14 ; 1 John i. 9). 

Learn : 1. The inspiration of Scriptures. 2. The profitableness of Scripture-reading. 
3. The testimony of conscience to the Word of God. 4. The certainty of God's anger 
against sin. 6. The blessedness of sincere mourning on account of sin. 6. The merci- 
fulness of God in the providential preservation of his Word. 7. The certainty that 
God never loses sight of the Bible, though man often does. — W. 

Ver. 80. — The vaSLue of the Bible. I. This Bible lost. An unspeakable calamity. 
1. To literature. Remark on the indebtedness of modem literature to the Bible. 2. 
To rdigion. Without the support and quickening derived from Script\ire religion 
would speedily become languid. 3. To morality. Contrast in respect of moraUty 
coantries possessing and countries lacking the Bible. 

II. The Biblb found. A great mercy. More to be prized than the discovery of 
gold-mines, which can only contribute to man's material wealth, or even of rare manu- 
scripts by human authors, which enrich chiefly the intellect, the finding of the Bible by 
an individual or a nation for the first time, or the recovery of it after it has been for 
gome time lost, is. ; 1. An occasion of great joy, and ii usually felt to be such. Witness 



42« THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxxiv. 1—33. 

the gladness of Luther at finding the Bible in the convent at Erfurth. And ought to be : 
2. A reason for special thankfulness, as it generally is to all who know its value as a 
revelation of Divine wisdom and love, and can appreciate its power to influence the 
hearts and lives of men. 

m. The Bible bead. A blessed privilege. 1. Many might read the BiUe uiho do 
not have it. A sad deprivation. This the case of the heathen generally and of num- 
bers at home. An argument for missions. 2. Many have the Bible, yet do not read it. 
A grievous sin. This the case with thousands in Christendom to whom God's Word is 
a strange book. An argument for preaching. 3. Many have the Bible, hut cannot 
read it. A pitiful cocdition. This the case of those who through defective education or 
blindness are unable to read. An argument for Christian philanthropy. 4. Many have 
the Bible and read it. A happy experience. This the case of those who have learnt 
to recognize in the Bible God's Word, and to appreciate its suitability to their soul'i 
needs. An argument for the inspiration of the Scriptures. 

IV. The Bible obeyed. An indispensable duty. 1. Obedience the end and aim of 
the Bible. The Bible not written for information merely, but for direction also. Designed 
not simply for the construction of creeds, but likewise for the regulation of conduct 
(Matt. vi. 24 ; Jas. i. 22). 2. Obedience the only homage acceptable to the Bible. To 
read it, admire its literary beauty, study its theology, extol its excellences, circulate 
it, are good if these acts are accompanied by obedience, but if not they are compara- 
tively worthless. 3. Obedience the best witness to the Divinity of the Bible. " If any 
man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God " (John vii. 17). 
Those who know the Bible best, by giving practical obedience to its precepts are most 
fully convinced of its heavenly and supernatural origin. 4. Obedience the necessary 
means for obtaining the blessing of the Bible. Not the liearers of the Word, but the 
doers thereof, are justified before God (Matt. vii. 21 ; Luke xi. 28 ; Rom. ii. 13). — W. 

Vers. 29 — 33. — Jwdah's last national covenant. I. The ciecumstanoeb. 1. The 
time. (1) In the eighteenth year of Josiah's reign, or in Josiah's twenty-sixth year; 
not so early as the covenant made by Asa in the filteenth year of his reign (ch, xv. 10), 
or as that made by Jehoiada in the first year of Joash's reign (ch. xxiii. 16), or as that 
projected by Hezekiah also in the first year of his reign (ch. xxix. 10). But better late 
than never. (2) After the purgation of the land and the house. It is necessary as well 
as fitting that works of repentance and reformation should be followed up by resolu- 
tions after new obedience, that the casting out of false gods should be supplemented by 
the bringing in of the true God, that " ceasing to do evil " should be accompanied by 
"learning to do well " (Isa. i. 16, 17). (3) While Josiah was under the devout impres- 
sions produced by the reading of the book of the Law. Seasons when the heart is 
affected by a sense of Gx)d's nearness or a conviction of its own sinfulness should be 
improved by drawing closer its relations to God (2 Cor. vii. 11). 2. The place, (1) 
The city of Jerusalem, which had been swept clean from its idolatries — an indispensable 
preliminary to meeting with God. (2) The temple on Moriah, where Jehovah had set 
nil Name. They who would have dealings with a God of grace must seek him at the 
times, in the places, and by the ways he himself has appointed. 

n. The parties. 1. The king. As was most appropriate, Josiah led the way. 
Though sovereigns have no right under the gospel to enforce religion on their subjects, 
they may nevertheless, by means of personal example, persuade their subjects to embrace 
religion. 2. The elders. These were the heads of the houses, and therefore the repre- 
sentatives of the inhabitants both of Judah and Jerusalem. Unless the chiefs in a 
state and the fathers in a family- precede, it is not likely the inferiors in the former or 
the children in the latter will follow after in the paths of piety. 3. The priests and 
Levites. Instead of " the Levites," 2 Kings (xxiii. 2) reads " prophets," which has been 
explained by supposing that the prophets, among whom probably were Jeremiah, 
Baruch, Zephaniah, and Urijah, belongeil to priestly and Levitical families, or that they 
were Levites whose dnty it was to preach and to interpret the Law (ch. xvii 8, 9 ; ct 
Deut. xvii. 18 ; xxxi. 9 ; xxxiii. 10). Those who ascribe it to an error of the pen are 
uncertain whether that error should be charged against the author of the Kings (Keil) 
or against the Chronicler (Bertheau). 4. The people. Great and small — the pecple of 
ilistinction and the lower classes, perhaps also the grown-np persons and the chUdren 



CH. XXXV. 1—27.] THE SECOND BOOK pP THE CHRONICLES. 



427 



— were assembled as participants in this high transaction (cf. ch. xt. 13 ; Deut 

III. The preliminaries. 1. The reading of the hook of the eovmant. The part 
/ead most likely included Bxod. xxiv., the readers being, not the king himself (Adam 
Clarke), but others, presumably Shaphan, Hilkiah, Jeremiah, etc. The reading was 
" in their ears," from which may be inferred that it was audible and distinct. 2. The 
standing of the king in his place. This was the platform beside the brazen altar, upon 
which the sovereign was accustomed to stand in high religious and national ceremonies 
(oh. vi. 13 • xxiii. 13). 

IV. The bngaqbments. 1. To walk after the Lord. The common phrase for 
observing the worship of Jehovah (ch. xi. 17 ; 2 Kings xvii. 8 ; xxi. 22 ; Mioah iv. 5 j 
vi. 16). Distinguish the similar phrases, " to walk before God " (ch. vi. 14 ; Gen. xvii. 
1), and " to walk with God " (Gen. v. 24). The ideas in the first are perhaps those of 
imitation and obedience ; in the second, those of sincerity and purity ; in the third, those 
of communion and concord. 2. To keep his commandments and his testimonies and hi§ 
statutes. Explanatory of the foregoing ; to walk after Jehovah, signifying to keep hia 
commandments, etc. The three terms — commandments, testimonies, statutes— occa- 
sionally occur together or in contiguity (Ps. xix. 7, 8; cxix. 21, 22, 23), and though 
etymologically distinguishable, are practically synonymous. They are employed here 
perhaps for variety, but chiefly for emphasis (Eccles. iv. 12). The obedience required 
by Jehovah and promised by the people was not formal and superficial, but earnest and 
sincere — " with all the heart, and with all the soul." God for Christ's sake may accept 
less, but for his own sake he never can demand less, while God's people and Christ's 
should strive never to present less. 3. To perform the words of the covenant turitten in 
the hoolc of the Law. The ultimate standard of duty for king and people was to be the 
words of the book, and neither the opinions of others nor the imaginations of them- 
selves. So for Christians the supreme rule of faith and practice is the Holy Scriptures. 

V. The RESULTS. 1. The people assented to the covenant. At the king's command — 
whether with perfect free-will (2 Kings xxiii. 3) is not clear — they bound themselves to 
its observance (ver. 32). Without the concurrence of the will there can be no true religious 
service. 2. The Icing purged the land of Israel from abominations. He allowed no 
external observance of idolatry. To cleanse the hearts of his people from idol-worship 
was beyond his power. Human enactments, by whatever power promulgated, can only 
effect external reformation ; the regeneration of the heart and renewal of the mind are 
competent to God alone. 3. The nation kept true to the covenant while Josiah lived. 
The practice of idolatry had been suppressed, but the spiiit of idolatry had not been 
killed. After Josiah's death it again raised its head (ch. xxxvi. 5 ; 2 Kings xxiii. 32), 
as it had frequently done before after periods of reformation. 

Lessons. 1. The Word of God the supreme directory to a Christian both for faith and 
practice. 2. The prime duty of man to keep God's commandments and testimonies. 
3. The highest evidence of piety in either individual or nation is holiness. — W. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XXXV. 



This chapter of twenty-seven verses, occu- 
pied with the account of Josiah's great 
Passover (vera. 1 — 19), and his death in the 
battle of Megiddo, waged by Nooho King of 
Egypt with "Carohemish by Euphrates" 
(vers. 20 — 27), is paralleled by the ten 
verses of 2 Kingi xxiiL 21—30. 

Ver. 1. — They killed the Passover on the 
fourteenth . . . of the first month; t.i;. on the 
day appointed originally (Exod. xii. 6). It 
will be remembered that, under speoial cir- 



cumstances, the same day of the §eeond 
month was authorized by " Hezekiah and 
his princes " (ch. xxx. 2). 

Ver. 2. — Gomp. ch. vii. 6; xxxi. 2; 
1 Chron. xxiii. 32 ; and our notes in thois 
places. 

Ver. 3. — That tanght (see ch. xvlL 7, 9 ; 
Deut. xxxiii. 8 — 10). Which were holy (lo 
ch. xxiii. 6). Fat the holy ark . . . not to 
yon a bnrden on the shoulder. There is • 
double difBculty, though not of a very for- 
midable character, in this portion of the 
verse. We can only conjecture why the 
ark was not In its proper place, probably 
having been temporarily removed during 



428 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xxxv. 1—27 



Josiah'B own restorations, or possibly haying 
never been yet replaced Irom the date of 
some earlier removal of an iniquitona cha- 
racter and on the part of an iniquitous 
king. Sennndly, as to the burden, some 
would expliin the lan^age as a reminis'tence 
of the geneml and ever-applicable principle 
found in 1 Chron. xxiii. 26. This, at any 
rate, would seem rather more satisfactory 
than the suifgcstion conveyed by the italic 
type of our Authorized Version. Perhaps 
the explanation may rather be that the ark 
had latterly again and again been shifted, 
and Josiah wishes to protest that neither 
for one reason nor another shall it be again 
moved. 

Ver. 4. — According to the writing of 
David . . . and . . . of Solomon (comp. our ch. 
viii Hand 1 Chron. ix. 10 — 34, and the other 
marginal references, 1 Chron. xxiii. — xxvi.). 
It is more than possible that the fullest 
tabulation of arrangemeuls of this kind has 
not come down to us. 

Ver. 5. — In brief, this verse purports to 
say ihat, for this special occasion of the 
Passover, the Levites shall take special 
care that, as stationed in the holy precincts, 
there shall be a family of themselves ready 
to minister to a family ... of the people, 
eacli to each. 

Ver. 6. — Prepare your brethren; i.e. as 
betokened by the wording of the foregoing 
verse, their brethren, the people. The 
Levites were to purify tltemttelves^ perform 
their other duties of killing the victims, and 
withal to use their opportunities of in- 
structing tbe people to the better order and 
performance of the whole solemn service. 

Ver. 7. — Lambs . . . kids . . . bullocks. 
The variety of sacrificial offerings is speci- 
fically noticed in our ver. 13. While kiJe 
(" Ye shall t» ke it out In mi the sheep or from 
the goats," Exod. xii. 5) as well as lambs 
answered for the Paschal feast, tiie bullocks 
served for " burnt " and " peace oiferings " 
(Numb, xxviii. 16 — 25). 

Ver. 8.— The princes ; i.e. the three im- 
mediately mentioned by name. Jehiel (see 
Ezra viii. 2). 

Ver. 9. — Conaniah . . . Shemaiah . . . 
Jozabad (see ch. xxxi. 12, 15). 

Ver. 10.— According to the king's com- 
mandment (see ch. xxx. 16, where the 
sanction is referred further back, "according 
to the Law of Moses, the man of God "). 

Ver. 11. — Comp. ch xxix. 34 ; xxx. 16; 
Lev. i., iii., iv., passim. 

Ver. 12. — Eemoved ; i.e. cut oif ; the verse 
purporting that those who o£Bciated cut off 
those portions of the animals slain which 
were of the nature of burnt offering, that 
they might be taken by the offering wor- 
■liippers to the priests at the altars, tliere 
to Lie entiiely consumed. Of the people ; 



probably better, literally, to the children of 
the people, ie. " to the people " (Lev. iiL 
3—16). 

Ver. 13. — Boasted. (For the emphatio 
and repeated command to roast, see Exod. 
xii. 8, 9; Deut. xvi. 7.) Sod. The sodden 
or boiled off rings, peace o.Terings, were 
onliuarily eaten on the days of unleavened 
bread, and then particularly on the first 
and seventh (Lev. xxiii. 4 — 8, etc.). Divided 
them speedily among all the people. The 
marginal rendering of tlie original, and the 
Revised Version rendering, carried them 
quickly, may be noted ; nevertheless atten- 
tion is invited, probably not so much to the 
speed or quickness in question, but to the 
fact that "all the people" were carefully 
attended to. 

Ver. 15. — To the marginal reference* ef 
1 Chron. XXV. ; ix. ; xxvi.; add ch. vi. 33 — 
47. 

Ver. 16.— The same day; literally, that 
day, as next verse, " at that time." No 
stress belongs to tbe day as the same day 
evidently. 

Ver. 18.^ Upon this verse Professor 
Murphy says, " The Passover in Hezekiah'g 
time was great (ch. xxx. 26), but this was 
greater. For it was kept on the proper day 
in the first month, and was not a mere 
supplementary Passover; it was observed 
with due legularity, and not by worshippers 
some of whom were unclean ; and if we 
allow thirteen persons for each lamb or kil, 
there were upwards of half a million com- 
municants ; while, so far as we know, there 
were only seventeen thousand sheep pre- 
sented by Hezekiah ami his princes (ch. 
xxx. 24), which would not supply more 
than half the number of partakers." 

Ver. 19. — Tlie date is stamped as ever- 
memorable, ever-honourable landmark in 
Josiah's reign. 

Ver. 20.— After all this. A period of 
about thirteen years of happy retrospect is 
now the portion of the good king. This 
period brings itself to an unhappy and even 
fatal termination in the year b.o. 608 ; when, 
as it would appear by the result. King 
Jnsiah did wrong, and went out of his way, 
in opposing the march of Pharaoh-Necho 
(who reigned B.o. 611 — 595), successor of 
Psammeticbug King of Egypt, against 
Cyaxares (the monarch who, with Nabo- 
polassar, had taken Nineveh, B.C. 625) King 
of Assyria (2 Kin^s xxiii. 29), or King of 
Babylon at Circesium on the Eiver Phrai, 
the head-quaiters now of the united As- 
syrian and Babylonian power. Where the 
fault or sin of Josiah lay — whether he ran 
before he was sent, or whether, according to 
our following two verses, he set out againtt 
the Divine word by Necho — is certainly • 
question left in obscurity. Nothing is said 



OB. xxxv. 1—27.1 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 



429 



in our history or its parallel to accredit 
the tale of Necho, oi to discredit the heart 
and motive of Josiah — nothing except what 
•ilence and the result eeem to say. One 
other element of interest and of difBoulty 
may be added to the question; for of the 
thirteen years' interval, which we have de- 
scribed above as one presumably of happy 
retrospect in certain aspects for Josiah, we 
know nothing from Scripture, but have every 
reason to suppose that during it Josiah and 
his kingdom had become subject, if only 
nominally, to Nabopolassar ; so that, in 
offering to resist Necho of Egypt, he was 
offering to strengthen so far forth the royal 
line which did dishonour to his own country 
and his country's God. Upon this supposi- 
tion, however, we can lay uo stress. 

Yer. 21. — Not against thee this day. 
Possibly the suggestion couched in these 
last two woi'ds may have been the opposite 
of agreeable to King Josiah. For God com- 
manded me to make haste. The margin 
reading of the Rpvised Version seems pre- 
ferable, both for the Hebrew text and the 
oonnection, hath given command to $peed me. 

Ver. 22. — Would not turn his face (so 
ch. XXV. 17 and its parallel, 2 Kings xiv. 8). 
Disguised himself. This is, possibly enough, 
the intention of the word, but it is more 
probable that the simple meaning is fully 
armed himself. The Septuagint has strength- 
ened himself. Hearkened not unto the 
words of Neoho from the month of Ood. 
Unless these words are intended to convey 
really their patent and most natural import, 
it is tenfold strange that they should And a 



place in the compilation of the Chronicles. 
It is indeed possible that they might purport, 
from the pen of the writer of Chronicles, 
that in point of fact the words of Necho had 
been the permitted warning, though not the 
actually dictated language of God. The 
genius of the whole pussage strongly re- 
minds us of ch. XXV. 17, 19 — 21;. and iti 
parallel in 2 Kings xiv In the valley of 
Megiddo ; i.e. among those hills which 
separate the country of the coast from Es- 
draelon — a valley as that "of Kishon" (see 
Stanley's ' Sinai and Palestine,' pp. 336, 
339, 317 ; but see also Condor's ' Handbook,' 
p. 287, where a different view is taken). 

Ver. 24. — And he died. If the form of 
words used in the parallel, 2 Kings xxiii. 
30, be followed, Josiah was dead before they 
reached Jerusalem. And all . . , moomed 
for Josiah. We still find no note whatever 
of blame attributed to Josiah, and the 
general mourning (Zech. xii. 11) appears to 
have been most genuine. 

Ver. 25. — If Jeremiah's lamenting on this 
occasion was one committed to writing, it 
has not survived. To this day ; i.e. probably 
anniversary after anniversary to the time of 
the writer to whom this statement belongd, 
the authority from which our compiler draws 
his materials. Written in the lamentations. 
We have here another glimpse of a work 
which has not been handed down to us. 

Ver. 26. — Goodness ; Hebrew text, Icind- 
nesses. According to that . . . written in 
the Law. This sentence pictures Josiah a 
careful, loving student of the Word, to the 
end that he might become a " doer " of it 



HOMILETIC& 

Ven. 1 19. — 2^ lolemn celebration of the Passover. (For the homiletics of this 

passage, or the subject of it, see those written on ch. xxx.) 

Vers. 20 — 27. — The lamentations for Josiah's death. Some cloud of mystery, but, an 
far as we can see, none uf shame, hangs over the closing events of Josiah's reign and 
life. His determined resolution to oijpose Necho King of Egypt, when he came to 
" Charchemish by Euphrates," with the view of engaging in battle with the forces of 
Babylon or Assyria, had no doubt some strong motive. It is not at all impossible to 
imagine and even to assign some alternative motives as those most pnba'ily at work. 
One element in the obscurity concerns the question — -What was the operating and 
determining reason ? The larger source of difficulty, however, lies in the obscurity 
surrounding the question whether any blame whatsoever attached to Josiah for his 
immovable resolution. That he paid no heed to the representations and remonstrances 
of the King of Egypt, as that king made very free use, but by no means necessarily 
equally intelligent and religious use, of the name of Ood, was very natmal, and surely 
diplomatically justifiable. We can, meantime, find nowhere any reflection passed on 
Josiah for neglecting the pretended anxinus warning of Necho, which may be construed 
to mean all anxiety for himself only. No condemnation of Josiah's conduct is written 
on the page of Scripture, either before or after his death, in connection with this 
subject. And, lastly, the allusions which the writings of the prophets contain (Jer. 
xxji. 10, 18; xxxiv. 5; Zech. xii. 11) are not only equally clear of any suspicion of 



430 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xxiv, lr-27. 

reflecting Hame upon him, but also are of the most touching, tender, and Bympathetio 
character. The probability seems to be that, after the earnest, religious work of Josiah 
to the date of the Passover, special and solemn celebration (in " the eighteenth year of 
his reign," and twenty-seventh of his life), with its last eflfort to bring in the hapless 
remnant of Israel also, and after the Inpse of another period of some thirteen years, the 
doings of which, on the part of Josiah, are nowhere recorded, he is to be permitted, 
before the sad plot thickens, to be " taken away from the evil to come ; " and as his 
life was by no means in the sere and yellow leaf, the method of his departure shall be 
ordained mercifully — ru>t one of sickness, or stricken plague, or ignominious " accident," 
but in the honoui able risk and challenge of battle. Occasion may be taken here to 
consider the miagled mysteries and mercies that mark the Divine methods of summon- 
ing men from this present life, the methods of him whose wisdom is unchallengeable, 
whose ways are so often a profound deep, but of whom this may ever be recorded as 
comforting certainty, " Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints." 
The phenomenon before us is that of a good man and a good king, placed at a most 
remarkable juncture of history ; one, indeed, without the possibility of an exact parallel, 
who has served his day and generation and his God with singular fidelity amid 
circumstances of singular di£Sculty. He is the last true king, and the short following 
of his descendants and his successors on the throne are not in any degree the inheritors 
of his virtues and goodness. He has made one more, one last protest for his God and 
against that idolatry of his nation which has cankered to the very heart its religious 
and its national health. Such a stand he has boldly and for a year successfully made; 
but he has been told, and doubtless has seen, that all was too late, and that the tide 
could not be turned. He is but thirty-nine years of age. And the appearance is as 
of a man rushing on his fate. But there is no appearance of recklessness or of 
intemperateness. He does not sport nor gamble away his life; and if in any partial 
aspect it looks for a moment like a gratuitous hazarding, it cannot be said to come of 
any of the ordinary impulses in any such cases. It is not for self, for sense, for sin ; 
not for the gratification of any of these; and, meantime, it is not plain for what it is! 
It is the parable of providence — a parable by no means unfamiliar to us; known, indeed, 
to many an age, many a nation, many a family, and full of silent, deep, useful lesson 
and suggestion. It teaches — 

I. 'I HAT WHAT WB KNOW AS DEATH IS NOT EXTINCTION OF LIFE. Let alone whatever 
else, what it simply and by itself means is the merging of one cycle of existence in 
another ; the removal of life from one school of knowledge to another ; the shifting of 
it from one sphere of activity to another. All the living force and excellence and 
vii tue of Josiah are not quenched, cannot be merely thrown away ; and if in one sense 
broken in twain — though all the analogies of sense must here in this very respect fail — 
only in one sense. Such a death at such a time of present life, under such circum- 
stances, is one of the strongebt moral persuasives — a. source of moral conviction 
irresistible as to what death is. 

n. The thing called death, in itself, asks absolutely more than ant otheb 
OF THE FACTS OP LIFE, THE THING CALLED FAITH. It is itself a fact of life — the last 
fact of the series known here. To be understood rightly, and to be used rightly, and 
to yield anything like its full fruit of advantage, it demands to be " mixed with faith " 
more than any preceding fact of life. Therefore it is that sometimes it actually gives 
birth to faith, sometimes greatly strengthens it, or, lastly, supposing it is absolutely 
wanting, condemns the forlorn mourner to utter darkness. 

III. The methods of death often serve, even beyond the fact itsei,f, to 

BUBPRISE, TO STARTLE INTO EXISTENCE A WONDER THAT WILL NOT REST. That 

irrepressible and often agonized wonder assists to tear open the eye of flesh and sense, 
and operates to find deep within, or deep behind, the dormant but now struggling germ 
of other and more real vision. Sorrow, grief, and wonder are three of the greatest 
moral forces of our nature, and their agonized unanswered questions avail to Sound 
some of the deeper depths of that nature. The mystery of death is one thing, but the 
mysteries of the methods of death — the victims of death, the apparently capricious or 
arbitrary action of death in those taken — of youth and excellence and usefulness, in the 
height of their service to the world, and where beads and hearts are, in consequence, 
liiers^Uy mowed down in widest sweep and ciioles — are other things. It is, indeed. 



OH. XXXV. 1—27.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 481 

■ometimeB not impossible to imagine the gain to ihose who go ; but what a wrecked 
scene for all that is left behind — with work that must be abandoned, schemes that 
must be abortive^ hopes that must be dashed to ihe ground — a widespread field of 
desolation and devastation ! For the whole scene there is one refuge. It is one which 
postulates, for iis highest safety and adequacy, not merely the existence and presence 
of faith, but faith of overcoming and dominant quality. Wanting this, which so 
uniformly is wanting, it may yet be that faith learns life, and lifts itself to bud and to 
begin to unfold its buds. 
IV. Though death is such a vigoboub and bblentless biddeb fob faith, both 

IH ITSELF AND IN ITS CIBOUMSTANOB, YET IT DOBS ALSO INFER BOMB VERY CERTAIN 

PEEhENT USE AND SIGNIFICANCE. In cvcry case, for instance, of deep sorrow and sincere 
expression of it in "lamentation," what (comparatively speakiug) healthy action of 
living hearts is betokened, and what a pure tribute of unharmful and direct honour is 
rendered to the vanished goodness ! Upon this ancient sorrow, so far removed from 
ourselves, of "all Judah and Jerusalem . . . and of Jeremiah . . . and of all the 
singing men and the singing women " — so that they made " an ordinance of it in 
Israel," and recorded the words of their lamentation in their historical writings — with 
what pathetic interest we nevertheless look back ! And we wish there were uo sadder 
end to the history of Judah and her kings impending, no bitterer tears to flow, no 
anguished cries to be heard, no shame to be bowed beneath ! So the death of Josiah, 
and his place after death yet on earth, in memory, in heart, and in song, are fraught 
with no little interest, apart from faith's higher action, and are charged incentives to 
zeal, devotion, pure religion, and sensitiveness of conscience even for ourselves, 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 3 — 7. — The preferable service. There is considerable uncertainty as to the 
meaning of the words (ver. 3), " put the holy ark in the house," etc. (see Exposition). 
But whatever interpretation we give them, it is clear that Josiah intended the Levites 
to understand that he required them to render a ditlerent and a higher service than that 
of carrying the ark as a burden on their shoulders ; they were to " serve now the Lord 
their God, and his people Israel ; " they were to do this by " standing in the holy 
place," by " killing the Passover," and thus enable " their brethren to do according to 
the Word of the Lord." In other words, instead of the work of sacred porterage to 
which they had been accustomed, they were to render important services in the 
sanctuary; were to be instrumental in the keeping of a sacred feast by all their 
brethren ; were to render valuable assistance in aiding them to carry out the commaud- 
ments of the Lord. They were to give up the lower for the higher service, the 
mechanical one for that which was more spiritual; one that was no longer needed for 
that which was urgent ; the comparatively unprofitable for that which was likely to 
be fruitful of devotion and piety. We thus judge — 

1. That all work fob God may be good and acceptable. Josiah could not have 
meant that the carrying of the ark was not " service." Although the words, as they 
stand in the third verse, certainly bear that construction, we conclude that he could 
not have intended them to have that significance. No devout Jew would have 
questioned the statement that the work of carrying the ark of the covenant under 
Divine commandment was an act of sacred service. Indeed, it matters not how humble 
or even slight and trivial be the work we do in the cause of God, so long as it is 
rendered (1) cheerfuUy, and not of constraint or grudgingly ; (2) faithfully, diligently, 
taking our part and carrying it out with loyalty and thoroughness; (a) harmoniousli/, 
in concert with our lellow-labourers ; (4) religiously, devoutly, doing what we do ai 
mnto Christ, and not only as unto man ; it is then good and sacred and acceptable uute 
GK)d our Saviour. 

"Ml works are good, and each is best 
As most it pleases thee ; 
Xach worker pleases when the rest 

Ha serves in charity ; 
And neither work nor man unbleak 
Wilt thou permit to be." 



432 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxxv. 1— 27. 

But there is another side to this truth. There are works which are to he preferred to 
others, if they can he rightly undertaken, hecause they are intrinsically better. Hence 
we urge — 

II. That thbkb is work which is to be peeferred when the choice is offered 
OS. 1. The spiritual to the mechanical ; e.g. leading in prayer or urging to religious 
decision or to deeper and fuller devoterlness, (to be preferred) to the work of " the 
doorkeeper in the house of the Lord," good as that is in its time and way. 2. The 
practical to the speculative ; e.g. doing some work of rescue or reformation rather than 
indulging in speculations as to the employments of the heavenly country, or trying to 
read the riddle of the Apocalypse. 3. The sympathetic to the argumentative. It may 
be well to demolish the arguments of the assailant of the faith ; it is better to " visit 
the widow and the fatherless in their afBiction," to carry consolation and hope to those 
who are ready to faint or to despair. The logical man does well to argue, but the 
work of " the man who is a hiding-place from the wind and a covert from the tempest" 
is of a nobler, a Christlier kind. 4. The costly to the costless. No sum is too small for 
the treasury of the Lord, no word too simple for the sanctuary; yet is it a better thing 
to bring to Jesus Christ that which costs us something (2 Sam. xxiv. 24) — ^the work 
which commands and requires our strength, the word on which we have spent patient 
and prayerful thought, the feeling which is a real expenditure of ourselves. — C. 

Vers. 6 — 16. — 2%e service of the Lord, From this account of Josiah's great Passover 
we may learn — 

I. 'I'hat religious life mcLtJDBs A FEW GREAT OCCASIONS. The rcligious life of 
Israel included some special occasions, of which this was one. Provision was made in 
the Law for one event of surpassing solemnity in every year (Lev. xvi.). And the 
very checkered course the nation ran provided a few extraordinary scenes which were 
great and sacred opportunities. Thus is it with individual lives. During a life of 
ordinary length and interest there will occur some few events which are signal, 
striking, critical. Much may depend on them ; much use should be made of them. 
But, after all, it is not by them that our life will be sustained, and it is not upon them 
that any wise man will rely. It is the regular worship; it is the daily devotion; it 
is the habitual recognition of Grod and appeal to him that determines our spiritual 
position, that makes us to " live before " him and in him. 

II. That the service of God provides a vert wide opportunity. How many 
men, how many classes or orders of men, contributed to this one service! The king 
inspired and directed it (vers. 1, 2) ; the Levites " killed the Passover " (vers. 6 — 11) ; 
the priests " sprinkled the blood " (ver. 11). The heads of the orders, from the king 
downwards, contributed generously of their flocks to supply the people's need (vers. 
7 — 9). The singers sang (ver. 15) ; the porters " waited at every gate " (ver. 15). So 
" all the service of the Lord " was rendered, every one taking his place and doing his 
best thereat (ver. 16). The Church of Christ is one body with many members, and 
all the members have not the same office ; very various indeed are the ofBces which 
are rendered by the disciples of the one Lord. And as, year by year, Christian life, ai 
well as civilized life, becomes more complex and intricate, it becomes more decisively 
and imperatively our duty to recognize the fact that, while our own particular function 
has its importance, it is only one among many others, and that every one of us is 
beholden to his fellows for valuable services which it is not in his own power to render. 
And it is well also to mark that, in a state so complicated, with so many posts to be 
filled, there is the less excuse for any idle member. 

III. That the service of others should precede pbovibion fob ourseltes. 
" Afterward they made ready for themselves " (ver. 14). In the kingdom of Christ we 
•re not to stand upon our official rights ; we are to claim the supreme honour of serving 
others, after the manner of our Divine Leader. He was "among us as one that 
serveth ; " he was here " not to be ministered unto, but to minister ; " and we never 
itand nearer to him than when we abnegite any right we might officially claim, and 
prefer to wait upon others' wants ; to minister to their necessities ; to make them glad, 
or to do them good. Of ourselves we may think and for ourselves we may care, but 
ufierward, not first. 

IV. That we mat bendeb ak exoellent service bt a betiyai. or. the foboottkr. 



CH.xxxv. 1— 27.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 433 

It does not follow that old usages, though they once had the sanction of Christian 
custom, should be revived. Possibly they are better left alone. "The old order 
changeth," etc. On the other hand, the time may come for their revival, if not in the 
«ame form, in a different one. Tftat usage, in some form, deserves to be restored which 
promotes devotion, humility, charity. — C. 

Vers. 17 — 19. — The moral of the Passover. The keeping of this Passover is very 
particularly described in this chapter, and we may be sure that it was entered into and 
enjoyed, as a religious festival, with exceeding zest. We naturally ask — What was its 
significance? What did it mean to those who celebrated it? We reply that in it and 
byit— 

I. Thet eecognized their unity ab the people of God. They went back in 
thought to the time when they were bound together in the strong bond of a common 
sorrow ; when they were a suffering people bent beneath the same yoke, bleeding with 
the same blows ; and they recognized the fact that they were all the children of their 
fathers to whom Moses came as the great prophet and saviour. And the lamb of 
which they partook, with not a bone of its body broken, was the symbol of the 
national unity. 

II. They rejoiced in a great Divine deliverance — a delivebancb through 
SACRIFICE. The prevailing thought of the whole institution was God's merciful and 
mighty interposition on their behalf, redeeming them from the land of bondage and 
misery, bringing them out into liberty and happiness, and constituting them a nation, 
holy unto himself. And closely connected with the main idea of deliverance was that 
of sacrifice ; they commemorated the fact that through the sacrifice of a slain lamb 
they had been spared and redeemed. 

III. They had fellowship with God and with one another. The Feast of the 
Passover and of Unleavened Bread was one in which they rejoiced together both as 
families and as a congregated nation " before the Lord." Then they had true fellow- 
ship with one another, meeting and greeting one another as members of the same 
redeemed nation, whom the Lord had pitied and restored ; and while they were thus 
glajldened in heart as they associated one with another, they were also solemnized by 
the thought that they met together in the city of God, in the courts of the Lord's 
house, in his own presence. Theirs was a sacred union and communion ; it was fellow- 
ship with the Supieme. 

When we meet, as Christian men, in ordinary worship, and more particularly when 
we gather together at the Lord's table, we are moved and animated by this same spirit, 
•by these same convictions and considerations. 1. We realize our essential unity, our 
oneness in Jesus Christ. Are we not all members of that race on which, in all its 
distance from the home of God, he had compassion and which he stooped to save ? 
Are we not bound together, not only as partakers of the same human nature, but as 
those who have bowed beneath the same yoke, who have needed the same Divine 
Redeemer, who have suffered in the same affliction? 2. We rejoice together in the 
same glorious redemption — a redemption that (1) not only was designed and begun, 
but was triumphantly completed ; (2) a redemption which, in its spiritual character 
' and its everlasting issues, dwarfs even such a great national deliverance as that which 
this Passover commemorated; (3) a redemption which could only be (and was) 
accomplished through the sacrifice of the " Lamb of God," slain /rem the foundation of 
the world /or the recovery of the world. 3. We meet to have holy and happy fellow- 
ship with one another, and also hallowed and elevating fellowship with our Father and 
bis Son Jesus Christ (1 John i. 3). — 0. 

Vers. 24, 25. — Jn early sunset. That very good men may make very great mistakes 
we hardly need to be told ; unfortunately, we have all too many illustrations of that 
fact. The text provides us with a very melancholy instance. What had Josiah to do 
with this contest between the kings of Egypt and Assyria? Was his heart, too, 
"lifted up," that he thought himself and his people more than a match for the 
disciplined hosts of Egypt ? Had he been attacked, and had he cast himself on God as 
Hezekiah did when Sennacherib appeared against him, then he might have hoped 
■confidently for victory. But to contest with a great world-power on worldly principles 
n. cheoniolbs. 2 r 



434 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ce. xxxv. 1— 27. 



was a supieme and a fatal error. He paid the penalty of his folly with his life. " Hit 
sun went down while it was yet day." So passed, needlessly and unfortunately, one 
of the hest and boldest spirits that occupied the throne of Judah. Regarding his death 
as that of one early removed from the scenes of earthly activity, we are naturally 
affected by — 

I. Its extreme badness. We are not surprised to read of so demonstrative and so 
feryent-natured a people as the Jews were, that " all Judah and Jerusalem mourned 
for Josiah;" nor that Jeremiah uttered his prophet's plaint concerning him. It was 
• time for profound sorrow ; and even passionate grief might, under such circumstances, 
be excused. For the nation had not merely lost its chief; it had lost an invaluable 
leader, a king who was leading in the paths of righteousness and therefore of prosperity 
There must come oooasiocs to the country, to the Church, to the city, to the family, 
when one man's death will be felt to be a calamity. Yery wise is that community, 
sacred or secular, national or domestic, that recognizes this fact and provides against 
it ; that secures such resources, material or spiritual, that when such a blow comes 
everything will not be lost ; that when its best is taken it has still much in reserve ; 
that it is not dependent for the maintenance of its liberty, or its security, or its 
vigorous existence on anything so precarious as one human being's life. 

II. Its kighteousness. Why did God not interpose to prevent Josiah from throw- 
ing his life away ? Why did he let darkness come down at noon, and put an end to 
this bright and useful day ? Why does he not now intervene between us and the 
death we speak of as premature ? Why does he permit the young statesmen to overtax 
his strength and die in his prime; the young minister to commit himself to the 
tieacherous tide and be drowned in the very fulness of his powers and the midst of his 
uselulness ; the young missionary to expose his life to the savages who pierce him with 
the poisoned spear? We ask such questions, wondering, if not complaining, at the 
Divine inaction. But we might very justly and more properly ask ourselves another 
question — What right have we to expect that God will give to any man a particular 
term of earthly life that we may choose fur him ? Has he promised to confer any one 
length of days on his servants ? Is not the gift of every added day a prolongation of 
his goodness and his mercy? Ought we not, rather than complain, to bless him for 
the number of years he does bestow — a number which is greater than our deserving? 
Would it he really wise or kind of our heavenly Father if he were always interposing 
to prevent us from suffering the natural consequences of our error or our negligence, 
because we were right at heart with him ? Would that be the way to discipline, to 
purify, to perfect his children? No I when God lets death 

" Descend in sudden night 
On manhood's middle day," 

he ii not imrighteous, nor is he really unwise or unkind. Get down far enough, and 
we stand on the rock of righteousness and wisdom and love. We may look at — 

III. Alleviatino asfeots of it. No doubt, when Josiah found that he was " sore 
wounded," and that he could not recover, he would grieve more or less, as Hezekiah 
did. But as he confronted death he would become reconciled to the will of God, and 
he would, probably, have some hope concerning himself for the future, and would 
entrust his country to the care of God. But we have a much larger measure of 
alleviation than Josiah had. For there has visited us and spoken to us that Divine 
One who is the Resurrection and the Life indeed. And in the light of his revealing 
truth, and in the hope of his gracious promise, we look upon death as introducing us 
into another part of the kingdom of God— another and a better; a sphere from which 
sin is shut out ; — and not only sin, but weariness and disappointment and sorrow ; a 
sphere that will be ever brightening and broadening as added years reveal in us and 
to ua " enlarged and liberated powers." — C. 

Vers. 1 — 19. — The great Passover of Jonah, I. Gbeat in bkspeot of its confor- 
MiTT to the Law. To suppose (De Wette, Thenius, and others) that never before 
had a Passover been observed in Israel or Judah since the days of Samuel (ver. 18 ; 
1 Esdr. i. 20, 21) or of the judges (2 Kings xxiii. 22), is not only to extract an 
unwanantable inference from the sacred text, but is contradicted by the fust that 



CH. ixiv. 1— 27.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 433 

Hezekiah, » fonner Eang of Judah, celebrated a Passover in Jerusalem which was not 
merely a Passover of his own arranging, but the Passover (oh. xxx. 1, 2) prescribed by 
the Law of Moses (vers. 16, 18). That this Passover, however, should have adhered 
more closely to the prescriptions of the lawgiver than any former, demands no addi- 
tional explanation beyond the fact that it was celebrated in Josiah's eighteenth year 
(ver. 19), and after the discovery of the book of the Law (oh. xxxiv. 14, 15). The 
stricter adherence to Mosaic regulation appeared in three things. 1. TAe exactness of 
the date. The solemnity began " on the fourteenth day of the first month " (ver. 1), 
as the book of the Law commanded (Exod. xii.). Hezekiah's festival commenced " in 
the second month," because of the difficulty of getting ready for the stipulated time 
(ch. XXX. 2, 3). The Passover proper also ended on one day, i.e. all were able to eat 
the sacrificial lamb at the appointed time (ver. 16), without any requiring to defer their 
participation thereof for any reason whatever (Numb. ix. 6 — 12). 2. The unity of the 
place. The feast was held in Jerusalem (ver. 1) by all its celebrants. The same was 
true of Hezekiah's Passover (ch. xxx. 1), though it is doubtful if as much could be said 
of earlier observances from the days of the judges or of Samuel. 3. The completeness 
of the ritual. Everything was done " in accordance with the Word of the Lord by the 
hand of Moses" (ver. 6); i.e. the instructions as to the duties of the priests, Levites, 
and people ; as to the killing, burning, eating of the victims ; and as to the presentation 
of mazzoth gifts for the ensuing feast, were faithfully carried out. 

II. Gbeat in respect of the pbbpabations foe its obsbrvanob. Not greater 
as to amoimt of labour than were those made in connection with Hezekiah's festival ; 
but still great. 1. Concerning the priests. These were set in their charges and 
encouraged to the service of the house of the Lord (ver. 2). Following the example of 
Jehoiada (ch. xxiiL 18), Josiah distributed among the divisions of the priesthood as 
arranged by David (1 Chron. xxiv.) the different parts of work required by the Law 
of Moses in the celebration of the Passover, i.e. he set them " according to their daily 
courses, being arrayed in long garments, in the temple of the Lord" (1 Bsdr. i. 2); 
after which he strengthened them for their labours by detailed instructions as to their 
duties, and by encouraging exhortations to its faithful performance. 2, Concerning 
the Levites. These were: (1) Defined as to their o£Scial work and character; in 
respect of the former being called " teachers of all Israel " (cf. ch. xvii. 8, 9 ; Neh. viii. 
7, 9), and with reference to the latter being designated "holy unto the Lord " (Numb. 
iii. 12, 13) — an epithet applied also to the priests (oh. xxiii. 6 ; Lev. xxi. 6), and 
even to the people (Deut. vii. 6) ; an epithet expressive of outward consecration, which, 
however, ought in every instance to reflect an inward consecration as its ground and 
justification. (2) Directed about the ark, which they were told to " put," or leave 
(Eeil), " in the house which Solomon the son of David King of Israel did build " 
(ver. 3). The ark, it is supposed, had been removed from the holy of holies during tho 
idolatrouB reigns of Manasseh and Amon by these kings themselves (Estius, Piscator), 
or by the priests who wished to preserve it (A. Claike), and now was ordered by Josiah 
to be replaced ; but against this stands the fact that the work of placing the ark in 
the holy of holies belonged not to the Levites, but to the priests (ver. 7). It has also 
been conjectured that the Levites had been accustomed to carry the ark about the 
temple courts during the Passover celebration " under the impression that they were 
required so to do by the Law, and that Josiah pointed out to them the alteration which 
had taken place in this respect since the erection of the temple by Solomon " (Bertheau) ; 
but for this conjecture there is no positive historical foundation. A third explanation 
is that, as the Levites were no longer required to carry the ark about from place to 
place since it now had a resting-place in the temple, they should leave it there and 
give themselves to such other duties as were now demanded of them (Eeil). (3) Com- 
manded relative to themselves — to arrange themselves according to their fathers' houses 
and after their courses according to the writings of David and Solomon (ver. 4) ; to 
take up their stations in the holy place according to the divisions of the fathers' houses 
of their lay brethren, so that one of their divisions should fall to each father's house of 
the laymen (ver. 5) ; to kill the Passover and sanctify themselves, probably by washing 
themselves, before handing the blood to the priests to sprinkle on the altar (Keil), or 
after they had done so and before they performed any further duties (Bertheau) ; and, 
finally, to prepare, sc. the Passover for their brethren the laymen, that they might do 



436 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxxv. 1—27. 

according to the Word of the Lord by the hand of Moses (ver. 6). 3. Concerning the 
people. These, i.«. such of them as were pour, or had come from a distance without 
iiaviDg brought the necessary sacrificial animals, were furnished with lambs, kids, and 
bullocks, or small cattle and oxen (vers. 7 — 9), without which they could not have 
taken part in the celebration. At least the poor would have been excluded, which 
would have marred both the completeness and hilarity of the celebration. 

III. Geeat in eespeot or its accompanying libebalitt. 1. On the part of the 
ling. From the royal revenues Josiah contributed for the Passover offerings (1) largely 
— thirty thousand lambs and kids and three thousand bullocks (ver. 7), a much larger 
gift than was presented by Hezekiah (ch. xxx. 24); and (2) promptly, taking the lead 
in his good work, and so supplying an example to his subjects. 2. On the part of the 
royal princes. These, copying the action of their sovereign, likewise made donations 
(1) freely, or " for a free-will offering " — an indispensable quality in all religious 
giving (2 Cot. viii. 12) ; and it may be hoped (2) largely, though this is not stated. 
They would hardly faU behind the princes in the time of Hezekiah (ch. xxx. 24). 
3. On the. part of the rulers of the temple. Hilkiah the high priest (ch. xxxiv. 9), 
Zechariah, perhaps the next in rank to him, " the second priest " (2 Kings xxv. IS ; 
Jer. lii. 24), and Jehiel, the chief of the line of Ithamar (Ezra viiL 2), exhibited 
» similar praiseworthy liberality (ver. 8). 4. On the part of the Levite princes. Six of 
these whose names are recorded— Conaniah, with his two brothers Shemaiah and 
Nethaneel, with Hashabiah, Jeiel, and Jozabad — also displayed a high degree of 
generosity (ver. 9). 

IV. Great rsr eespeot of its co-orEBATiNQ activity. Each bad his part to 
perform, and each performed it in such a way as not to hinder, but to accelerate the 
progress; and not to mar, but to increase the effect of the whole. 1. Th^ priests. 
These (1) stood in their place beside the altars (ver. 10 ; ch. xxx. 16) ; (2) sprinkled 
the blood they received from the Levites (ver. 11; ch. xxx. 16) ; and (3) offered burnt 
offerings and the fat until night (ver. 14). 2. The Levites. These (1) killed the 
Passover victims (ver. 11) ; (2) flayed or skinned them (ver. 11) ; and (3) removed 
from their carcases such parts as were designed to be offered as burnt offerings (ver. 12) ; 
after which they (4) roasted the Passover with fire, according to the Mosaic ordinance 
fver. 13 ; Exod. xii. 8, 9) ; (5) boiled the other offerings in pots, caldrons, and pans 
(ver. 13) ; (6) divided them as they were ready among the people (ver. 13) ; and (7) 
prepared the Passover for themselves and for the priests (ver. 14). 3. 2%e singers. 
These, the sons of Asaph, stood in their places, in the court of the temple, discoursing 
music with harps, psalteries, and cymbals (1 Ghron. xxv. 1), without once leaving their 
ranks even to eat the Passover, the Levites preparing for and fetching to them their 
portion (ver. 15). 4. The porters. At every gate these watched, never departing from 
their service, because the Levites did for them as for the musicians (ver. 15). Thus 
each contributed his part, and all worked harmoniously towards the production of the 
general result. 

V. Geeat m bespect of its celebrating nttmbebs. The feast was attended by : 
1. The inhabitants of Jerusalem, including Josiah and his princes, with the priests and 
the Levites. 2. All Judah, meaning the population beyond the metropolis, in the country 
districts. 3. The children of Israd ; i.e. the members of the northern kingdom who had 
not been carried into exile, and who had come to Jerusalem to be present at tiie feast. 

Learn : 1. The duty of observing the public ordinances of religion. 2. The beauty 
and value of unity and co-operation in Christian work and worship. 3. The propriety 
of having special seasons of religious service. — ^W. 

Vers. 20 — 27. — The death of Josiah. I. Josiah's militabt expbditioh. (Ver. 20.) 
Seeminoly the only expedition in his reign. 1. When it took place. " After all this, 
when Josiah had prepared the temple ; " i.e. after the eighteenth year of his reign, in 
point of fact, thirteen years after (ch. xxxiv. 1). 2. Against whom it was directed. 
Necho King of Egypt ; in Egyptian, Nekii, son of Psammatik L, the illustrious founder 
of the Saitic or twenty-sixth dynasty, and grandson of Necho I., of the twenty-fifth or 
Ethiopian dynasty. Necho II. ascended the throne of the Pharaohs in b.o. 612, and 
reined sixteen years. A warlike and adventurous prince, he was likewise devoted to 
commercial pursuits ; he possessed two fleets of Greek-made triremes, one in the 



OH. XXIV. 1—27.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 43f 

Mediterranean and another in the Red Sea. In his service Phoenician sailors were the 
first to circumnavigate Africa (Herod., iv. 44). 3. For what reason it was projected. 
To oppose Necho, who was on his way through Palestine towards Carchemish on the 
Euphrates, to fight against the King of Assyria. Whether this sovereign was " King 
of Assyria proper" — in which case he would most likely be Esarhadikm II., the last 
ruler of Nineveh — or whether he was the Babylonian monarch Nabopolassar, who 
geiied the empire after the overthrow of the Assyrian power, cannot be conclusively 
determined, although the best authorities favour the latter hypothesis (Ebers, Sayce, 
Rawlinson). In any case, Necho, taking advantage either of the declining power of 
Nineveh, or of the still unsettled state of Babylonian affairs, resolved to strike a blow 
for the recovery of those Asiatic provinces which had finuerly been subject to the 
Pharaohs ; and Josiah, still regarding himself as a tributary of the Assyrian crown, and 
probably under Jeremiah's teaching (Jer. xlvii. 25), dreailing the rise of the Egyptian 
power, hastened to resist his advance (b.o. 610). 

II. Josiah's providential waeninq. (Ver. 21.) 1. The purport of this warning. 
Before the two armies met, Necho despatched an embassy to Josiah, requesting him to 
desist from offering opposition. (1) Because he, Necho, was not seeking to disturb or 
injure him, Josiah, but was aiming at Assyria — "the house wherewith I have war." 
Of. Joash to Amaziah (ch. xxv. 18, 19). (2) Because he, Necho, was acting in accord- 
ance with a Divine commission, so that in opposing him Josiah would be guilty of resisting 
God, and would only bring ruin upon hisiiself. In claiming to act under the impulse 
of Heaven, Necho probably meant no more than Pianchi-Mer-Amon of the twenty-fifth 
dynasty, who, when marching against Tafnakhth and other rebel chieftains, said, 
" Thou knowest what Amon the great god hath commanded us ; " and again, " I am 
born of the loins, created from the egg, of the deity ; the divine procreation is in me. 
All hail to him, I have not acted without his knowing ; he ordained that I should act" 
(' Records,' etc., ii. 84, 91). 2. The author of this warning. Though Necho may have 
had no other idea in using the term " god " than that above explained, and though 
certainly it cannot be assumed that he understood himself to be the medium of con- 
veying a Divine warning to the King of Judah, it is nevertheless clear that the 
Chronicler beheld in the incident the finger of God. Whether Jehovah actually put 
the words into Necho's mouth, or only permitted him to speak as he did, the Hebrew 
historian, perhaps judging from the fatal issue of the war, regarded the message of 
Pharaoh as a clear warning from Heaven which Josiah should have accepted. Tliere is 
no need for supposing either that Necho spoke of Josiah's God or that Josiah's God 
■poke to Necho. 

III. Josiah's lamentable obstinaot. (Ver. 22.) 1. His rejection of the warning. 
"H? hearkened not unto the words of Necho from the mouth of God." To assume 
Josiah knew that Necho was going against Nabopolassar with the express sanction of 
Jehovah, and that Nechu's dissuasive admonition proceeded straight from Heaven, and 
to hold moreover that Josiah, cognizant of all this, nevertheless closed his ear agamst 
the voice of the Supreme, is to put the worst construction possilile on Josiah's conduct ; 
to understand the sacred writei's language as merely imiiorting that Josiah was not 
disposed to hearken to Necho's advice, and so failed to recognize it as "from the 
mouth of God," is probably to put upon the King of Judah's behaviour the best con- 
Btruction it will admit of. Had Josiah not been bent upon this war, he would have 
quickly discerned the prudence of Necho's counsel. 2. Sis determination to fight. 
"Josiah would not turn his face from him " (Necho), but pushed on and offered battle 
in the valley of Megiddo, Magdol (Herod., ii. 159) — the modern Lejjun, west of the 
Plain of Esdraelon, and near Taanach (Robinson), though a claim has been advanced 
for the modern Mujedd^a, " an important ruin in the Plain of Beisan, at thw foot of 
Gilboa " (Gender). Here had once stood an old Canaanitish town, of which the king was 
conquered by Joshua (Josh. xii. 21), and which, though within the territory of Issaohar, 
was yet assigned to Manasseh (Josh. xvii. 11). In later years Solomon selected it as 
one of his fortified cities (1 Kings ix. 15). In Meaiddo Ahaziah sought refuge when 
mortally wounded by Jehu (2 Kings ix. '11). Megiddo had been the scene of a great 
battle between Thothmes III. and one of the confederations of the small kings and 
princes of Palestine, b.o. 1600 (' Records,' etc., ii. 35). Now on this histoiic ground the 
forces of Josiah and Necho come into collision. 



438 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHEONICLES. [oh. xxxvi. 1— 23. 

rV. Josiah's fatal wouud. (Ver. 23.) 1. The ineffectual disguise. Like Ahab at 
Bamotb-Gilead (ch. xviii. 29), Josiah resorted to a customary but foolish and, in thle case, 
useless artifice. Josiah should have ventured upon no campaign which demanded such 
•u expeiiient. Had Josiah been sure of the Divine approbation, he would have needed 
no protection beyond the invisible shield and buckler of Jehovah (Ps. xci.). 2. The 
death-winged arrow. No coat of mail can protect a soldier, or stratagem prolong the 
days of him whose hour is come. Whether the Egyptian bowmen penetrated through 
Josiah's disguise or not, Jehovah did. If Necho's archers shot at random, the almighty 
and omniscient Archer (Lam. ii. 4 ; Job vi. 4 ; Eev. vi. 2) did not. Every shaft that 
flies from his hand hits. Josiah believed he was only fighting against Necho; Necho 
told him he was fighting against God. In this unequal contest (Isa. xxvii. 4) Josiah 
was of course defeated. " The archers shot at King Josiah ; and King Josiah said to 
his servants. Have me away ; for I am sore wounded." 

V. Josiah's untimely death. (Ver. 24.) It was : 1. Immediate. The pious but 
mistaken monarch felt he had received his death-blow. Obeying his instructions, his 
•oldiers lifted him from his war-chariot, and, placing him " in a second chariot which 
belonged to him, and was probably more comfortable for a wounded man " (Keil), 
conveyed him to Jerusalem, where he shortly after expired. 2. Untimely. What 
Hezekiah feared was about to happen to him in his thirty-ninth year (Isa. xxxviii. 10), 
happened in reality to Josiah ; he was deprived of the residue of his years. What 
another singer prayed against (Ps. cii. 24) befell him, perhaps, notwithstanding his 
prayers — he was cut off in the midst of his days. In the language of a Hebrew prophet, 
" his sun had gone down at noon " (Amos viii. 9). Considering his elevated character, 
the quality of the work he had already performed, and the promise of good for his land 
and people which lay, or seemed to lie, in his prolonged life, his death could scarcely be 
pronounced other than premature ; it was all too soon for Jerusalem and Judah. Yet 
was it not too soon for God, who best knew the moment in which to fulfil his own 
promise (ch. xxxiv. 28 ; Ps. xxxi. 15) ; or for Josiah, who was thereby removed from the 
evil to come (Ps. xii. 1 ; Isa. Ivii. 1), so that his eyes saw not the calamities which 
forthwith began to descend upon his country (ch. xxxvi. 3). 3. Regretted. (1) Mourned 
for by the people. When they buried him in the sepulchres of his fathers (ver. 24), 
or in his own sepulchre (2 Kings xxiii. 30) — perhaps in one of the chambers of 
Manasseh's tomb (oh. xxxiii. 20) — the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem felt that 
" a prince and a great man " had been taken from them. They sorrowed for him as 
they had never before sorrowed for a sovereign, " lamenting and grieving on his account 
many days " (Josephus), with such an intensity of heartfelt anguish that even after 
the Captivity "the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon" became s 
proverbial expression for the deepest and truest grief (Zech. xii. 11). (2) Lamented by 
Jeremiah. The most plaintive of all the prophets, who had commenced his ministry in 
the thirteenth year of the deceased sovereign's reign (Jer. i. 1), composed a dirge to 
keep in memory his death. Whether that elegiac hymn was recited at his fimeral 
(Stanley) or not, it was placed in the national collection of such threnodies, and was 
long after chanted by the singing men and singing women who, on fixed days, were 
appointed to recall the memory of the good king. 

Lessons. 1. The danger of intermeddling with other people's strife (Prov. xxyi. 17). 
2. The folly of rejecting good advice, even though given by an enemy. 3. The proba- 
bility that he who runs into danger unbidden will not escape unhurt (Ps. xci. 11). 
4. The certainty that death will overtake all, in sucn an hour as they think not (Matt, 
xxiv. 44). 6. The loss which a good man's death is to a community or nation 
(2 Kings ii. 12). 6. The propriety of perpetuating the recollection of noble lives 
(Prov. X. 7). 7. The fitness of song to express sorrowful emotions (2 Sam. L 17 { 
Micah ii. 4). — ^W. 

EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XXXVL 

One short chapter now brings to a oon- 
cinsion the work, in so many aspects remark- 



able, called "The Chronicles.' And thirteen 
verses sum the contents of the four loat 
pre-Captivity kings of the line of Judah. 
The words of Eeil,-in opening this last 



OH. XXXVI. 1—23.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



439 



ohaptei in liis commentary, are not on- 
worthy of note. He eays, "As the kingdom 
of Judah after Josiah's death advanced 
with Bwift Bteps to its destruction hy the 
Chaldeans, bo the author of tlie Chronicle 
goes quickly over the reigns of the last 
kings of Judah, who by their godless con- 
duot hastened the ruin of the kingdom. As 
to the four kings remaining, who reigned 
between Josiah's death and the destruction 
of Jerusalem, he gives, besides their ages 
at their respective accessions, only a short 
characterization of their conduct towards 
God, and a statement of the main events 
which, step by step, brought about the ruin 
of the king and the burning of Jerusalem 
and the temple." 

This chapter, then, contains, first, very 
brief accounts of the four reigns of Jehoahaz 
(Ten. 1 — 4), Eliakim or Jehoidkim (vers. 4 — 
8), Jehoiachin (vers. 9, 10), and Zedehiah 
(vers. 10-13); next, general remarks on 
the iniquity that heralded the destruction 
of the nation and the punishment of it by 
the Chaldean captivity (vers. 14 — 17); 
thirdly, the methods of that destruction and 
captivity (vers. 17—21); and lastly, the 
restoring proclamation of Cyrus King of 
Persia. 

Ver. 1. — The people of the land took 
Jehoahaz (see parallel, 2 Kings xxiii. 80). 
The form of expression may indicate the 
hearty zeal of the nation for this chosen son 
of Josiah, who seems to have been not the 
eldest. In the next verse, as Kevised Ver- 
sion, he is called Joahaz. In 1 Chron. iii. 
15, as in the affecting passage Jer. xxii. 
10—12, his name appears as Shallum. His 
mother's name was Hamutal, while the 
name of the mother of his immediate suc- 
cessor was Zebudah (2 Kings xxiii. 31 and 
36). 

Ver. 3. — ^Put him down ; Hebrew, inTD;i ; 
i.e. deposed him (Kevised Version). At 
J-riisalem. In something more than three 
months Pharaoh-Necho seems to have been 
returning, and in the neighbourhood of 
Jerusalem. Tlie parallel (2 Kings xxiii. 31) 
tells us that he put Jehoahaz " in bands " 
at " Eiblath in the land of Hamath " (Ezek. 
xix. 4). And condemned the land; i.e. in- 
flicted a fine on the land ; Hebrew, B'JJJ^l. 
From this time nothing further is heard of 
Jehoahaz or Shallum. 

Ver. 4. — Eliakim. The meaning of the 
word is " God sets up ; " the meaning of 
jehoiakim is "Jehovah sets up." An 
Egyptian king knew and recognized the 



word "God," but possibly meant to taunt 
the " Jehovah " of the Jew. 

Ver. 5. — Here we note the age of Jehoia- 
kim as greater than that of Jehoaliaz, and 
in the parallel we read that his mother was 
different. 

Ver. 6. — Against him came up N ebnohad- 
nezzar Sing of Babylon. Our mere allusions 
in this and the following verse to Nebn- 
ohadnezzar's relations to Jehoiakim and 
Judah are strange in comparison witli the 
graphic account furnished by the parallel 
(2 Kings xxiv. 1 — 6). The name is the 
same with Ndbohodrosoros, is written in 
the Assyrian monuments Nebii-kuduri-utzur, 
and mraning, "Nebo (laa. xlvi. 1), pro- 
tector from ill," or "protects the crown." 
In Jeremiah (xlix. 28) we have the name 
written Nebuchadrezzar, as also in Flzekiel. 
Nebuchadnezzar, second King of Babylon, 
was the son of Nabopolassar, who took 
Nineveh B.o. 625, and reigned above forty 
years. Though we are here told he bound 
Jehoiakim in chains, to take him to Babylon, 
for some reason or other he did not carry 
out this intention, and Jehoiakim was put 
to death at Jerusalem (Jer. xii. 18, 19; 
xxxvi. 30 ; Ezek. xix, 8, 9). The expedition 
of Nebuchadnezzar was B.o. 605-4 (Dan. L 
1 ; Jer. xxv. 1), and during it, his father 
dying, he succeeded to the throne. 

Ver. 7.— (Comp. Dan. i. 2.) The temple 
here called his temple was, no doubt, the 
temple of Belus, or in the vernacular " Me- 
rodaoh," the Babylonian god of war. This 
rifling of the sacred vessels of Jerusalem's 
temple for Babylon's temple was the sig- 
nificant beginning of the end for Judah now 
at last, after many a warning. 

Ver. 8.— The rest of the acts of Jehoiakim. 
As our compiler has literally told us none 
at all, we need but note his expre.'-sion here 
as a convenient formula, indicating his own 
intentional brevity, and the fact that lie 
was privy to all in the original sources, 
which he nevertheless now omitted ; yet see 
Jer. vii. 9; xix. 13, etc. The telling ex- 
pression, what was found in him, is too 
readily to be filled up from the parallel, in 
its vers. 3, 4. Jehoiachin his son. In 1 
Chron. iii. 16 he is called Jeconiah, and in 
Jer. xxii. 24 he is called Coniah. 

Ver. 9. — Eight years old. Our text, not 
the writer, is in error, and the parallel fur- 
nishes the correction, "eighteen years old." 

Ver. 10. — When the year was expired ; t.e. 
at the begiiining of the new year, in spring 
(cb. xxiv. 23). It appears, from 2 Kings 
xxv. 27 — 30, that the captivity of Jehoia- 
chin, which thus began, lasted thirty-seven 
years, till B.o. 561, past the end of Nebu- 
chadnezzar's reign, and that he was thence- 
forward kindly treated by Bvil-Merodaoh. 
Compare particularly with this verse the 



440 



THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxxvi. 1— 23. 



Miallel in its vers. 10 — 16. ZedeMah his 
brother; i.e. not adopting the very generic 
nsage of tlie terms of relationship, so com- 
mon in Old Testament language, his uncle. 
His mother (^Hamutal, ver. 18 of parallel) 
was the same with the mother of Jehoahaz. 
Ten years old evidently when Jehoiakim 
began his reign, he must have been thirteen 
years younger than his whole brother Je- 
hoahaz. Zedekiah's name was before Mat- 
taniah. The account of Zedekiah in the 
puallel (which see) is very much more full. 

Yer. 12. — Humbled not himself before 
Jeremiah the prophet. Very numerous 
passages in the Book of Jeremiah (xxi. — 
IL) illustrate both this clause and generally 
the feeble character and uncertain career 
of Zedekiah. 

Yer. 13. — He also rebelled against . . . 
Kebuohadnezzar, who had made him swear by 
Ood (MoMm). The criticism of the Prophet 
Ezekiel upon this oath-violation on the part 
of Zedekiah is to be found Ezek. xvii. 12 — 
20 ; xxi. 25. ITnto the Lord God of Israel. 
Note here the resorting on the part of the 
Jew to the name, Jehovah. It is not this 
name that is used at the commencement of 
the verse. 

Yer. 14. — This, with the following three 
verses, may be regarded as the formal and 
final indictment ofthe people of Judah, and 
may be compared with that of Israel 
(2 Kings xvii. 6—23). All the chief of the 
priests (see 1 Chron. xxiv. 1, 3 — 19). The 
heads of the twenty-four courses there 
spoken of, vrith the high priest added, sum 
np the twenty-five men of Ezek. viii. 16, 
the entire of which chapter may well be 
read with the present history, and its 
description of the culminating pitch of 
wickedness of king, priests, and people. 

Yer. 15. — His messengers. The chief 
of these weie presumably Isaiah, Jeremiah, 
Ezekiel. The marginal references (Jer. xxv. 
3 — 7; XXXV. 12 — 15) are very interesting, 
both for this verse and the following. 

Yer. 16. — No remedy (comp. our ch. 
xii. 18; Prov. vi. 15; xxix. 1 ; Jer. viil. 15; 
xiv. 19; xxxiii. 6; Mai. iv. 2 [iii. 20]). 

Yer. 17. — Powerful illustrations of this 
verse may be read in Lam. ii. and Ezek. ix. 
throughout the length of the chapters. 

Yer. 18. — Compare the parallel in its 
vers. 13—17 (2 Kings xxv.); Jer. Iii. 15—23. 

Vers. 19, 20. — (Compare the parallel, 
2 Kings xxv. 1 — 12; Jer. xxxix. 1 — 10; Iii. 
24 — 30.) The reign of the kingdom of Persia; 
t.e. the ascending on the throne of the 
Persian liing. The immediate successor of 
Nebuchadnezzar was his son Evil-Merodach. 

Yer. 21. — The word of the Lord, Note 
marginal references (Jer. xxv. 9 — 12 ; xxix. 
10). The three score and ten years of dcso- 
lateness may probably best be dated from 



Nebuchadnezzar's first taking of Jerusalem, 
B.o. 606-5. Although this date does not 
tally exactly with the B.o. 538 of Cyrus's con- 
quest of Babylon, yet the discrepancy is 
easily explained on more than one suffi- 
ciently natural supposition (fi.g. that Cyrus's 
reign was not exactly synchronous in the 
beginning of it with his conquest of 
Babylon, etc.). Enjoyed her sabbaths (sea 
Lev. xxvi. 34, 85, 43—46). 

Yer. 22. — la. the first year of Cyrus Ein(p 
of Persia. A period of half a century has 
elapsed between the latest date of the fore- 
g:oiug verses (ciro. B.O. 586) and the date 
signalized here (ciro. B.o. 538-6). With 
the proclamation of Oynu begins in fact 
the manhood, with all its mystic, its 
wonderful, and its stUl non-progressing 
struggles, of the Jew. His simple child- 
hood, wilful youth, are indeed for ever gone. 
But he and his nation are vnth unspeakably 
painful travail born. No life of nation that 
is or ever has been merits the devout 
observation and study that this unchal- 
lengeably does. Our present verse and tb( 
one succeeding it are, sentence for sentence, 
the same with the opening verses of the 
Book of Ezra, which may possibly once have 
joined on to Chronicles, as one work, though 
we think this exceedingly unlikely. Cyrus 
(the ts'l'is of the Hebrew text) was tha 
son of a royal Persian, Cambysses; his 
mother was Mandane, daughter of Astyages, 
last King of Media. The name appears on 
the monuments, written Kurue. Cyrus 
defeated his grandfather Astyages, b.o. 559 ; 
ending thereby the Median royal line ; and 
he defeated Croesus, b.o. 546, possessing 
himself thereby of the kingdom of Lydia ; 
he took Babylon, as above, b.o. 538. Ha 
himself died in battle, B.O. 529. That the 
word of the Lord by . . , Jeremiah might 
be accomplished (see Jer. xxv. 11 — 14; 
xxix. 9 — 11). The Lord stirred np the 
spirit of Cyrus. The fact is told us, and 
this, no doubt, as on a thousand other un- 
suspected occasions of far more intrinsic and 
vital interest in the Bible, is suifioient. It 
would have been interesting tf> know, how- 
ever, even here, the mode in which Cyrus 
was appealed to ; as, e.g., it has been plau- 
sibly suggested that Daniel may have been 
in part instrumental in the work, and that, 
again, in part perhaps by directing the 
attention of Cyrus to Isa. xliv. 28 ; xlv. 1. 

Yer. 23.— Hath the Lord Ood of heaven 
given me . . , the Lord his Ood be with 
him. The adopting by Cyrus of the Hebrew 
"Jehovah" in both these places cannot 
escape our notice. There can be no room to 
doubt that Cyrus was acquainted with the 
sacred literature of the Hebrews, and 
especially with the writings of Isaiah, 
Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, as with the languaga 



OH. XXXVI. 1-23.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 



441 



of Daniel. It may have been partly a 
graceful act on the part of Cyrus to word 
his proclamation to the Jews thus, or it may 
have been simply, what under the circum- 
stances came most naturally to him, with 
little or no intention in it either way. The 



numerous passages in Ezra parallel im 
matter with this verse do not need specifica- 
tion here. Now begins the new period of 
Jewish life, with fiercer probation, with 
unbounded and various trial, aud probably 
of world-length continuance. 



HOMILBTICS. 

Vers. 1 — 23. — The final indictment, sentence, and execution of it. It is in vers. 11 — 
21 of this chapter that we are given to read the final summary of, first, the folly and 
sin of Judah, her king, princes, ami people ; and second, the just displeasure aud necessary 
punishment of Jehovah after an unparalleled forbearance. The historic incidents of 
the four reigns which occupy this chapter abound in pathetic, tragic interest. The 
account of them given in the parallel (2 Kings xxiii. 31 — xxv. 30) is fuller. And both 
are illustrated and extraordinarily enhanced in interest by the light and by the cross- 
lights flung on the scene in the prophecies of Jeremiah and Bzekiel (particularly Jer. 
ixi.; xxiv.; xxvii. — xxix.; xxxii. — xxxiv.; xxxvii.; xxxviii.; li. 59— lii. 34; Ezek. i. 1 — 
3 ; xii. 13 ; xl. 1). Many of these portions of history write, and loudly utter forth aa 
well, their own emphatic and impressive homilies. The present Scripture, however, offers 
matter of most solen n reflection, in summarizing the long indictment of centuries that 
lay against Judah, and in a most pathetic rehearsing of the compassionate, forbearing, 
ever-forgiving ministration of Divine love which had for equal length of time striven 
to prevail over her infidelity, yet all in vain ! Her day of visitation had been not one 
day only ; it had been many a day I She " knew " them not, and " now they are hid 
from her eyes." Judah's long-drawn sin, of many a day, year, generation, and even 
century, had been, in one word, idolatry. That sin incurs the guilt of the first two 
commandments set at nought. There is a sense, only too obvious and too certain, in 
which it is the world's fundamental source of sin and snare of sin. No age, no people, 
exempt from the danger, and every individual exposed, at any rate, to it. 

L The claim of God upon man is that man wobship him. The honoured word 
"worship" is often dishonoured, in our not keeping in vivid memory all its strangely 
beautiful import. To love supremely, to obey perfectly, to serve perpetually, to express 
praise and render homage intelligently, and to say without a reserve that all this is the 
simple due of the object adored — this is to worship ! Notice : 1. The claim is abso- 
lute, one undivided and unshared, and always operating without intermission. 2. It is 
natural, reasonable, vindicable in every sense, and from every point of view. Nothing 
else could be thought, nothing else would ever have been thought, except from one 
circumstance. 3. It postulates the consent, not the conflict, of that in man which is 
called his free-will. That free-will is a great fact in human nature — solemn, respon- 
sible, and inspiring fact — but it is the central fact of a moral nature, instead of a merely 
physical or merely animal nature. Nay, more; it is the head and the crown — the veiy 
crown of that moral nature, resting on its brow, and iy rights resting there as an 
imperishable crown. Unless miserably and most mournfully forfeited, it is such. 
There belongs to it by equal rights immortality of honour, and the honour of immor- 
tality. The lesson Judah never learnt effectually was that she was not her own. 
The last lesson any of us learns absolutely perfectly is — just that same. Happy is the 
fi-esh full life, the patience, the strength, the confidence, the love, of that man who has 
learnt, " rising up betimes," that he is not his own; and that he ought not to be sin's 
and Satan's, but the blest property of God, and prized (with and because of his free- 
will and all) of that God I It is when our free-will becomes an infatuated will, per- 
verse will, self-yt\\\, that our glory, is dragged in the dust, and our crown and diadem 
fall. There is no so great, broad, practical, ennobling rule for any man's and every 
man's life than to study to remember well and absolutely that he is God's and Christ's, 
and not (as also a man often says, oftener thinks in his heart, of his money), not his 
own, to do with himself, his lifetime, his powers, his heart, his tongue," what he likes.'' 

II. DiVINBST MINISTBT IS VOUCHSAFED IN SUPPORT or THAT CLAIM. 1. That gracioU* 

ministry helps by informing. The force of habit, of example, of hereditary misincli- 



142 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xxxvt 1—23 

nations and disinclinations, has been potent to put out the truth in this matter. " The 
Lord God of their fathers sent to them by his messengers, rising up betimes, and send- 
ing; because heliad compassion on his people" (ver. 15). 2. The informing ministry 
is the ministry of revelation. 3. It is a graciously persistent one, repeating over and 
over again its various methods. 4. It is a warning, and, if needs be, a threatening 
ministry — sometimes so to the last degree, confronting a man, and standing awhile 
in his actual way, as the angel in the way of Balaam. 5. It is also an encouraging 
and rewarding ministry. None who heed it doubt this, or ever find it otherwise. 
Sin, how often it gave heart-ache and life-ache to king and people ! but " the turning to 
the Lord God of Israel " (ver. 13) never failed to do the contrary. 6. It is a punishing 
and again relenting and forgiving ministry. How often punishment is learnt, before 
it is experienced — if, alas I it should be so by any — for the long last time I 7. When, 
after all, that ministry is sinned against, " mocked, despised, misused, till there is no 
remedy " (ver. 16), then comes the wreck of " wrath," that wrath which can no longer 
be made light of, decisive, irrevocable, and in itself dreadful. 
III. After Judah's iebbvocablb sentence of pcnishmbnt, and the dbead seventy 

TEARS OF HUMILIATION AND CAPTIVITY, THERE 18 THE SUDDEN, UNEXPECTED, HEAVEN- 
SENT INTERPOSITION OF A OREAT REDEMPTION. After the banishment from Eden it was 
so ; after the deluge of Noah it was so ; now, after Israel and Judah had run their course 
as separate kingdoms, it was so; after Malachi, the last of " the prophets," it was most 
chiefly so. And it is so now. The world of sin, the " mocking, despising, misusing " 
world of sin, the ever-sufferiug world of sin, pitiless toward itself, and mercilessly 
inflicting self-punishment, knows the announcement of an interposition great beyond 
bU before, and the offer cf a Heaven-sent, free, priceless hope and redemption I 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS, 

Vers. 1 — 10. — 2%r«e melancholy spectacles. As we read these verses we feel Ihat 
we are drawing very near the end of the kingdom of Judah ; there is an air of melan- 
choly pervading this last chapter of the Hebrew chronicles. There are three things 
which it is sad to see. 

I. A NATION SINKING INTO SERVITUDE. When Egypt comes up and deposes one 
king and sets up another, calling that other by a name that it pleases to confer, at 
the same time imposing a heavy tribute on the people of the land ; and when, that 
power declining, Assyria sends its troops and, without any resistance, enters the capital, 
puts the sovereign in chains, and then extends to him a contemptuous protectorate; 
when this same power again comes up and carries away the sovereign after a brief reign 
of three months, and takes him away, with the most precious treasures of the capital;— 
we are affected by a sense of pitiful national decline. We enter into the feelings of 
its patriot-subjects who could not have helped contrasting the glories of the age of 
David and Solomon with the abject humiliation of their own time. A strong and 
self-respecting people falling into servitude, bowing its head to an utterly relentless 
power which has no other force than that of the sword and the war-chariot, — ^tbib is a 
melancholy spectacle indeed. It may profitably suggest to us the question — What is 
the real cause of a nation's fall ? and it will be found, on inquiry, that while this 
may be due to overweening ambition, it is much more likely to be ascribed to indul- 
gence, to demoralization, to the weakness which niiist attend moral and spiritual 
deterioration. Simplicity and purity of life, sustained by Christian principle^this is 
the one security against decline, subjection, and ruin. 

II. A YOUNG man's hopes EXTINGUISHED. No doubt the young prince Jehoahaz 
grew up in the court of Judah with high hopes for his future. His father was in 
possession of no mean estate, and there vvas every prospect of his succeeding to some 
measure, if not to the chief part of it. But, after three months' occupancy ol power 
and enjoyment of wealth, to be cast into chains and taken away to languish in confine- 
ment in Egypt until he died, was a sad and sorry portion. We do not know, but we 
can well imagine, that there was high hope extinguished, love broken off, much earthly 
brightness suddenly eclipsed. It is one of the consolations of obscurity that it is 
much less likely than is prominence to be subjected to such sudden and painful 



BH. XXXVI. 1—23.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 443 

overthrow. It is most wise on the part of all of us to have in reserve a spiritual force 
that will sustain us if we " suffer the loss of all things " human and temporal. 

III. A TODNG MAN CHOOsiNO THE EVIL PATH. Of Jehoahaz, as well as of jehoiakim 
»nd of Jehoiachin (see 2 Kings xxiii. 32, 37 ; xxiv. 9), it is recorded that " he did evil 
in the sight of the Lord." This is peculiarly sad as applioahle to Jehoahaz. Considering 
the gracious influences under which he spent his childhood and his boyhood at court, he 
ought to have done (as he must have known) better things. Instead of confirming and 
consolidating the glorious revolution effected by his father, he dissipated a]l good forces 
•nd broke up all good institutions. It is not in the power of most young men to work 
evil on such a scale ; but who shall measure the good left undone and the evil wrought 
when one young man deliberately chooses the evil part ? Within the compass of one 
human life large capacities are included ; how large only Omniscience can tell. Let the 
jroung man feel that not for his own sake only, but also for the sake of a very large 
number of other human souls, it is of the greatest consequence that he should walk 
in the ways of heavenly wisdom. — 0. 

Ver. 8 (with Jer. xiii. 18). — An wnlamented death. We learn more of this King of 
Judah in the prophetic writings of Jeremiah than in these brief annals. There we 
learn that his foreign policy was not less condemnable than his conduct of home affairs. 
When his treasury was low by reason of heavy payments to the foreign powers, he 
must needs build for himself a splendid and costly mansion (Jer. xxii. 14), and in 
order to do this he had to impress the labour of his subjects (Jer. xxii. 13) ; he thus 
excited a strong feeling of just resentment and natural disaffection among them, and 
brought down upon himself the severe rebuke of the prophet of the Lord, We also 
learn from Jeremiah that the king acted in daring defiance ot God's holy Law, presum- 
ing to cut in two and to burn in the fire the sacred roll (Jer. xxxvi. 23). By this 
wanton and impious action he still further drew down upon him the wrath of Jehovah, 
and by that act he terribly prejudiced and injured his country. How, then, can we 
wonder that the Chronicler writes, as in the text, of "the abominations which he 
did " ? and how can we wonder that his death excited so different, so opposite a feeling 
throughout all his kingdom to that which the death of his father called forth (ch. 
XXXV. 24, 25) ? We have in him a melancholy instance of an wnlamented death (Jer. 
xxii. 18). 

I. A liAMENTABLE ABSENCE OP BORROW. Let uo man Say lightly or cynically, " I 
don't want any tears shed over my grave ; I shall be quite content to die without any 
one sorrowing on my account." There is no true unselfishness, but much thoughtless- 
ness, in such a sentiment. Any minister of religion who has stood at the grave-side, 
and has been unable to ask for God's comfort to be granted to those who are left behind, 
will know how little to be desired is the absence of grief at the death of a man or woman. 
For what does it mean ? It means that God gave to such a man all the opportunities 
for winning human love, and that he did not gain it; for doing service, and that he left 
it undone ; for rendering help and blessing, and that he did not render it ; it means that 
a human life has been one long act of mean, barren, dreary selfishness, has been an 
utter failure, condemned of God and man 1 God forbid that any whom we love should 
die unlamented ; with none to say, " Ah, my brother I ah, my sister ! " 

II. A BORROW MUCH TO BE DESIRED. Truly there is sorrow enough and to spare in 
this world of sin and woe. But there is one sorrow that no wise or good man would 
wish for one moment to be spared. It is that which we feel when our kindred and 
our friends are taken from us by death. The hope we have concerning these may 
chasten and (in time) supersede it. But sorrow there must be and should be. And 
it is well with us and for us that the heart bleeds freely then. For such sorrow is : 
1. The tender tribute we pay to the worth of the departed, to their affection and to 
their goodness. 2. The proof that this hardening world has not petrified our spirit 
with its touch. 3. The share we have with all the best and truest of our race, enabling 
us to sympathize with them and to succour them. 4. The occasion which takes 
US often to the sympathizing Friend in elevating, chastening communion. 5. The 
nnloosening of the ties which must soon he unbound to set us free. — C. 

Ver. 17, Stooping. "No compassion on him that stooped for age." There are 



444 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHKOiNlCLES. [oh. xxxvi. 1— 23. 

many kinds of " stooping," some of which are to be commiserated, one of which is to 
be honoured and even envied and emulated. There is the stooping which is— 

I. A MISFORTUNE. That of bodily defurmity ; such as was suffered by the poor woman 
of whom we read that " she had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years, and was bound 
together, and could in no wise lift up herself" (Luke xiii. 11). We do not wonder that 
the Lord of love had compassion on her, and " loosed her from her infirmity." Perhapi 
few men and women are more to be pitied than the deformed. They see all others 
round them .standing, walking, running, erect in the full stature and freedom of man- 
hood, and they themselves are subjects of uncomeliness and inability. How cruelly 
unchristian to treat these with contempt, or even with disregard! How are we brnnd, 
•3 the followers of our Lord, to extend to these stooping ones our sympathy, our 
brotherliness, our honour! "Trust me no more, but trust me no less," our great 
popular novelist makes such an afflicred one say continually ; knd here, as often, the 
tecular writer is more Christian than he may know. 

II. A MARK OF TIME. This is the case of those named in the text ; they " stoop for 
age." The burdens of life have rested on their shoulders and have made them stoop. 
They have carried much, and they bend with the weight of the years they have spent. 
It is an honourable mark, like that of the " hoary head." Shall we pity them that 
stoop for age? Yes, if they have lived a life that has not been worthy, and move 
toward a future in which no star of hope is shining. No, if they are bent dowo 
with estimable and fruitful labour, with work that will leave many traces behind it — 
especially if the weight beneath which they stoop is the burden of others which they 
have generously and (perhaps) nobly borr e (Gral. vi. 2) ; no, if this mark of the passage 
of time only indicates that he who thus stoops is nearing the end of his earthly service, 
that he may lay it down and take up the better work in the brighter light and the 
broader sphere, where toil knows no fatigue, and, instead of wearing out the worker, 
continually multiplies his power. But let those who " stoop for age" remember that 
their work below is nearly finished ; that what else they would do here for the Master 
and for their kind they must do quickly; "so much the more (therefore) as they see 
tie riay approaching." 

III. A SBEiotrs DISCREDIT. There is: L The stoop of sertraM*^. This is discreditable. 
No one need be and no one should be servile. It is a mistake as well as a fault and 
a dishonour. Civility eveiy one appreciates ; respect, all who are worthy of it look for 
and like to receive; but cringing or servility is as unacceptable to him to whom it U 
shown as it is dishonourable and injurious to him by whom it is offered. 2. The stoop 
of immorality ; the lowering of the standard of morals in order to accommodate our- 
selves to circumstances, in order to be free to gain or to enjoy that which, in our truer 
and worthier moods, we could not touch. This stooping of the soul is pitiable indeed; 
it is also condemnable indeed. If we have yielded to it, let us be ashamed of it; let 
lis rise to our true height, let us stand erect again in the full stature of honourable and 
eniimable Christian manhood. Only then can we respect ourselves and enjoy the 
esteem of the pure and good. 

IV. The highest spiritual attainment. We know who it is that has stooped 
the furthest ; it is that Son of God who became the Son of man. It is he who, " though 
he was rich, for our sake became poor, that we through his poverty might he rich" 
(2 Cor. viii. 9 ; and see Phil. ii. 3 — 8). We never rise so high in the estimation of our 
Divine Lord as when we stoop thus. When we are thus reduced we are enlarged 
indeed. When we renounce our right, whether it be (1) of enjoyment, or (2) of 
adornment, or (3) of enrichment, in order to reach and rescue others, then do we rise 
toward the nobility of our great Exemplar, and then are we in the way of reaping a 
large reward. — 0. 

Vers. 18, 19. — Desecration and destruction. We look at — 

I. A BAD historical PACT. Perhaps a Jew would say, the saddest of all the fact* 
of history. This is the very climax of disasters — the great temple of Jehovah in Jeru- 
salem burnt down, and all its precious treasures and all its sacred vessels carried away 
into a heathen land, to be there profaned by irreverent and wanton hands! Could 
anything happen more painful to the feelings, more shocking to the imagination, of th« 
devout than that? All the work to which David consecrated his energies with such 



OH. XXXVI. 1—23.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 448 

rare affection and devotion, to which Solomon brought all his wisdom and for which 
he obtained the most advanced culture of his time, brought to desolation by the ruth- 
less hand of the heathen 1 That glorious, that sacred, that beloved building, meeting- 
place of God and man, where the people of God realized their highest privileges, and 
recognized their relation to their Redeemer and to one another, burned and desolated, the 
foot of the idolater intruding into its holiest sanctuary, and the hand of the spoiLei 
taking away its most sacred treasure 1 

II. Its baddest histobioai. analoqub. Once there lived upon the earth a Son of 
man who could say of himself without presumption, " In this place is One greater than 
the temple " (Matt. xii. 6) ; and he once spake of " the temple of his body " (John ii. 
21). And well, indeed, might the Son of God speak thus of himself; for was he not 
the manifestation of the Divine to the children of men, and did he not reveal the truth 
of God to mankind, and in his presence men drew near to God as they did not even in 
" the holy of holies "? We know how that living temple of God suflered from the rude 
violence of men, and at last "with wicked hands was slain." No such desecration 
took place when the temple was burnt and spoiled as was witnessed when Jesus Christ 
was crowned with thorns in the soldiers' hall, and was crucified at Calvary. ' 

III. Its lamentable illbstbation how. Where shall we find the visible, approach- 
able, appreciable manifestation of God now ? Where, but in the life and the character 
of good men ? W* are the temple of God when we are what our Divine Father created 
us to be ; such are we then, that, as men draw nigh to us and observe us and learn of 
us, they know God and learn of him. But how may (hi* temple.be desecrated and 
destroyed? 1. By the profanation of our powers and our affections. When our powers 
are expended on the furtherance of that which is evil and on the production of that 
which is baneful ; when our affections are wasted on those who are unworthy of our 
love ; when we prize and when we pursue that which is below our true aspiration, and 
which leads us downward and backward ; — then the temple of God is despoiled and 
desecrated. 2. By the guilty forfeiture of our life. What a destruction of the temple 
of God ia a guilty suicide 1 And they are many who take their own lives. It is not 
only those who shoot or hang themselves that commit suicide ; it is they who deli- 
berately and repeatedly do those things which they must know are destroying their 
vitality and taking away their life; these are men who put a brand to the temple 
which God as well as man has built. 

IV. Its excellent opposite. This is found in the reverence we pay to the human 
body as the temple of God ; the habit of regarding our bodily frame — and how much 
more our human spirit! — as a sacred thing, because it is (because we are) the very 
dwelUng-place of God (see 1 Cor. iL 9, 16, 17 ; vi. 19; 2 Cor. vi. 16; Eph. iL 20, 21; 
1 Pet. ii. 5). It is this elevated and ennobling thought which, more than any other, 
■tirs and strengthen us to " purify ourselves even as Christ the Lord is pure ; " to seek, 
by earnest effort and frequent prayer, for the utmost attainable sanctity of spirit and 
of life.— 0. 

Ver. 20. — Exile. " And them . . . carried he away to Babylon ; where they were 
servants [slaves] to him and his aons." The captivity of the Jews in Babylon may b« 
regarded in three lights. 

I. As A PENALTY. It Undoubtedly was that ; nothing can be clearer than that they 
were permitted to be " the prey to the teeth " of the enemy because of their sins. The 
very next verse (21) intimates that it was disobedience to the Law of God that resulted 
in the denudation of the land. And the truth that national calamity is the conse- 
quence of national transgression is "writ large" and plain on every page of this Book 
of Chronicles. He may run that reads it. Sin entaih penalty. The truth is written 
on the pages of national and individual history as well as on those of the Word of God. 
Every nation and every man may make up its (his) mind that, sooner or later, sin will 
entail defeat, humiliation, bondage. The penalty may take various forms, but penalty 
will most surely come. It may be obviously physical, or it may he principally spiritual ; 
it will almost certainly be both the one and the other. But no man can harden him- 
self against the Holy One and prosper. Whoso sinneth against him " wrongethhis own 
soul;" he deprives himself of inestimable good, and he makes himself the victim of 
deep and lasting evil. The children of Judah in Babylon had often occasion to say, 



446 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES, [ch. ixxvi. 1— 23L 

"We suffer because we sinned against the Lord." This is the explanation of the 
tribulation and distress, of the darkness and the death, of the human world. 

n. As A FUBQATION. God meant that Babylonian captivity to be a fiery trial which 
should bum up the large measure of " wood, hay, and stubble " in the character of the 
Jews that needed to be consumed. Strange it may seem to us that they should learn 
purity of creed among the heathen; that,- away from the city and the temple of God, 
they should acquire a taste and a love for his service and worship shown for many 
generations in their synagogues ; that in the midst of many superstitions they should 
come to hate all idolatrous forms and tendencies with the utmost abhorrence. But so 
it was. In the land of the stranger they lost their inclination to apostatize from God ; 
they were purged of their old folly and guilt. And what early instruction, what 
fuller privileges, what later experiences will not do, that Divine chastisement may 
accomplish. God passes us through the fiery trial to purge us of our dross, to con- 
sume our earthliness, our selfishness, our grossness, our unbelief. Add in some '' strange 
land," in some place of spiritual solitude, in conditions under which we are compelled 
to feel as we never felt before, to learn what we never knew before, to lay to heart 
what we .never realized before, we leave many things behind us which are weights and 
hindrances, we move on to that which is before us. 

m. A8 A. PICTURE. Of what is that exile a picture? Is it not of our spiritual 
distance from God ? To be living in sin, in a state in which we are not reconciled unto 
God, — is not this the exile of the soul ? For what does it mean ? 1. It is distance 
from Ood. It is to be a long way, an increasing distance, flrom him, from his favour, 
from his likenes^, from the desire to hold communion with him, and therefore from 
his felt presence. 2. It is captivity. It is to be in the hands of the enemy ; it is to be 
where silken cords at first, and at last iron chains, of nnholy habit hold us fast in a 
cruel and degrading bonda;;e ; where we are held fast to covetousness, or to vanity, or to 
procrastination, or even to some dishonouring vice. 3. It is unsatisfiedness or even 
misery of soul. In that " strange land " these exiles could not sing " the Lord's song ; " 
they "wept when they remembered Zion." Spiritual exile is joylessness of soul ; unre- 
conciled to him, there can be no "joy and rejoicing in him" or in his holy service. 
But let us bless God that away in this saddest exile we have not to wait until an 
appointed term is fulfilled, or until some Cyrus issues a proclamation (ver. 22); we 
may hear, if we will listen, the voice of One who does indeed rule over " all the king- 
doms of the earth " (ver. 23), who is ever saying to us, " Eeturn unto me, and I wUl 
return unto you." We may hear the blessed words of him who never ceases to address 
the generations of men, saying, " Come unto me, and I will give you rest." We may 
learn of that Divine Teacher that whoever comes back from the " far country " of sin, 
and seeks the heavenly Father's mercy, shall find the most cordial welcome he could 
hope to meet, and be takeu back at once to aU the love and to all the fireedom of the 
Father's home. — 0. 

Vers. 1 — 4. — Jehoahaz ; or, three months of royalty. I. Elected by the people of 
THE LAKS. (Ver. 1.) 1. In his father's stead. When Necho had defeated Josiah, 
instead of turning back to seize Jerusalem, which was virtually in his power, he pushed 
forward on his first intended march towards the Euphrates. Accordingly, on Josiah's 
death, Josiah's second son, Shallum, "He who shall be requited" (Jer. xiii. ll)-^a 
name of evil omen (2 Kings xv. 13) — was called to the throne under the name Jehoahaz, 
" He whom Jehovah sustains." Like his predecessor of the same name, Ahaz the son 
of Jotham (ch. xxviii. 1), he failed to follow in the steps of his pious father, and rather, 
like the earlier untheocratic kings, surrendered himself to the practice of idolatry under 
the guidance of the heathen party in the state (2 Kings xxiii. 32). According to 
JosephuB, he was " an impious man, and impure in his course of life " (* Ant.,' z. 5. 2). 
Most likely it was he whom Ezekiel described as " a young lion that learned to catch 
the prey and devoured men, but, as soon as the nations heard of him, he was taken in 
their pit, and brought with hooks into the land of Egypt " (xiz. 3, 4). 2. Over his 
Mer broths. As Eliakim was twenty-five years when he began to reign (ver, 6), it is 
obvious he was older than Shallum, who must, therefore, have been elevated to the 
throne by the voice of the people. As Shallum was not the legitimate heir, he was 
anointed (2 Kings xxiiL 30) — a custom usual in the case of founders of new dynasties 



iiH. xxxvi. 1—23.] THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES. 441 

(2 Kings ix. 3). He may have been preferred to his brother Eliakim on account of 
his ferocious character and supposed warlike qualities (Keil), or because Eliakim was 
at the time beyond their reach, having probably taken part in the battle of Megiddo 
and beun made a prisoner (Bawlinson). 

II. Deposed by the Kino op Egypt. (Ver. 3.) 1. After a short reign. Only 
three brief months was he allowed to retain the regal dignity. The other Shallum's 
time of glory was still shorter. Sic transit gloria mundi. 2. At the request of his 
brother. This, at least, is not improbable. As Necho was not far distant, viz. at 
Biblath, in the land of Hamath (2 Kings xxiii. 33), the party favourable to Eliakim, 
the legitimate heir, may have craved his help against the usurper. 3. By means of 
treachery. The language of Bzekiel (xix. 3, 4) seems to imply that he was caught 
by guile, entrapped by stratagem. That Necho actually returned from Eiblah with 
part of his forces, besieged and captured Jerusalem (Keil), is doubtful, and is not 
required by the language of the Chronicler (ver. 3). It is more likely that Jehoahaz was 
either expressly summoned by Necho (Josephus), or treacherously enticed into visiting 
the camp at Biblah (Ewald), where he was thrown into chains and so deposed. 4. With 
the imposition of a fine upon the land. " A hundred talents of silver," equivalent to 
£34,200, and " a talent of gold," equivalent to £5475, were exacted in tribute, and as a 
pledge of fealty to Egypt. 

III. Succeeded by his father's son. (Ver. 4.) 1. Whose right was vindicated. 
The throne belonged to him by right of primogeniture. 2. Whose name was changed. 
Called Eliakim, " Whom God establishes," he was designated, on acceding to the king- 
dom, Jehoiakim, " Jehovah has set up." 3. Whose throne was secured. The usurper 
being deported to Egypt, where he died (2 Kings xxiii. 34), removed the likelihood at 
least of civil strife. 

IV. Lamented by a prophet op Jehovah. Jeremiah (xxii. 10 — 12) probably 
only gave expression to the feelings of regard cherished by Jehoahaz's subjects, who 
mourned : 1. For their own disappointed hopes. During his short reign he had pleased 
the people, caught the popular imagination, and excited in them .expectations of being 
able to revive the faded glories and upraise the fallen fortunes of Judsea. But now 
these anticipations were scattered to the winds. 2. For his melancholy fate. This 
seemed worse than what had threatened to befall Hezekiah (2 Kings ix. 1 ; Isa. xxxviii. 
10) — to be out off in the middle of his days ; worse even than what had overtaken his 
illustrious father — death upon the battle-field (ch. xxxv. 23, 24). No king of Judah 
had before been carried off into hopeless exile. Manasseh had, indeed, been deported 
to Babylon (ch. xxxiii. 11), but had afterwards been restored to his crown and kingdom 
(ch. xxxiii. 20). In the case of Jehoahaz no such alleviation of his misery could be 
looked for. Jehovah's word, through Jeremiah, was the death-stroke to any such 
expectation : " He shall die in the place whither they have led him captive, and shall 
see this land no more." 

Learn : 1. The strange vicissitudes of mortal life. 2. The miseries of many kings — 
a check to ambition. 3. The certainty of God's Word. — W. 

Vers. 5 — 8. — The fortunes of Jehoiakim. I. A new king upon the throne op 
Judah. (Ver. 5.) 1. His designation. Eliakim, " Whom God establishes," changed 
into Jehoiakim, "Jehovah basset up;" not by himself (Obey ne, ' Jeremiah : his Life 
and Times,' p. 142), thoi^h it would almost seem as if Uzziah had adopted that name 
instead of Azariah on acceding to the crown (ch. xxvi. 1), and Pul had assumed the 
title Tiglath-Pileser, '• Adar is my confidence," on succeeding Shalmaneser of Assyria 
(Sayce, ' Fresh Light,' etc., p. 126) j but by Necho II. (ver. 4 ; 2 Kings xxiii. 34), as 
Mattaniah's name was changed into Zedekiah by Nebuchadnezzar (2 Kings xxiv. 17) ; 
which statements may be harmonized by supposing that " Necho and Nebuchacinezzar 
treated the vassal kings appointed by them not altogether as slaves, but permitted 
them to choose themselves the new names, which they only confirmed in token of iheir 
supremacy" (Keil). 2. His lineage. The son of Josiah and of Zebudah, the daughter 
of Pedaiah of Kumah, supposed to be identical with Arumah, near Shechem (2 Kings 
xxiii. 36). Jehoahaz, whom he succeeded, was his younger brother by a different 
mothsr, Hamutal, the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah (2 Kings xxiii. 31). 3. Hit 
acceisum. (1) As to time, when he was twenty-five years of age, which shows he 



448 THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHEONIGLES. [oh. xxxvi. 1—23. 

must have been born in his father's fourteenth year. (2) As to means, by the help ol 
Necho II., who deposed his usurping brother (ver. 3), partly perhaps because he was a 
usurper, but partly also, it may be assumed, because the people had elected that brother 
without having first obtained Necho's consent. (3) As to title, he was Josiah's eldest 
son, and therefore the crown prince and legal heir to the throne. 4. His character. 
Bad ; modelled upon that of Ahab rather than of Josiah (Jer. xxii. 15, reading of two 
Septuagint manuscripts, adopted by Cheyrie). (1) Idolatrous: "He did that which 
was evil in the sight of the Lord", (ver. 5), as his half-brother had done (2 Einga 
ixiii. 32). " He devoted himself with his whole soul to the heathen party, reintroduced 
all the foreign rites formerly extirpated by Josiah, and added the Egyptian to their 
number " (Ewald), of which the amplest proof appears in the prophets (Jer. vii. 9, etc. ; 
xvii. 2; xix. 4, 5; Ezek. viii. 9 — 17). (2) Violent; in this respect like his brother, 
compared to a young lion who learnt to catch the prey and devoured men (Ezek. xix. 
6, 6 ; of. Jer. xxii. 17) ; the worst examples of his violence being his murder of Urijah 
the prophet, whom he fetched out of Egypt and slew (Jer. xxvi. 22), and his burning 
of Jeremiah's roll, accompanied with an order to arrest the prophet (Jer. xxxvi. 23, 26). 
(3) Luxurious ; he strove to excel in cedar, by building for himself a costly palace of 
ample proportions, with spacious chambers and large windows, ceiled with cedar, and 
painted with vermilion (Jer. xxii. 14, 15). " At another time certainly no one could 
have blamed Jehoiakim and his nobles for being discontented with the narrow, ill- 
lighted chambeis of Syrian houses; but was this the moment for beautifying Jerusalem 
when the land was still groaning under Necho's war-fine ? " (Cheyne, ' Jeremiah : his 
Life and Times,' p. 141). (4) Exacting ; grinding the faces of his people with severe 
taxation to pay the tribute to Pharaoh (2 Kings xxiii. 33), and cheating of their 
hard-earned wages the very labourers who built his palace (Jer. xxii. 13). (5) Licen- 
tious ; abandoning himself to lewdness (Ezek. xix. 7, margin ; 1 Esdr. i. 42). In short, 
" he remained fixed in the recollections of his countrymen as the last example of those 
cruel, selfish, luxurious princes, the natural product of Oriental monarchies, the disgrace 
of the monarchy of David " (Stanley). 5. His reign. Eleven years. Too long for any 
good it wrought. Judah could hardly have fared worse, had he been uncrowned after 
three months, as his brother had been. 6. His death. Accounts vary. (l)TheOhronioler 
docs not make it clear whether he was carried to Babylon or not. If he was (Dan. i. 2 ; 
1 Esdr. i. 40, LXX.), he was probably, like Manasseh (ch. xxxiii. 13), permitted after a 
time to return to his own land (Keil, Bertheau, Jamieson), since (2) aocoiding to 2 Kings 
(xxiv. 6), JehoiMkim " slept with his fathers," and, according to the LXX., " was burieid 
in the garden of Uzzah." The addendum of the LXX. is obviously non-authentic, 
and the statement of Scripture seems contradicted by (3) passages in Jeremiah, which 
Bay that Jehoiakim should be " buried with the burial of an ass, drawn and cast forth 
beyond the gates of Jerusalem" (xxii. 19), and that his dead body should be "cast 
out in the day to the heat, and in the night to the frost" (xxxvi. 30). The reconcilia- 
tion, however, of the seeming discrepancy is easy. He may have been slain by the 
hand of an assassin, and his dead body thereupon cast out unburied (Cheyne) ; or 
" he may have perished in a battle with some one of the irregular marauding bands 
who, according to 2 Kings xxiv. 2, came against him " (Keil, Bahr), and his corpse 
been left to rot upon the battle-field ; or, after being first executed by Nebuchadnezzar 
and buried with the burial of an ass, his bones may have been collected and interred in 
the sepulchre of Manasseh (Rawlinson). 

II. A NEW ENEMY AT THE GATE OF Jerusalem. (Ver. 6.) 1. His person. Nebuchad- 
nezzar, Nebuchadrezzar (Jer. xxi. 2), Nabuchodonosor (LXX.), in the inscriptions 
Nabu-kudurri-usur, meaning " Nebo protect the crown." 2. His descent. A son of 
Nabopolassar, a general of Sarak, the last King of Nineveh (Ewald), perhaps the 
viceroy of Babylon (Cheyne). On the fall of Nineveh he founded the new Babylonian 
empire (b.o. 625 — 610). 3. His title. King of Babylon. Hitherto the enemies of Jeru- 
salem and Judah had been kings of Egypt (ch. xii. 2 ; xxxvi. 3) or of Assyria (ch. 
xxviii. 20; xxxii. 1,2); now it is a King of Babylon. According to the canon of 
Ptolemy, Nebuchadnezzar ascended the throne in b.o. 604; according to Berosus, while 
crown prince he was, in b.o. 605, despatched by his father " to crush a revolt of the 
western provinces," in which he was entirely successful, having conquered Syria ana 
Phoenicia as well as Egypt. 4. His invasion. According to Daniel, this occurred in 



OH. XXXVI. 1—28.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 449 

Jehoiakim'a third year (Dan. i. 1), the year before Nebuchadnezzar defeated Necho at 
Carchemish (Jer. xxv. 1 ; xlvi. 2), t.e. b.o. 606. The probability is that, either before 
or immediately after defeating Necho, he proceeded to Jerusalem and received the sub- 
mission of Jehoiakim, who had up till that time been Necho'a vassal. In order to 
•eoure this transference of Jehoiakim's allegiance, he appears to have both taken the 
city and put its sovereign in chains, as if, should he prove refractory, to deport him to 
Babylon, but to have departed from this design on obtaining promise of Jehoiakim's 
fealty. This, however, Jehoiakim only kept for three years (2 Kings xxiv. 1), at the 
end of which he rebelled. Nebuchadnezzar, being occupied with affairs in Babylon, 
having acceded to the throne only two years prior to Jehoiakim's revolt, despatched 
•gainst the rebel several detachments of troops, " bands of Chaldeans," at the same 
time stirring up the Ammonites, Syrians, and Moabites to harass Judah (2 Kings 
xxiv. 2), but not himself returning to Jerusalem till five years later, in the reign of 
Jehoiaohin. 

III. A NEW SPOLIATION OF Jkhovah'b TEMPLE. (Ver. 7.) 1. Hie first plundering 
of the Mored edifice. (1) By whom? Shishak (Sheshonk) King of Egypt. (2) When? 
In the fifth year of Eehoboam, b.o. 971. (3) To what extent? Total: "He took 
away the treasures of the house of the Lord : he took all" (ch. xii. 9 ; 1 Kings xiv. 26). 
2. 2%e second plundering of the sacred edifice. (1) The despoiler. Ahaz King of 
Judah. (2) The time. b.o. 734, during the Syro-Ephraimitish invasion. (3) The 
reason. To purchase therewith the help of Tiglath-Pileser IL against Rezin of 
Damascus and Pekah of Samaria (ch. xxviii. 2i). 3. The third plundering of the 
sacred edifice. (1) The agent. Hezekiah, the son of Ahaz. (2) The act. He took 
" all the silver found in the house of the Lord . . . and the gold from the doors and 
pillars of the temple" (2 Kings xviii. 15, 16). (3) The object. To give to Sen- 
nacherib King of Assyria as tribute-money. (4) The date. When Sennacherib was 
encamped at Lachish, b.o. 701. 4. The fourth plundering of the sacred edifice. (1) 
The person. Nebuchadnezzar, called King of Babylon, though at the time only 
erown-prince. (2) The extent. Partial : " He carried off the vessels of the house of 
the Lord!." Jeremiah (xxvii. 18, 20) predicted that the vessels which had been left 
would one day be carried to Babylon, and would remain there until the return from 
captivity, when they should again be restored to their place in the temple (of. ver. 18 ; 
Dan. V. 2 ; Ezra i. 7). (3) The cause. To punish Judah as well as Jehoiakim, and 
to ensure their fealty. (4) The aggravation. The pillaged vessels were transported 
to Babylon and deposited in " his temple," or " treasure house of his god " (Dan. i. 2 ; 
1 Esdr. i. 41), rather than " his palace " (Bertheau). The inscriptions show that 
Marduk, or Merodach, was Nebuchadnezzar's patron divinity, that Nebuchadnezzar's 
temple was the temple of Merodach at Babylon, which he completely built and restored, 
and that Nebuchadnezzar himself was, according to his ideas, intensely religious, even 
calling himself " the heaven-adoring king " (' Records,' etc., v. 113, etc. ; vii. 75, etc.). 

Lessons. 1. The native corruption of the human heart, attested by the wicked 
characters of Josiah's sons. 2. The impossibility of going on in sin with impunity.— W. 

Vers. 9, 10. — Jehoiachin the wortMess. I. His cokonatioh. 1. His title to the 
throne. He was Jehoiakim's son, his mother having been Nehushta, " The Brazen," 
the daughter of Bl-nathan of Jerusalem (ver. 8 ; 2 Kings xxiv. 6, 8), one of the princes 
attached to Jehoiakim's court (Jer. xxvi. 22 ; xxxvi. 12, 25). 2. Ris regal designation. 
Jehoiachin, " Jehovah has established," perhaps expressive of the hopes with which 
he assumed the sceptre. His personal name appears to have been "Coniah" (Jer. 
xxii. 24, 28), or Jeconiah (1 Chron. iii. 16), also signifying «' Jehovah establishes." 3. 
His age at accession. Eight years (ver. 9), obviously a mistake for eighteen (2 Kings 
xxiv. 8) since he had wives (2 Kings xxiv. 15), and in Jeremiah is represented as a 
man,* while, if Ezekiel (xix. 5—9) refers to him rather than Jehoiakim, the language in 
ver. 7 is hardly suitable as applied to an infant or child of eight. 4. His continuance 
upon the throne. Three months and ten Hays — ten days longer than his uncle Jehoahas 
(ver. 2), and "just as long as Napoleon's after his landing in March, 1815 " (Cheyne). 
Another illustration of short-lived glory. Vanitas vanitatumi 

II. His chabactbb. 1. As a man. He was obviously no better than his fother, in 
whose footsteps he walked. His father's wickedness allured more than his father's evil 

n. OHBONIOLES. 2 O 



450 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [oh. xxxvi. 1- 23. 

fortunes repelled him. Jehovah's withering scorn of Coniah as " a despised and broken 
pot," "a vessel wherein is no pleasure" (Jer. xxii. 28; cf. xlviii. 38), significantly 
intimates the esteem in which he was held by him who tries the hearts and reins alike 
of kings and common men ; while the relentless doom pronounced upon " this man " 
and "bis seed" was a clear certification that the stock from which he sprang was 
incurably diseased, that the taint of vileness in the family was ineradicable, that he 
and his descendants were only fit to be cast out and trodden in the mire (Matt. v. 13 ; 
Luke ziv. 34). 2. As a king. " He did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord " 
(ver. 9)i He had no power, even had he possessed the inclination, to arrest the down- 
ward progress of his nation. By personal preference as well as by official position ha 
was bound neck and heels to the heathen party to which his mother Nehushta belonged, 
•nd which sought neither the prosperity nor the safety of their land and kingdom in 
maintaining the pure worship of Jehovah, but in serving Canaanitish, Phcenician, 
Egyptian, Assyrian, or Babylonian idols, whichever should at any time be thought 
most likely to serve their turn. 

III. His oaptivitt. 1. 3%« reason. Not stated by either the Chronicler or the 
author of Kings, this may have been suspicion of Jehoiachin's fidelity (Bawlinson, 
' Kings of Israel and Judah/ p. 231), or knowledge of Egyptian troops advancing to 
the aid of Jerusalem (Cbeyne, ' Jeremiah : his Life and Times,' p. 162). 2. TTie tim». 
At the return of the year (ver. 10), i.e. in springtime, when kings were accustomed to 
go forth to battle (2 Sam. xi. 1). The year was the eighth of Nebuchadnezzar's reign 
(2 Kings xxiv. 12), or b.o. 597, 3. The manner. (2 Kings xxiv. 10—15.) (1) 
Nebuchadnezzar despatched his generals to besiege Jerusalem. (2) Afterwards 
Nebuchadnezzar himself appeared in front of the city. (3) Jehoiachin, accompanied 
by his mother, his wives, his servants, his princes, his officers, went out to make sub- 
mission and surrender the city to Nebuchadnezzar, in the hope doubtless of being 
permitted, like Jehoiakim, to retain his kingdom as a vassal of Babylon. This, how- 
ever, was not accorded him. (4) Nebuchadnezzar made him prisoner and carried him 
off to Babylon, as Jeremiah (xxii. 25) had some time before predicted he would do. (5) 
In addition, Nebuchadnezzar carried off his mother, his wives, his officers, the chief 
men of the land, amongst whom was Ezekiel (i. 1, 2), even ten thousand captives, with 
seven thousand men of might, and a thousand craftsmen and smiths — " a sad mitigation 
of his lot indeed, but one for which Jehoahaz might have envied him. All that was 
best and worthiest in the old coital city went with Jehoiachin to Babylon " (Cheyne, 
'Jeremiah,' etc., p. 162). (6) Only the poorest sort of people were left in the land, 
with t)ie king's uncle Mattanias, or Zedekiah, as kiog. (7) The temple and palace 
were on this occasion completely plundered. " The goodly vessels of the house of the 
Lord " (ver. 10), i.e. the larger articles — the smaller ones having been previously taken 
(ver. 7)— were transported to Babylon. 4. The duration. Thirty-seven years. Then, 
on the twenty-seventh day of the twelfth month of the year, Evil-Merodach (in the 
inscriptions Atfil-Marduk, signifying " Man of Marduk " or " Merodach "), on coming 
to the throne after Nebuchadnezzar's death, lifted up his head out of prison (2 Kings 
XIV. 27—30). 

Learn : 1. The incurable character of sin, at least by any merely human means. 2. 
The swiftoess in some cases of Divine retribution. 3. The misery entailed by sin upon 
evil-doers and all connected with them. 4. The evil done to religion by the wicked- 
ness of those who profess and should adorn it. — W. 

Vers. 11 — 21. — Zedekiah ; or, the fali of Jvdah. I. An ixauplk or insenbatb 
WICKEDNESS. (Vers. 11 — 16.) 1. On the part of the king. Seemingly the third 
(1 Chron. iiL 16), but in reality the fourth, son of Josiah (cf. 2 Kings zxiii. 31, 36), 
•nd the full brother of Jehoahaz, or Shallum (2 Kings xziii. 31 ; xxiv. 18), but the 
half-brother of Jehoiakim (2 Kings xxiii. 86), Mattanias, or " Jehovah's gUt," as he 
was originally called, ascended the throne of Judah in his twenty-first year, by the 
favour of Nebuchadnezzar his overlord (ver. 10). With his superior's consent, like 
Jehoiakim, he adopted of his own accord, or had chosen for him by others (Oheyne), • 
special throne-name. Zedekiah, Zidkiah, meaning " Jehovah is righteous," or " Justice 
of Jehovah," had been the name of a former sovereign cf Asoalon, whom Sennacherib 
had subdued (Schrader, ' Die Keilinschriften,' p. 291) ; and whatever may have been 



OH. XXXVI. 1—23.J THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHEONIOLES. 451 

the object of Mattanias or his princes in selecting this as the designation of Judah's last 
king, it is hardly possible not to be struck with its singular propriety. To a people 
who were frequently instructed by "signs" it was a double symbol — first by way of 
contrast of the utter corruption of the nation, both prince and people ; and tecond br 
way of prediction of coming doom for the kingdom. So far as the king was concerne<C 
it was a grim satire on holy things to designate a creature like him Zedekiah, If 
his person and character were remarkable for anything, it was for the absence of right- 
eousness. (1) His devotion to idols was intense. " He did evil in the sight of the 
Lord his God" (ver. 12), by adhering to the heathen worship of his predecessors 
(2 Kings zxiv. 19; Jer. lii. 2), (2) His unbelief was pronounced. He refused to 
believe Jeremiah the prophet speaking to him in Jehovah's name (Jer. xxxvii. 2). (3) 
His disobedience was flagrant. He rebelled against Nebuchadnezzar, who had made 
him swear (allegiance) by God (ver. 13 ; cf. 2 Kings xxiv. 20 ; Ezek. xvii. 13 — 19)— a 
wickedness for which Jehovah declared he should die in Babylon. The reason of this 
revolt was the accession of a new Pharaoh, Hophrah in Scripture (Jer. xliv. 30), in the 
hieroglyphic inscriptions Udhibri, oiiatppTj in the LXX., 'Airptris, or Apries, in Herodotus 
(ii. 161, 169 ; iv. 159). To him Zudekiah, against Jeremiah's advice, despatched 
ambassadors, hoping to obtain " horses and much people " (Ezek. xvii. 15). Nebuchad- 
nezzar at once took the field, uncertain whether to march against Egypt or Jerusalem. 
By means of divination he decided for Jerusalem (Ezek. xxi. 20 — 22). In the ninth year 
of Zedekiah's reign, on the tenth month, Nebuchadnezzar with his armies sat down 
before Jerusalem (2 Kings xxv. 1). Hearing, however, of Fharaoh-Hophra's approach, 
he raised the siege (Jer. xxxvii. 5). This having excited false hopes as to Nebuchad- 
nezzar's final withdrawal from the city (Ezek. xvii. 17), Jeremiah warned king and 
people that he would soon return (Jer. xxxvii. 8 — 10). This warning Zedekiah would 
not hear (ch. xxxvi. 16). 2. On the part of the people. Hardly second to their 
monarch were the priests, the princes, and the people. (1) Their passion for idolatry 
was as great : " They trespassed very greatly after all the abominations of the heathen" 
(ver. 14). "Like priest, like people" — a proverb applicable to kings and subjects, 
masters and servants, as well as ecclesiastics and worshippers. (2) Their insolenow 
was as high : " They polluted the house of the Lord which he had hallowed in Jeru* 
salem " (ver. 14). " Jeremiah (xxiii. 11) alludes to practices specially inconsistent 
with the holy place, and one of the Jewish captives explains what they were (Ezek. 
viii. 11 — 17). There was (a) an image of Asherah ; (&) totemistio animal-emblems on 
the wall of a temple-chamber ; (c) weeping for ' Tammuz yearly wounded ; ' (4) sun- 
worship and the rite of holding up ' the twig' to the nose" (Cheyne, ' Jeremiah : his 
Life,' etc., pp. 166, 167). (3) Their unbelief was as daring. Though Jehovah had 
" sent to them by his messengers, rising up early and sending them," yet had they 
"mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words, and scoffed at his prophets" 
(vers. 15, 16) — a degree of criminality beyond that of which the Israelites had been 
guilty when they laughed Hezekiah's messengers to scorn (ch. xxx. 10), but not above 
that which hearers of the gospel may incur (Acts iL 13 ; xvii. 32 ; Heb. x. 29 ; 2 Pet. 
ii. 3, 4; JudelS). 

IL An instanob of Divine betbibution. (Vers. 17 — 21.) The moral and 
spiritual corruption of the community in Zedekiah's time was so great that nothing 
remained but to pour out upon them the vials of long-threatened wrath (Deut. xxviii. 
21, 36, 52 ; xxxi. 16—21 ; Jer. v. 19 ; xxxii. 28 — 36). In the expressive language of 
the Chronicler, " there was no remedy," " no healing," more ; nothing but fire and sword. 
After defeating Pharaoh-Hophra, or causing him to retreat, Nebuchadnezzar returned 
to his head-quarters at Biblab, on the east bank of the Orontes, thirty-five miles north- 
east of Baalbec, and despatched his captains, Nergal-sharezer, Samgar-nebo, 8fti> 
sechim, Bab-saris, Bab-mag, and others to resume the siege of Jerusalem, which, 
however, triumphantly withstood their assaults until the beginning of the eleventh 
year, when the supply of provisions began to fail (Jer. lii. 6). On the ninth day of 
the fourth month, i.e. in July, B.c. 586, " there was no bread for the people of the land." 
The starving defenders of the city could no longer hold out. The horrors of the situa- 
tion may be gathered from Lam. ii. 19; iv. 3 — 10; Ezek. v. 10; Baruch iL 3. The 
besiegers eventually effected a breach in the north wall, and poured in like a destroying 
flood. Then ensued : 1. Merciless carriage. The Chaldean soldiers butchered all and 



452 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLES, [ch. xxxvi. 1— 2*. 

sundry, young and old, lad aad maiden, not even sparing suoh as had taken refuge in 
the temple (ver. 17). The massacre was wholesale, truculent, and pitiless, eclipsed in 
horror only by that which took place when Jerusalem was captured by Titus (Josephus, 
' Wars,' vi. 9. 4). 2. Ruthless sacrilege. They completely despoiled the temple of its 
sacred vessels, great and small, as well as pillaged the royal palaces, carrying off their 
treasures (ver. 18). Among the articles removed from the temple were the brazen and 
golden utensils of service, the two pillars, the brazen sea, and the yases which Solomon 
had made (2 Kings xxv. 13—17 ; Jer. lii. 17 — 23). 3. Wkolesdle destruction. " They 
burnt the house of God, and brake down the wall of Jerusalem, and burnt all the 
palaces " (ver. 19) ; which was pure vandalism. This appears to have been done not 
on the night of the city's capture (tenth day of tenth month), but Beven months after, 
on the tenth day of the fifth month, i.e. in February, B.c. 587 (Jer. lii. 12), and to have 
been carried out by one of Nebuchadnezzar's generals, Nebuzar-adan, captain of the 
king's guards, or " chief of the executioners " (cf. Gen. xzziz. 1), despatched from Biblah 
for the purpose. What happened in the interval is narrated in 2 Kings (xxv. 4 — 7) 
and Jeremiah (lii. 7 — 11), viz. the capture, near Jericho, of Zedekiah with bis court 
and his forces, who had escaped when the city was taken, and their journey north to 
Eiblah, the head-quarters of Nebuchadnezzar, where, after judgment held (2 Kings 
XXV. 6), Zedekiah's sons and the princes of Judah were slain, and Zedekiah himself 
blinded according to an inhuman practice of the time (see ' Records,' etc., iii. 50, 1. 117, 
" Of many soldiers I destroyed the eyes ; " and comp. Herod., viL 18), and cast into 
bonds preparatory to being deported to Babylon. In Babylon he was cast into prison 
until the day of his death (Jer. lii. 11) ; according to tradition, his work in prison was 
that of grinding in a mill like an ordinary slave (Ewald, 'History of Israel,' iv. 
273, note 5). 4. Pitiless expatriation. Those that had escaped the sword were 
driven off, like gangs of slaves, to become exiles in a strange land, and servants to the 
kings of Babylon, " until the land had enjoyed her sabbaths," viz. for three score and 
ten years (vers. 20, 21). Such transplantations of conquered populations were common 
in the ancient Orient. "Sargon transported the Samaritans to Gnzan and Media; 
Sennacherib carried off two hundred thousand Jews from Judeea ; Esarhaddon placed 
Elamites, Susianians, and Babylonians in Samaria. Darius Hystaspis brought the 
nation of the Fasonians from Europe into Asia Minor, removed the Barcaeans to 
Bactria, and the Eretrians to Ardericca near Susa" (Bawlinson, ' Egypt and Babylon,' 
, pp. 45, 46). 

Lessons. 1. The incorrigible character of some sinners. 2. The offensiveness in 
God's sight of pride and hardness of heart. 3. The heinousness of oath-breaking and 
of unjustifiable rebellion. 4. The hopelessness of reformation in a city or a land when 
all classes are in love with wicked ways. 5. The infinite compassion of God towards 
the worst of men. 6. The certainty that mercy despised will turn into wrath displayed. 
7. The pitiless character of Heaven's judgments upon them for whom there is no 
remedy. 8. The indifference God shows towards the external symbols of religion when 
the inner spirit is wanting. 9. The impossibility of God's Word failing. — W. 

Vers. 22, 23. — Cyrus of Persia ; or, the return of the exiles. I. The great deliverbr. 
(Ver. 22.) 1. Foretold in Scripture. (1) That his name should be Cyrus. (2) That 
he should come from the East. (3) That he should be a mighty conqueror, subduing 
nations and dethroning kings. (4) That he should overthrow Babylon, and become 
the sovereign of the empire of that .name. (5) That he should liberate the captive 
Jews in that city and empire. (6) That he should issue orders or grant permission 
for the rebuilding of both the city and the temple of Jerusalem. (7) That in doing 
all this he should act (whether consciously or unconsciously is not stated) nnder the 
immediate guidance and direct superintendence of Jehovah (Isa. xli. 2 ; xliv. 28 ; xlv. 
1 — 5 ; xlvL 11 ; xlviii. 14, 16). 2. Raised up in history. (1) He was called Cyrus, 
in Hebrew Coresh (ver. 22; Ezra i. 1), in the inscriptions E^u/r'us and Ku-ra-ai 
(Schrader, ' Die Keilinschriften,' p. 372). (2) He came from the East, being named in 
sacred history (ver. 22 ; Ezra i. 1 ; iv. 3 ; Dan. vi. 28), as well as in profane (Herod., 
ix. 122 ; Xen., ' Cyr.,' viii. ii. 7), King of Persia, though the monuments now show that he 
was originally King of Elam, on the east of Persia (Sayce, ' Fresh Light,' etc., pp. 168, 
•tc.). (3) First he conquered Astyages the Median, who had marched against him in the 



OM. XXXVI. 1—23.] THE SECOND BOOK OP THE CHRONICLES. 453 

sixth year of Nabonidus King of Babylon. Next, before tlie ninth year of Nabonidus, 
he must have acquired the sovereignty of Persia, as in that year he calls himself " King 
of Persia." (4) In the month Nisan (March), of the ninth year of Nabonidus, Cyrus 
marched his troops into Acoad, or Northern Babylonia. In the tenth year Erech was 
captured. In the eleventh the situation remained in ttatu quo. In the seventeenth 
year, in the month of Tammuz (July), Cyrus encountered the army of Accad in the 
town of Eutum, upon the river Nizallat, when the soldiers of Nabonidus broke into 
revolt. On the fourteenth day the garrison of Sippara surrendered, while Nabonidus 
fled. On the sixteenth the governor of Gutium (Kurdistan) marched the troops of 
Cyrus into Babylon without requiring to strike a blow. Nabonidus, subsequently 
captured, was cast into fetters in Babylon. Whether the siege of Babylon described 
by Herodotus (iiL 158, 159) was this of Cyrus (Budge), or a later one of Dariui 
Eystaspis (Sayce), need not here be determined ; it is sufficient to note that after this 
Cyrus assumed the title " King of Babylon " (Ezra v. 13) in addition to his other titles — 
" King of Persia and King of Elam." (5) The clay cylinder of Cyrus contains " a refer- 
ence to the restoration of the Babylonian captives to their several homes. The expe- 
rience of Cyrus had taught him that the old Assyrian and Babylonian system of 
transporting conquered nations was an error, and did but introduce a dangerously dis- 
affdcted people into the country to which they had been brought" (Sayce, ibid.). 
(6) " Those who chose to return to Jerusalem were allowed to do so, and there rebuild 
• fortress, which Cyrus considered would be useful to him as a check upon Egypt" 
(Sayce). (7) In the Cyrus cylinder it is said, " Merodach sought out a king for himself 
who would perform according to the heart's desire of the god whatever was entrusted 
to him. He proclaimed the renown of Cyrus the King of Anzan [Elam, Sayce ; Persia, 
Budge] throughout the length and breadth of the land. . . . Merodach, the great lord, 
directed his (Cyrus's) hand and heart" (Budge, 'Babylonian Life,' etc., pp. 80, 81). 

11. The CHEERING PROCLAMATION. (Ver. 23.) 1. Its date. The first year of Cyrus, 
i.e. the first year of his reign as King of Babylon, i.e. b.c. 538 (Canon of Ptolemy). 

2. Its cause. The stirring up of his heart by Jehovah. Though the monuments have 
shown that Cyrus was not a monotheist, but a polytheist, they have also made it 
manifest that he considered himself as under the immediate guidance of Heaven in the 
taking of Babylon ; and hence, it may be assumed, also in the liberation of the captives. 
That he was powerfully persuaded of the propriety of such an action, and regarded his 
impulse in that direction as " from Heaven," is apparent. The sacred writer states 
that the true source of that inspiration was Jehovah. Cyrus believed it to be Merodach. 

3. Its design. To fulfil the Word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah (xxix. 10), 
that after seventy years the captives should be restored. This was Jehovah's design, 
not Cyrus's — concerning which see above. That the seventy years, io round numbers, 
were accomplished, can be seen from an easy calculation. Dating from B.C. 599, the 
year of Jehoiachin's captivity, and setting down the first year of Cyrus as b.o. 538, the 
interval is only sixty-one years ; but if the period of the exile be dated from the third 
(Dan. i. 1) or the fourth year of Jehoiakim (Jer. xxv. 1 — 12), i e. B.C. 606, then the 
interval from Jeremiah's prediction to Cyrus's proclamation will be sixty-eight years, 
or sixty-nine inclusive, which, with the months that elapsed before the first company 
of exiles settled in Palestine (Ezra iii. 1), will practically make seventy years. Or the 
prophetic year may be taken as consisting of 360 days ; in which case 360 x 70 = 25,200 
days = 69 years of 365 days. 4. Its form. (1) Vocal; being probably proclaimed by 
means of heralds (cf. ch. xxx. 5, 6). (2) Written ; being most likely set forth in two 
languages — Persian and Chalilee. 5. Its contents. (1) A devout acknowledgment of 
Heaven's grace. "All the kingdoms of the earth hath the Lord God of heaven given 
me " (ver. 23 ; Ezra i. 1), the term " Jehovah " being employed in the Hebrew copy 
instead of "Ormazd" in the Persian. Persian sovereigns were accustomed to speak of the 
Supreme Being as the God of heaven (Ezra vi. 9, 10 j vii. 12, 23), and to recognize their 
dependence on him for their earthly power, an inscription of Darius saying, " Then the 
land was mine, and the other lands which Ormazd has given into my hand. I con- 
quered them by the grace of Ormazd " (' Records,' etc., ix. 68). And the cylinder of 
Cyrus stating, " Cyrus King of Elam, he (Merodach) proclaimed by name for sove- 
reignty; all men everywhere commemorate his name" (Sayce, 'Fresh Light,' etc., 
p. 172). (2) A hearty submission to Divine will. " He hath charged me to build 



454 THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHRONICLKS. [tH. xxxvl 1—23. 



him an house in Jerusalem, which is in Judah." According to Josephus (' Ant.,' zi. L 
2), Cyrus learnt the Divine will concerning himself by readiag Isaiah's prophecy 
(xliv. 28) ; but as Cyrus, whether a polytheist (Sayce) or a monotheist (Budge), was 
extremely tolerant to all religions, and as on capturing Babylon he immediately pro- 
ceeded to restore the shrines of the Babylonian gods, he may have conceived himse^ as 
called upon by Jehovah to do the same thing for the Jews in Palestine. (3) An earnest 
inquiry after Jehovah's people. " Who is there among you of all his people? " The pro- 
clamation was not limited to the Judahites, but extended to all worshippers of Jehovah 
— to those who had been carried captive from both kingdoms. (4) A free permission 
to return to Jerusalem. "Let him go up." "Jerusalem was on a much higher level 
than Babylonia, and the travellers would consequently have to ascend considerably " 
('Pulpit Commentary on Ezra,' L 3). (5) A solemn benediction on those who 
availed themselves of his permission. " The Lord his God be with him." The expres- 
sion of this wish or prayer corresponded with the mild and benevolent character of 
Cyrus. 

Lessons. 1. The ability of God to fulfil his promises no less than his threatenings. 
2. The secret access which God has to the hearts of men — of kings no less than of 
common men. 3. The certainty that God can raise up at any moment a fitting instru- 
ment to do his wilL — W. 



EOMILETICAL INDEX 

to 

THE SECOND EOOK OF THE CHEONICLES. 



CHAPTER I. 

Each Highest Need of Life offers to 
torn into the First Accepted and 

Best Rewarded Prayer of Life ... 7 

A Bright Beginning ... ... 9 

The Ark and the Altar; Obedience 

and Sacrifice ... ... ... 10 

The Divine Responsiveness, etc. ... 10 

God's Offer to the Young ... ... 11 

From the Altar to the Throne ... 12 

The Beginning of a Reign ... ... 13 

A Toung King's Choice ... ... 14 

The Qlory of Solomon ... ... 16 

CHAPTER IL 

Those Methods of Religious Enterprise 
which go to ensure Success and to 

issue in Real Usefulness ... ... 22 

The Three Elements in Human Pur- 
pose ... ... ... ... 23 

Human Labour ... ... ... 21 

The Aoceptableness of the Imperfect 25 

God's Care for the Country... ... 26 

Lessons from the Labourers ... 26 

A Great Project: the Building of a 

Temple ... ... ... 27 

" A Wonderful Great House " ... 29 

The Two Hirams ... ... 30 

CHAPTER IIL 

The Preparation for the Building oi 

the Temple ... ... .•• 35 

Beginning to build ... ... 37 

tout Elements of Faithful Service ... 37 



Life at its Highest ... ... 38 

Out Strength and Beauty ... ... 39 

The Building of the Temple m. '10 

CHAPTER IV. 

The Altar, the Sea, the Light, and the 

Bread ... ... ... ... 45 

Acceptable Worship ... ... 47 

Lights in the World ... ... 48 

God's Bounty and our Response ... 18 
Completeness in Christian Service ... 49 
The Manufacture of the Temple Fur- 
niture ... ... ... ... 50 

An Ancient Manufactory ... m. 53 

CHAPTER V 

The First Worship in the Finished 

Temple ... ... ... 55 

Conclusion ... ... ... 55 

Dedication, Permitted and Desired ... 56 

Bringing in the Ark ... ... o7 

God's Glory in the Sanctuary : Church- 
opening Sermon ... ... 58 

The Dedication of the Temple: 1. The 

Bringing-in of the Ark ... ... 58 

CHAPTER VI. 

The Dedication, and Solomon's Prayer 64 

God, the Incomprehensible One ... 66 
The Worth of a Wish— the Estimate 

of Christ ... 67 

Spiritual Attitude „, ... 68 

God in the Sanctuary ... ... 69 

Divine Justioe ... «. •., 7t 



INDEX. 



IBEKB TAOK 

God and the Nation ,.. ... 70 

God and the Individual Soul ... 71 

Departure and Return ... ... 72 

The Dedication of the Temple : 2. 

Tilt! Address of Solomon ... 73 
The Dedication of the Temple : 3. 

The Consecration Pniyer ... 74 
** Will God in very Deed dwell with 

Men?" ... ... ... 76 

The Sevenfold Illustration ... ..■ 77 

A Prayer for the Church of God ... 81 

CHAPTER VII. 

The Testimony by Fire, and the Vouch- 
safed Glory of the Lord ... ... 85 

The Divine Approval ... ... 87 

Sacred Overflow ... ... ... 88 

Simshine ... ... ... 89 

The Temple, the Temple, and the 

Temples of the Lord ... ... 89 

The Divine Promise ... ... 90 

The Acceptance of Solomon's Prayer 91 

A Great Festival ... ... ... 93 

A Covenant concerning the Church of 

God ... ... ... ... 93 

CHAPTER VHL 

The Formative Influence of the Church 96 

■Wise Work ... ... ... 97 

Doubtful Marriage Alliance ... 98 

Purfecting the Sanctuary ... ... 99 

Solomon's Building Operations ... 99 

The Subjects of Solomon ... ... 101 

The Consort of a King ... ... 102 

The House of the Lord perfected ... 104 

The First Merchant-ships ... ... 105 

CHAPTER IX. 

A Study in the Matter of Fame ... UO 

" Solomon in all his Glory" ... 112 

The Unimaginable ... ... 113 

Gold and Silver ... ... ... 113 

Grandeur without Godliness ... 114 

Solomon's Queenly Visitor... ... 115 

The Glory of Solomou ... ... 117 

CHAPTER X. 

A Notable and very Mournful Instance 
of lacking Wisdom through not 

asking of God ... ... ... 123 



Two Young Men ... ... ... 124 

The Legacy of Brilliance, etc. ... 125 

Ignominy, its Source and its Avoid nee 126 

The Coronation of a King ... ... 127 

The Recall uf an Exile ... ... 128 

The Loss of a Kingdom ... ... 129 

CHAPTER XL 

The Discipline that resulted in Obe- 
dience, acoompauied with Right and 

Earnest Endeavour ... ... 134 

Fighting against iirethren... ... 135 

Wrought of God ... ... ... 136 

Fidelity to Conscience ... ... 137 

Spiritual Admixture ... ... 137 

A Warlike Expedition hindered ... 138 

The Strengthening of a Kingdom ... 139 

A Royal Polygamist ... ... 140 



CHAPTER XIL 

A Model Instance of Divine Goodness 
and Opportunity prolonged to One 
who annulled all, and vitiated every 
Highest Privilege vouchsafed to 
him, by the One Fact of his own 

Infidelity of Heart ... ... 144 

The Peril of Security ... ... 145 

Penulty, Penitence, and Forgiveness 146 

Servitude and Service ... ... 146 

The Apostasy of Rehoboam ... 147 

Shishak's Invasion ... ... 148 

Two Messages from Jehovah ... 149 

The First Sacking of Jerusalem ... 150 

Brazen Shields for Golden ... ... 151 

Good Things in Judah ... ... 151 

The Biography of Rehoboam ... 151 



CHAPTER XIII. 

A Royal and Manly Manifesto in the 

Eights of Godly Truth ... ... 154 

The Folly of Unnatural Severance, 

etc ... ... 156 

Four Reasons for Surrender ... 157 
Jeroboam : Career, Character, Reputa- 
tion ... ... ... ... 158 

Abijah : the Lessons of his Life ... 159 

The Successor of Rehoboam ... 160 

A Great War in a Short Reign ... 161 

The Career of Jeroboam ... ... 164 



INDEX. 



in 



OHAPTEB XIV. 

Tiiiin rAoi 

The Quiet of Ten Years ... ... 170 

The Human Trust and Prayer that 

herald Divine Victory ... ... 172 

" Kegt on every Side " ... ... 173 

Destructive Qodliness ... ... 173 

Constructive Godliness ... ... 174 

The Secret and the Spirit of True 

Defence ... ... ... 175 

Quiet in the Land ... ... 176 

An Alarming Invasion m« ». 177 



CHAPTER XV. 

The Hour of Happiness improved ... 184 

God's Presence and Departure ... 185 

Spiritual Strength a Sacred Obligation 185 

The Reward of Christian Work ... 186 
The Secret of Joy in the Service of 

Christ 187 

A Conqueror's Welcome ... ... 187 

Accient Coveaanters m. ... 190 



CHAPTER XVL 

The Disappointing Relapse of what 
had seemed Tried Worth, Know- 
ledge, and Proved Goodness ... 195 
Preferable Things... ... ... 196 

Divine Observation and Interposition 197 

Lessons from Last Years ... ... 198 

A King's (Asa's) Mistake ... ... 199 

The King and the Prophet... ... 'iOl 

The Eyes of the Lord ... ... 203 

The Career of Asa ^ ... 203 



CHAPTER XVH. 

The First Chapter of Jehoshaphat'e 

Career... ... ... ... 206 

Spiritnal Fortification ... ... 207 

The Wise Choice and the Happy 

Course ... ... ... 208 

A Strong because Instructed People... 209 

Willing Service 269 

The Accession of Jehoshaphat ... 210 

An Old Education Act ... ... 212 

The Greatness of Jehoshaphat ... 212 



CHAPTER XVm. 

THRHR PAQI 

The Second Chapter in Jehoshaphat?! 

Career... ... ... ... 217 

Temporal Advancement and Spiritual 

Decline 219 

Spiritual Unwariness ... ... 219 

Inquiring of the Lord ... ... 220 

Speaking for God... ... ... 221 

The True Lesson of Human Ignorance 222 

The False Steps of a Good King ... 223 
A Council of War: Jehoshaphat and 

Ahab among the Prophets ... 224 

Micaiah, the Son of Imlah — an Old 

Testament Hero ... ... 226 

The Battle of Ramoth — an Ill-fated 

Expedition ... ... ... 229 



CHAPTER XIX. 

The Third Chapter in Jehoshaphaf a 

Career... ... ... ... 232 

Friendship with Man and Faithfulness 

to God... ... ... ... 233 

A Royal Mission which is a Heavenly 

One ... 234 

Ennobling the Earthly, or making 

Sacred the Secular ... ... 235 

The Sovereign and the Seer ... 236 

A Royal Reformer ... ... 237 



CHAPTER XX. 

The Last Chapter in Jehoshaphat's 

Career... ... ... ... 241 

The Source of Safety in the Hour of 

Peril 242 

Friendship with God ... ... 243 

Befoje the Battle : Lessons ... 244 

At and after the Battle : Lessons ... 245 
An Alarm of War — an Invasion from 

the East ... ... ... 246 

The Prayer of Jehoshaphat „. 247 

A Victory without a Blow ... ... 249 

The Biography of Jehoshaphat ... 23] 



CHAPTER XXI. 

A Reign of Unmitigated Shame ... 255 

A Life spent in Undoing ... ... 256 

The Trouble that is Worse than Sorrow 257 

The Character of Jehoram ... ... 258 

The Letter of Elijah ... ... 260 



tr 



IKDEX. 



CHAPTEE XXn. 

rAoa 

A. Medley of the Memoranda of Evil- 
doing, its Coneeqaences, and its 
End ... ... ... ... 263 

A. Pitiable Prince ; or, an Unfoitunate 
Child of Fortune ... ... 264 

The Counsel that destroys, and that 
which aayes ... ... ... 265 

Our Friends and their Fate, eto. ... 266 

A Chapter of Tragedies ' ... ... 267 

The Bescue of Joash ... „. 270 



CHAPTER XXIIL 

The Time of Action, after Six Years' 

Waiting ... ... ... 273 

The Constituents of Success ... 271 

Bin surprised at its Failure ... 275 

The Basis of National Prosperity ... 276 

First Purity, then Peace ... ... 277 

The Coronation of Joaah ... ... 277 

The Fall of Athaliah ... ... 279 

The Close of a Bevolution ... ... 280 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

The Sad and Strange Unreliablenesi 

of Human Disposition and Life here 287 

Uoral Weakness ... ... ... 288 

Church Benovation ... ... 289 

A Noble Character and a Useful Life 290 

Sad Successive Stages ... ... 291 

The Early Years of Joash ... ... 291 

A Good Intention well carried out ... 292 
The Life, Death, Burial, and Epitaph 

of a Great Man ... ... 291 

The Downward Career of a King ... 295 
Divine Retributions ; or, the Predic- 
tions and Prayers of a Dying Man 

ooming True .m ... ». 297 



CHAPTER XXV. 

Another Type of Uncertain Charncter S02 

« Doing Right, but " ... ... 303 

Gold, and the Favour of God ... 301 

The Folly of Irreligion ... ... 301 

Human Presumption ... ... 805 

The Accession of Amaziah ... 306 

A Campaign against the Edomitcs ... 306 

The Declension of Amaziah ... 809 



THEUB WAM* 

The Battle of Beth-ihemeih; or, the 

Downfall of a Boaster .„ ... 310 

The Last of Amariah n. — 312 

CHAPTER XXVt 

The Reign of Fifty-two Years spoiled 

in One Hour ... ... ... 316 

Premature Responsibility, eta ... 317 

Seeing God «. 318 

A Victorious Career ... ... 319 

A Clouded Close 320 

Uzziah the Prosperous ... ... 321 

Uzziah the Leprous ... ... 323 

CHAPTER XXVIL 

The Blameless Reign of a Son who 
followed all that was Good in • 
Father's Example, and took Warn- 
ing of what was Wrong in it ... 326 
Uzziah and Jotham, Father and Son... 326 
Features of an Honourable Life: 
Jotham ... ... ... 327 

The Accumulation of Spiritual Power 328 

A Brief Record of a Bright Reign m. 329 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

" This King Ahaz : " the " Progress" 

of a King literally devoid of Religion 881 

Spiritual Rebound ... ... 336 

Divine and Human Pity ... ... 837 

Blow upon Blow ... ... ... 838 

Sin in its Issues ... ... ... 388 

« This is that King Ahaz " ... 339 

The Sending Back of the Captives — 

an Incident of the Israelitish War 34:2 

An Unfortunate Embassy ... ... 811 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

The Reformation of Hezekiah — " the 

Thing done suddenly " ... ... 319 

The Height of Opportunity ... 350 

Doing Duty ... ... ... 351 

Confession, Propitiation, Consecration 352 

The Public Worship of God ... 353 

The Accession of Hezekiah ... 351 

The Purification of the Temple ... 356 

The Re-dedication of the Temple ... 357 
The Rr^vival of Religion in Church or 

Statu ... ... ... ... S5S 



INDEX. 



CHAPTER XXX 

The Celebration of the FasBover, with 

its Sacred Suggestions ... ... 862 

Letters to Ephraim : Oenerogity ... 863 

Four Be&sons for Bepentance —, 865 

The One Essential Thing ... ... 866 

. Religions Enthusiasm ... ... 866 

Preparations for a Orand National 

Passover ... ... ... 367 

A. National PassoTer at Jemsalem ... 370 
An Ideal City : Jerusalem in the First 

Days of Hezekiah ... .«. 872 

CHAPTER XXXL 

The Works that came of Faith ... 374 

After the Excitement ... ,., 875 
The Service of the Conseerated Life, 

and of the Substance ... ... 376 

Systematic Chnrch Finance ... 876 

Earnestness ... ... ... 377 

A Religions Reformation in the Days 

of Hezekiah ... ... ... 378 

"The Camp of the Lord" ... ... 379 

A Nation's Liberality ; or, a Lecture 

on Tithes .379 

The Secret of Prosperity ... ... 881 

CHAPTER XXXIL 

The Weakness that bodes Strength: 
the Defiant Strength that bodes 

"Shame of Face" ... ... 384 

The Shadow which Hezekiah casts on 

his own Life's History ... ... 886 

In Face of the Enemy ... ... 387 

Resting upon Words ... ... 388 

Sennacherib and Hezekiah: Abase- 
ment and Exaltation ... ... 389 

The Trial of Restoration ... ... 839 

Hezekiali's Happiness ... ... 390 

An Assyrian Invasion of Judah ... .391 

The Invasion of Sennacherib: I. A 

Summons to surrender ... ... 394 

The Invasion of Sennacherib : 2. The 

Great Deliverance ... ... 396 

Hezekiah's Sickness and Prayer ... 398 

Hezekiab's Fall and Repentance ... 399 

The Greatness of Hezekiah ... 400 

Hezekiah's Mistake ... ... 400 



CHAPTER XXXm. 



Uncertain Repentances 
The Apostate 



~. 404 
.» 405 



The Penitent ... ... .„ 406 

The Forfeited Heritage ... ... 407 

The Reign of Manasseh ... ... 408 

Manasseh's Repentance ... ... 410 

Lessons from the Life of Manasseh ... 412 
Manasseh and Amon — Father and 

Son : a Parallel and a Contrast ... 413 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 

The Reign of Josiah — its Unexpected 
Boon, in a Republication of Re- 
vealed Religion, with the Legitimate 
and Happy Results following there- 
upon ... ... '.., ... 416 

Piety in Youth ... 417 

Faithful Work ... ... ... 418 

The Hidden Treasure ... ... 419 

Communication and Continnance ... 420 

Josiah the Good ... ... ... 421 

The Repairing of the Temple by 

Josiah... ... ... ... 422 

The Book of the Law 423 

The Value of the Bible ... ». 425 

Judah's Last National Covenant .. 426 



CHAPTER XXXV. 

The Solemn Celebration of the Fas»- 

over ... ... ... ... 429 

The Lamentations for Josiah's Death 429 

The Preferable Service ... ... 431 

The Service of the Lord ... ... 432 

The Moral of the Passover... m. 433 

An Early Sunset ... ... ... 433 

The Great Passover of Josiah «. 434 

The Death of Josiah ... ... 436 

CHAPTER XXXVL 

The Final Indictment, Sentence, and 

Exeoutionof it ... ... m. 441 

Three Melancholy Spectacles », 442 

An Unlamented Death ... m. 443 

Stooping... ... ... M. 443 

Desecration and Destruction ,., 444 

Exile 445 

Jehoabaz ; or, Three Months of Royalty 446 

The Fortunes of Jehoiakim ... 447 

Jehoiachin the Worthless ... ... 449 

Zedekiah ; or, the Fall of Jndah ... 450 
Cyrus of Persia ; or, the Return of 

the Exiles ... .„ „. 451 




■it'icri *tttr.i«. . h. <irL-J«j.u44*t»«'**«i««D«t 




