


| eae <


oa





De hg mired pen oben chem ieee


;


2)


The Library


of the
School of Theology
| at Claremont


1325 North College Avenue
Claremont, CA 91711














THE PREACHER’S ©
COMPLETE HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY


ON THE


BOOK OF NUMBERS


THE PREACHER'S
COMPLETE HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY


ON THE


OLD TESTAMENT


ON AN ORIGINAL PLAN


WITH CRITICAL AND EXPLANATORY NOTES,
INDEXES, ETC., ETC.


By VARIOUS AUTHORS


In Twenty-One Volumes





FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK AND LONDON


6


ees A HOMILETIC
COMMENTARY


ON THE BOOK OF
CHAPTERS XVI to XXXVI
WITH CRITICAL AND EXPLANATORY NOTES, INDEXES, Etc., Ete.


BY THE


REV. WILLIAM JONES





FUNK &¢ WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK AND LONDON


Printed in the United States








a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF NUMBERS,





CHAPTER XVI.


Critica, anD ExpLanatory Norzs.


In this chapter we have the history
of the rebellion of Korah and his com-
pany. The time and place of this
event are not recorded. It is probable
that it occurred in one of the early years
of their penal wanderings.

Verse 1. Korah wasa Kohathite, and
cousin to Moses and Aaron (Exod. vi.
16-21), Dathan and Abiram....
and On were Reubenites ; ana were pro-


_ bably discontented because tne rights
_ of primogeniture were taken from their


tribe, and the tribe of Judah placed


_ before them. Moreover the camps of


Reuben and of the Kohathites were


_ pitched on the same side of the taber-


nacle (chaps. ii. 10, iii. 29); thus the
two families were conveniently situated
for conspiring together. On is not
mentioned hereafter: he probably with-
drew from the conspiracy, or took only
a very subordinate part in it.

Took men. The word “men” is not
in the original; and the verb “took”
is in the singular number. But it is


‘not uncommon in Hebrew when the


verb begins the sentence (as it does
here) for it to be in the singular,
even when the nominative case which
follows is plural. So Gesenius would
translate, And Kuruh ... . and Dathan


TT


and Abiram.... took and rose up
against Moses, &c. Keil and Del. follow
Geseniushere. The Jerusalem Targum
supplies “counsel” after “took.” If
this be adopted the translation will be,
And Korah.... . took counsel apart
with Dathan and Abiram, &c. The
Hebrew literally translated is, “ And
Korah, son of Yizhar, son of Kohath, son
of Levi, took both Dathan and Abiram,
sons of Eliab, and On, son of Peleth,
sons of Reuben ; and they rose up,” &e.
In this way Bp. Patrick, Drs. A. Clarke,
Gill, and others construe the verse. It
is suggested in the Speaker's Comm.
that “ probably the whole difficulty is
due to an after insertion of the mention
of Dathan and Abiram, and of their
insurrection against Moses, into the
original narrative of the sedition of
Korah. This narrative would run na-
turally as follows: ‘Now Korah, the
son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son
of Levi, took of the children of [srael
two hundred and fifty,’ &. In it,
moreover, Korah and his company
would be naturally represented as
gathering themselves together against
Aaron as well as against Moses (ver. 3).
But in the expansion of this narrative
with a view of making it comprise the


289


CHAP, XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


rr ee


account of the proceedings of Dathan
and Abiram, it became important to
mark that the outcry of the latter was
directed against Moses alone; hence
the introduction of the opening words
of ver. 2.”

Verse 2. Famous in the congregation.
Keil and Del.: “‘Called men of the
songregation,’ #¢, members of the
council of the nation which admin-
istered the affairs of the congregation
(ef, i. 16).”

Menof renown. Keil and Del.: “‘Men
of name’ (see Gen. vi. 4). These two
hundred and fifty men appear t» have
belonged to the other tribes; this is
implied in chap. xxvii. 3.”

Verse 3. Ye take too much upon you,
Margin: “It is much for yoo.” Dr. A,


Clarke: “The original is simpty D2? a)


‘too much for you.’”


Verse 4. Comp. chap. xiv. 5.
Verse 7. Ye take too much upon you.
Moses gives back to them their own


words, p> a),


Verse 9. Scemeth it but a small thing
unto you. The words, “seemeth it but”
ure not in the original. Keil and Del.
translate, “Is this too little for you }”

Verse 11. “The words of Moses in
his wrath are broken. Literally the
verse runs: ‘ Wherefore against the
Lord (not against Aaron) thou and all
thy company whoare gathered together,
and Aaron, what is he, that ye murmur
against him?’ Cf. the parallel reproof
of Ananias by St. Peter (Acts v. 3, 4).”
— Speaker's Comm.

Verse 13. A land that floweth with
milkand honey. Thus insolently they
apply to Egypt the very words by which
Moses had described the Promised Land.

Except thou make thyselj altogether a
prince over us? Keil and Del.: “That
thou wilt be always playing the lord
over us 1”

Verse 14. Wilt thou put out the eyes
of these men. Margin as in Heb.: “bore
out,” or dig out; “te. ‘blind them to
the fact that you keep none of your
promises,’ equivalent to ‘throw dust in
their eyes.’ ”— Speaker's Comm,

290


Verse 19. The glory of the Lord ap-
peared, &c. Comp. chap. xiv. 10.
Verse 24. Tabernacle of Korah, Heb.&


WD, dwelling of Korah.


Verse 29. Die the common death. of
all men. Margin: “ Die as every man ~
dieth,” z.e., a natural death.

Verse 30. Make a new thing. Mar-


gin: “Create a creature.” MR)
N'JA, create a creation ; #¢, work an


extraordinary miracle : do such a thing
as was never done before. So Dr. A.
Clarke, Keil and Del. e al.

Verse 32. And all the men that ap-
pertained unto Korah. “ Aypertained,” is
not in the original; when that is
omitted the A. V. is a literal transla-
tion of the Hebrew. This does not
mean his children ; for it is written,
“ Notwithstanding the children of Ko-
rah died not” (chap. xxvi. 11); and
the celebrated Korahite choir were de-
scendants of his. Keil and Del. say
that, “‘all the men belonging to Korah,’
were his servants.” The Speaker's
Comm.: “ All belonging to him who
associated themselves with him in this
rebellion.”

It appears that Korah was not swal-
lowed up with Dathan and Abiram.
“Korah himself,” says Bishop A. C.
Hervey, ‘was doubtless with the 250
raen who bare censers nearer the taber-
nacle (ver. 19), and perished with
them by the ‘ fire from Jehovah’ which
accompanied the earthquake. It is no-
where said that he was one of those
who ‘went down quick into the pit’
(comp. Psa. cvi. 17, 18), and it is
natural that he should have been with
the censer-bearers. That he was so is
indeed clearly implied by Num. xvi.
16-19, 35, 40, compared with xxvi. 9,
10.” (See a somewhat full and care-
fully-compiled consideration of this
question in Cobbin’s Hvangelical Synop-
sts on this verse.)

Verse 35. Comp. Lev. x. 1, 2.

Verse 37. Out of the burning, te.,
from the midst of the men that were
burned.

Scatter thou the fire yonder, te, scatter


hee” ke ie


a a i hi ee ee i





Sp er


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XVL


SS


far away the burning coals in the cen-
- pers,


They are hallowed. See the next ver. :
“For they offered them before the Lord,”
&c., and comp. Lev. xxvii. 28.

Verse 38. Sinners against their own
souls, or lives. Because of their sin


_ their lives had been suddenly cut off.


Comp. Prov, xx. 2; Hab. ii. 10.


Verse 45. And they fell upon their
faces. Comp. vers. 4, 22; and chap,
xiv. 5.

Verse 46, A censer, “Rather ‘the
censer ;’ «¢., that of the High-priest
which was used by him on the Great
Day of Atonement; cf. Lev. xvi. 12;
Heb. ix, 4.”—Speaker’s Comm.


Tur REBELLION oy Kora AND HIS CoMPANY,


(Verses 1-7.) : °


“The former rebellions had been


' mere popular tumults; but this was a


regular conspiracy, headed by persons
of consequence, abetted by many of the
princes, and favoured by most of the
congregation.” In endeavouring to ex-
pound that portion of the narrative
selected as our text, we take two main
divisions.

I. The base rebellion of Korah and
his company.

1. The leaders of the rebellion. **‘ Now
Korah, the son of Izhar, the son of Ko-
hath, the son of Levi, took both Da-
than,” &c. Korah was a Levite, en-
gaged in sacred services in connection
with the temple and worship of the
Lord, and ought therefore to have set
an example of loyalty to the rightful
rulers. He wes also cousin to Moses
and Aaron, and he ought to have found
in that an additional reason for render-
ing to them prompt and zealous support.
Yet he seems to have been the instigator
and leader of the rebellion. Dathan and
Abiram were leading men in the tribe
of Reuben, who joined Korah in the in-
surrection. And with them were two
hundred and fifty of the most distin-
guished and influential men of the na-
tion, “A very dangerous conspiracy,”
says Trapp ; “ for as in a beast the body
follows the head, so in that bellua mul-
forum capitum, the multitude. Great
men are the looking-glasses of the coun-
try, according to which most men dress
themselves ; their sins do as seldom go
unattended as their persons; height of
place aah adds two wings to sin, ex-

u


ample and scandal, whereby it soars
higher and flies much further.” It is
ill with a nation when its leaders are
masleaders.

2. The nature of the rebellion. It was
an organized effort to depose Moses
from his position as the head of the
civil life, and Aaron from his position as
the head of the religious life of the
nation. It was “against both magis-
tracy and ministry.” The rebels would
have equal authority with Moses and
Aaron ; they would either ascend to the
same level as that occupied by the two
great chiefs, or they would drag the two
chiefs down to their level. In its essen-
tial features this rebellion has had many
successors. (a)

3. The cause of the rebellion. (1)
The ostensible cause. “They gathered
themselves together against Moses and
against Aaron, and said unto them, Ye
take too much upon you,” &c, They
alleged that Moses and Aaron had
usurped the position which they now
held and the authority which they
wielded. An outrageous assertion
when we consider how often the Lord
God had manifested His presence with
Moses, and used him as the instrument
of His power. They also alleged that,
as the worshippers of the Lord God, ali
the congregation were holy, and had,
therefore, the right to officiate as priests,
and to exercise equal authority with
Moses in the government. Their posi-
tion will not bear examination. It is
true that “the whole congregation of
Israel were holy in a sense, a8 being

291


J CHAP. XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


NUMBERS.


ee


taken into covenant with God; but
that which was a national privilege,
shared by the meanest Israelite, gave
no claim to the magistracy or the
priesthood, which He had bestowed ac-
cording to His pleasure.” There is a
sense in which all men are equal before
God, yet to some He gives greater
abilities and position and authority
than to others. But let us mark here
two things. First: The tendency of
man to seek to justify himself in evil
conduct. Korah and his company tried
to make their case appear just and
good. Men try to justify their evil con-
duct partly with a view of securing the
co-operation, or avoiding the condem-
nation of others. They do it also in
order to quiet their own consciences,
by persuading themselves that their
course of conduct is reasonable and
righteous. But this attempt to justify
evil is toadd sin to sin. Second: The
best of men in this world are liable to
reproach and slander. Very few, if in-
deed any, abler and holier men than
Moses have ever lived. And his cre-
dentials, as to his being called of God
to his high position, were of the clearest
and most convincing character ; yet he
is accused of being a domineering
usurper, &c. Count it not a strange
thing if you are reviled, &c. Comp.
Matt. x. 25. (2) The real cause. Envy
and ambition seem to have been the
root of the rebellion. Korah was en-
vious of Aaron and the priests, Dathan
and Abiram envied the tribe of Judah
its first rank amongst the tribes, and
the two hundred and fifty princes
envied Moses because of his place and
power. (6) All these men were ambitious
of higher rank and wider authority.
“Pride, envy, ambition,” says Babing-
ton, “was in their hearts, and that bred
discontentment ; discontentment, in-


surrection. If a man should call out
all carpenters, none would come but
such; but call for all that think ther
selves wise and able to govern, whe
will not come?” (c)

II. The noble conduct of Moses is
the rebellion.

“And when Moses heard it, he fell
upon his face,” &c. (vers. 4-7). Notice:

1. His all-sufficient resource in trouble.
“When Moses heard it, he fell upon his
face.” By prayer he endeavoured to
compose his spirit, and sought help of
God. The good man may ever seek
and obtain direction and help from God
by prayer. Comp. Heb.iv. 16 ; James
i, 5.


2. His sublime confidence in God.
This confidence is manifest in—(1) His
bold proposal for settling the question
raised by the rebels. ‘‘ This do, Take
yon censers, Korah, and all his com-
pany,” &c. (vers. 6, 7). Moses must
have been directed to this expedient
in answer to prayer: he would not
have ventured on so daring a measure
without the sanction of God. (2) His
assurance that God would vindicate
both Aaron and himself. “ He spake
unto Korah and unto all his company,
saying, Even to-morrow the Lord will
show who are His,” &c. (ver. 6). Moses
was convinced of the Divine authority
of his own mission and the mission of
Aaron, and that God would manifest te
all in a manner not to be mistaken
that He had chosen and called them to
their respective offices,

3. His calm rebuke of the rebels. “Yo
take too much upon you, ye sons of
Levi.” The rebuke was deserved. They
were leading a most wicked rebellion,
The rebuke was appropriate. They
were impugning the arrangements of the
all-wise God: surely that was to take
too much upon them,


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) Democracy, we are all well aware, what
is called ‘‘self-government ” of the multitude
by the multitude, is in words the thing every-
where passionately clamoured for at present
Democracy makes rapid progress in these
latter times, and ever morerapid, in a perilous


accelerative ratio; towards democracy, and
that only, the progress of things is every-
where tending as to the final goal and winning-
post. So think, so clamour the multitudes
everywhere, And yetall men may see, whose
sight is good for muck, that in democracy caa


ae bie Je


,
;





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


CHAP. XVI.


rer


He no finality; that with the completest
winning of democracy there is nothing yet
won,—except emptiness, and the freo chance
te win! Democracy is, by the nature of it, a
self-cancelling business; and gives in the
long-run a net result of zero, When no
government is wanted, save that of the
parish constable, as in America with its
boundless soil, every man being able to find
work and recompense for himself, democracy
may subsist; not elsewhere, except briefly, as
@ swift transition toward something other and
farther. Democracy never yet, that we heard
of, was able to accomplish much work, beyond
that same cancelling of itself, Rome and
Athens are themes for the schools ; unexcep-
tionable for that purpose. In Rome and
Athens, as elsewhere, if we look practically,
we shall find that it was not by loud voting
and debating of many, but by wise insighs
and ordering of a few, that the work was
dene. So is it ever, so willit ever be, The
French Oonvention was a Parliament elected
“by the five points,” with ballot boxes, uni-
versal-suffrages, and what not, as perfectly as
Parliament can hope to be in this world; and
had indeed a pretty spell of work to do, and
did itt The French Convention had to cease
from being a free Parliament, and become
more arbitrary than any Sultan Bajazet, before
it could so much as subsist, It had to purge
out its argumentative Girondins, elect its
Supreme Committee of Salut, guillotine into
silence and extinction all that gainsayed it,
and rule and work literally by the sternest
despotism ever seen in Europe, before it could
rule at all, Napoleon was not President of a
Republic; Cromwell tried hard to rule in that
way, but found that he could not, These,
“the armed soldiers of democracy,” had to
chain democracy under their feet, and become
despots over it, before they could work ont
the earnest obscure purpose of democracy
Itself1 Democracy, take it where you will
in our Europe, is found but as a regulated


method of rebellion and abrogation; it abro-
gates the old arrangement of things; and
leaves, as we say, Zero and vacuity for the
institution of anew arrangement. It is the
consummation of No-government and Laissez-
faire, It may be natural for our Hurope at
present; but cannot be the ultimatum of it.
Not towards the impossibility, ‘‘self-govern-
ment” of a multitude by a multitude; but
towards some possibility, government by the
wisest, does bewildered Hurope struggle, The
blessedest possibility: not misgovernment,
not Latssez-faire, but veritable government.—
Thomas Carlyle,

(6) For Illustrations on Envy see pp, 206-
208. :
(c) Ambition, that high and glorious passion
which makes such havoc among the sons of
men, arises from a proud desire of honour and
distinction; and when the splendid trappings
in which it is usually caparisoned are removed,
will be found to consist of the mean materials
of envy, pride, and covetousness, It is dea-
cribed by different authors as a gallant mad-
ness, a pleasant poison, a hidden plague, a
secret poison, a caustic of the soul, the moth
of holiness, the mother of hypocrisy, and by
crucifying and disquieting all it takes hold of,
the cause of melancholy and madness,—R.
Burton.

The same sun which gilds all nature, and
exhilarates the whole creation, does not shine
upon disappointed ambition. It is something
that rays out of darkness, and inspires nothing
but gloom and melancholy. Men in this de-
plorable state of mind find a comfort in spread-
ing the contagion of their spleen. They find
an advantage, too; for itis a general popular
error to imagine the loudest complainers for
the public to be most anxious for its welfare,
If such persons can answer the ends of relief
and profit to themselves, they are apt to be
careless enough about either the means or the
consequences,—L, Burke,


Wioxep Ampition Fairurutty Resuken,


(Verses 8-11.)


- Moses now addresses Korah and the
other rebellious Levites, probably with
a view to convince them of their error
and sin before the case should come on
for the Divine adjudication. For Moses
knew that if their audacious claims
were put to the test on the morrow
“before the Lord,” as he had proposed,
}t would be at their dread peril, and
that a similar fate to that of Nadab and
Abihu (Lev. x. 1, 2; chap. iii. 4) would
probably befall them. . By this remon-
strance he seeks to prevent this.


In this appeal Moses makes it clear
to Korah that he detected the real mo-
tives which actuated him in this move-
ment. The enquiries, “Seek ye the
priesthood also?” and “ What is Aaron
that ye murmur against him?” would
leave no doubt on the mind of the
leader of the rebels that Moses was
cognisant of his real feeling and aims.
Notice :—

I, The greatness of the privileges
conferred upon the Levites.

“Seemeth it but a smal] thing unto

293


OHAP, XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





you, that the God of Israel hath sepa-
rated you from the congregation,” de.
(vers. 9,10). Matthew Henry’s notes
are so excellent in themselves and in
their arrangement that we cannot do
better than quote them. “He reminds
them how great the honour was to
which they were preferred, as Levites,

“1. They were separated from the con-
gregation of Israel, distinguished from
them, dignified above them ; instead of
complaining that Aaron’s family was
advanced above theirs, they ought to
have been thankful that their tribe was
advanced above the rest of the tribes,
though they had been in all respects
upon the level with them. Note, It
will help to keep us from envying those
that are above us duly to consider how
many there are below us. Instead of
fretting that any are preferred before
us in honour, power, estate, or interest,
in gifts, graces, or usefulness, we have
reason to bless God if we, who are less
than the least, are not put among the
very last. Many perhaps who deserve
better are not preferred so well.

“2. They were separated to very great
and valuable honours. (1) To draw
near to God, nearer than the common
Israelites, though they also were a
people near unto Him: the nearer any
are to God the greater is their honour.
(2) To do the service of the tabernacle.
It is honour enough to bear the vessels
of the sanctuary, and to be employed in
any part of the service of the tabernacle.
God’s service is not only perfect freedom,
but high preferment. (3) To stand before
the congregation to minister unto them,
Note, Those are truly great that serve
the public, and it is the honour of
God’s ministers to be the Church’s
ministers; nay, which adds to the
dignity put upon them,

“3. It was the God of Israel Himself
that separated them, It was His act and
deed to put them into their place, and
therefore they ought not to have been
discontented ; and He it was likewise
that put Aaron into his place, and there-
fore they ought not te have envied
him,”

294


II. The unrighteousness of the am«
bition cherished by them.

Their ambition involved—

1. The disparagement of their present
privileges. Their privileges ‘seemed
but a small thing unto them.” Great
as they were, they did not satisfy them.
“ Ambition,” says Trapp, “is restless
and unsatisfiable; for, like the crocodile,
it grows as long as it lives.” And M.
Henry: “Those who aspire after and
usurp the honours forbidden them put
a great contempt upon the honours
allowed them.” (a)

2. Interference in the Divine arrange-
ments. ‘‘Seek ye the priesthood also?”
It was by the express arrangement and
command.of God that Aaron and his
sons were separated to the duties and
emoluments of the priesthood ; and,
therefore, in seeking the priesthood for
themselves, Korah and the Levites whe
were united with him were endeavour-
ing to set aside the arrangements of
the Lord God. Their insatiable ambi-
tion had dethroned their judgment,
and, for a time, mastered their con-
science ; it was both unreasonable and
unrighteous.

III. The heinousness of the rebellion
in which they engaged.

Moses points out to them concerning
their rebellion that—

1. Jt was unreasonable, ‘What is
Aaron that ye murmur against him?”
The high-priest was merely an instrus
ment in the hand of the Lord. Aaron
was not self-appointed. He was a
servant called of God to his office, with
his duties and his privileges clearly
apportioned unto him. How unreason.
able, then, was it to murmur at him
for being high-priest |

2. It was exceedingly sinful. “Thou
and all thy company are gathered
together against the Lord.” “Those
resist the prince who resist those that
are commissioned by him.” Comp
Matt. x. 40; John xiii. 20; Acts ix. 4


Conclusion.
1, Let us orush every rising of ambition
which is not tn harmony with wisdom


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,





and righteousness. It is of such that
Shakespeare says, and says wisely—
“Fling away ambition :


By that sin fell the angels; how can man then,
The image of his Maker, hope to win by’t ?” (5)


2. Let us seek to give to owr ambition
% righteous and noble direction. (¢)


CHAP, XVI,





“Tho true ambition there alone resides,
Where justice vindicates, and wisdom guides;
Where inward dignity joins outward state,
Our purpose good as our achievement great;
Where public blessings public praise attend,
Where glory is our motive, not our end.
Wouldst thou be famed? Have those high

acts in view;
Brave men would act, though scandal would
ensue.”—. Young.


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(@) There fs a curtain, but it is lifting, it
is lifting, it is lifting ; and when it is lifted,
whatdoI see? Thespirit world! ’Tis death
shat lifts the curtain; and when it is lifted,
these present things will vanish, for they are
but shadows. The world of eternity and
reality will then be seen. I would summon
a jury of the spirits that have passed that
curtain; and they would not be long debating
about the question whether Christ is worth
the winning. I care not where you select
them from—whether from among the con-
demned in hell, or from among the beatified in
heaven. Let them sit—let even those who are
in hell sit, and judge upon the matter, and, if
they could for once speak honestly, they would
tell you that it is a dreadful thing to despise
Christ; now that they have come to see things
in a true light—now that they are lost for
ever—now that they are crushed with know-
ledge and feeling which have come too late to
be profitable—now they wish that they had
listened to the ministrations of truth, to the
proclamations of the Gospel. Ah! if they

. could have a sane mind back again, they would
shriek, “Oh! for one more Sabbath, Oh! to
listen once more to an honest preacher, though
his words might beclumsy and uncouth, Oh!
to hear a voice once more say, ‘ Come to Jesus
while the day of mercy lasts.’ Oh! to be once
more pressed to come to the marriage feast—
once more bidden to look to Jesus and tolive!”
I tell you, sirs, some of you who make solight
of Sundays, and think preaching is but a pas-
time, so that you come here to hear us as you
would go to hear some fiddler on a week-night
—I tell you, sirs, the lost in hell reckon these
things at a very different rate, and so will you
ere long, when another preacher, with skele-
ton fingers, shall talk to you upon your death-
bed. Ah! then you wiil see that we were in
earnest and you were the players, and you will
eomprehend that what we said to you deman-
fed earnest, immediate attention, though,
alas! you would not give it, and so played
false to your own soul, and committed spiritual
tuicide, and went your way like a bullock to

the slaughter, to be the murderers of your own
spirits,—C. Hl. Spurgeon.


(6) How, like a mounting devil in the heart,
Rules the unrein’d ambition! Let it once


But play the monarch, and its haughty
brow

Glows with a beauty that bewilders
thought

And unthrones peace for ever, Putting
on


The very pomp of Lucifer, it turns
The heart to ashes, and with not a spring
Left in the bosom for the spirit’s lip
We look upon our splendour and forget
The thirst for which we perish.

N, P. Willis,


(e) There are few men who are not ambi-
tious of distinguishing themselves in the na-
tion or country where they live, and of
growing considerable with those with whom
they converse, There is a kind of grandeur
and respect which the meanest and most in-
significant part of mankind endeavour to pro-
eure in the little circle of their friends and
acquaintance, The poorest mechanic, nay,
the man who lives upon common alms, gots
him his set of admirers, and delights in that
superiority which he enjoys over those who
are in som? respects beneath him, This am
bition which is natural to the soul of man,
might, methinks, receive a very happy turn;
and, if it were rightly directed, contribute as
much to a person’s advantage as it generall
does to his uneasiness and disquict.—J/.
Addison,


“Ambition is the vice of noble souls!”
If ’tis a vice, then let those souls beware,
Thrice noble though they be, and passing
fair
In the world’s eye, and high upon the scrolls,
Her favour’d minions where the world enrolls,

Lest it conduct to shame! Be thine the

care,

Soldier of Christ, that nobler strife to dare,
Which the rash spirit of the world controls,
And makes ambition virtue! Be it thine

To win thy bright unfading diadem
By works of love! Around his brows shall

shine

In heaven from glory’s souree the purest

beam,
Whose aspect here, with beauty most divine,

Reflects the image of the Goop Suprems.

Bp. Maat.
295


CHAP, XVI,








HOMILE1IC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,





Tue Sin or Usurprina tHe Orion oF THE PrRinsTHOOD,


(Verse 10.)


“Seek ye the priesthood also ?”

The Papists say that Korah, Dathan
and Abiram are like unto Protestants,
and that as they perished for their re-
bellion against Moses and Aaron so
Protestants for leaving ‘‘the Cathone
Church,” as they call it, will perish for
ever in hell, But High Church clergy
and writers of like kind compare Korah
and his company to the Dissenters ;
they say that like as Korah, Dathan
and Abiram rebelled against Moses and
Aaron, so Dissenters presuming to have
preachers of their own establish a mock
ministry different from that which has
the apostolic commission. What a per-
verting of the truth! So far from it
being true that Protestants or Dis-
senters are shadowed forth, it is not
dificult to perceive rather that it
shadows forth themselves. What was
the crime of Korah, Dathan and
Abiram? It was an attempt to put
themselves in the place of Moses and
Aaron, Moses and Aaron were medi-
ators between God and Israel, and
therefore types of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ. Moses as lawgiver and
Aaron as priest were types of Jesus ;
their office was sacred and peculiar to
themselves ; no man could, with God’s
permission, perform the duties of their
office but themselves, No man on any
consideration was to usurp the office of
priest ; no, not even Jesus Christ Him-
self, as you see in Heb. v. 4,5. So
sacred was the office of priest that not
even Jesus Himself might take it until
called to it by God Himself. This was
the very crime of Korah and his com-
pany .... Now what is the conduct
of the Papists and of High Church
clergy? Is it more like the conduct of
Korah and his company, or is that of
Dissenters or Protestants more like it ?
Surely, it requires very little sense to
see which are like unto Korah and his
compiny. High Churchmen say that
they are priests, that they offer sacrifices,
that in the Supper of the Lord they

29¢


really do present the body of Christ to
God, that they are sacrificing priests
between God and the people; this is
the great point which they maintain.
Whereas there is known in the Bible
but one priest, in that sense, in the
present dispensation, namely Jesus, the
great High Priest, who has gone to ap-
pear in the presence of God to present
His sacrifice and offer His intercession.
He carries the blood and presents the
incense on behalf of His Church.

The wickedness of claiming to be a
priest is seen more plainly when we


consider the effect of it ; it is absolutely


to set Jesus Christ aside, and shut a
man out from salvation. This illustra-
tion very plainly shows this. Notice,
first, that the priest offered the blood
of the sacrifice; and what was that
blood offered for? It was God’s chosen
means whereby He would avert punish-
ment and deliverfrom danger. Ifthey
had done wrong and provoked Him to
punish them, or if they were brought in
the providential dealings of God, into
danger of enemies or other evil ; if they
shed the blood of the sacrifice and
presented it before the mercy seat, or
at the altar, it would be accepted, judg-
ment averted, and evil removed. That
was the national character of the Jewish
religion; ‘without shedding ef blood
there was no remission ;” and national
mercies were given in conseqvence of
their observing their national rites, and
national evils were removed because of
the offering of that blood. But, mark
the priest alone was to offer it ; it would
have been in vain if any other man had
attempted to present the blood, God
would not have accepted it, and the
punishment would have been poured
out. It was the priest who confessed
the sins of the people and presented the
sacrifice, and then mercy was vouch-
safed. Now, what was done hy the
priest for Israel is what is now actually
aone by our High Priest for the Church.
Observe how it is asserted that one wag


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY NUMBERS.





typical of the other (Heb x. 11, 12).
Thus you see Christ is both priest and
victim, as it isagainin Heb. ix. 11, 12.
How great then the office of Christ!
- «- . How awful the iniquity for any
miserable man calling himself a priest
to thrust Christ aside, and take upon
himself the very work which here we
read in God’s holy Word Jesus is exalted
to heaven to carry on !

Again observe, under the Old Testa-
ment law, the priest offered the incense
also; it was not acceptable to God if
otfered by any other man. Christ’s in-
tercession was typified by the burning
incense going up ina cloud of smoke
together with the prayers and praises
of the people ; and no man might offer
that except the priest. In like manner
it is Jesus, and Jesus alone, who in-
tercedes in the presence of God for His
people (Rom. viii. 34). Hence we offer
prayer ‘‘through Jesus Christ our
Lord,’’ ‘‘ through Jesus Christ our Sa-
viour.’’ Just as under the old law no
man might offer incense himself but
must give it to the priest, so in this


AUDACITY In


(Verses


Having finished his address to Korah
and the Levites, Moses sent messengers
to Dathan and Abiram, who during that
address seem to have departed to their
own tents, to call them to appear before
him. With outrageous insolence they
not only refused to obey his summons,
but preferred the most unjust and im
pudent charges against him. Theor
audacity in wickedness is manifest—

I. In their defiance of the authority
of the ruler appointed by God.

They absolutely and daringly refused
to obey the summons of Moses. Twice
they said, “We will not come up.”
“They denied his power,” says Gill,
“despised his authority, and would not
vbey his orders, and therefore refused
to come up to the tabernacle, or to the
tent of Moses, or to the Court of Judi-
sature, wherever it was; perhaps the
frat is best.” “Sturdy rebels,” says


CHAP. XVI.





dispensation no prayer is acceptable te
God but by and through Jesus Christ.
“No man cometh unto the Father but
by Me.” How great then the wicked-
ness of those who would presume to
put themselves in the place of Christ,
the great High Priest, and say that
they are mediators through whom the
prayers of the people are to be offered !
What says the Holy Ghost again on
this point of incense by the mouth of
the beloved Apostle? 1 John ii 1...
. - It may be well indeed that minis-
ters should pray for their people, and
people for their ministers ; but it is not
well that ministers should pretend to
put themselves as mediators between
God and the people, and represent
themselves as successors of the Jewish
High Priests; in a word, supplanting
Jesus Christ Himself; this is not well.


Application,

Trust to the only Priest. Have confi-
dence in that Man who because “ He
continueth ever hath an unchangeable
priesthood.” —R. W. Dibdin, M.A,


WIOKEDNESS,


12-15.)


Trapp, “ripe for destruction.”
Proy. xxix. 1.

Ii. In their reviling the ruler ap-
pointed by God.

They proceed to charge Moses with—

1, Having injured them in their cir
cumstances. “Is it a small thing that
thou hast brought us up out of a land
that floweth with milk and honey!
. . » Moreover thou hast not brought
us into a land that floweth with milk
and honey, or given us inheritance of
fields and vineyards,” The statement
concerning Eyypt was not truthful.
Moreover, as Bp. Patrick observes,
* nothing could be more insolent and
ungrateful than to describe Egypt in
the very same language in which God
had often spoken of the Land of Pro-
mise.” Their deliverance from Egypt,
instead of being resented as an injury,
should have been regarded by aoe as

29


CHAP. XVI.





a priceless blessing. And whose fault
was it. that they were not in possession
of the Promised Land? They charge
Moses with that for which they alone
were tu blame.

2. Attempting to tyrannise over them,
“ Thou make thyself altogether a prince
over us.” They speak as though Moses
were in the habit of lording it over
them as a usurping tyrant, when he
was really devoting himself to their
service.

3. Endeavouring to deceive them.
“Wilt thou put out the eyes of these
men?” They insinuate that Moses was
trying to blind the congregation as to the
true character of his doings and designs.

4. Aiming at their destruction. ‘Thou
hast brought us.... to kill us in the
wilderness.” Farther than this injustice
and falsehood surely cannot go. Ifthey
were doomed to fall in the wilderness it
was because of former rebellions of their
own. As for Moses he had sought their
good, and only their good. Is not the
audacity of their wickedness terrible ?

III. In the solemn appeal to God
which their conduct called forth from
the ruler which He had appointed.

“« And Moses was very wroth, and said
unto the Lord, Respect not Thou their
offering,” &c. Notice:

1. His righteous anger. ‘ Moses was
very wroth.” Anger is not always sin-
ful. ‘“‘Be ye angry, and sin not.” There
are times when it would be a sin not to
be angry. There is a deep principle of
wrath in the Divine nature. Our Lord
looked upon the wicked Pharisees “ with
anger” (Mark iii. 5), in proportion as
we regard holiness with affection we
must regard wickedness with indigna-
tion, There is much in this world at
present to awaken wrath in godly souls,
The anger of Moses was a righteous
thing : it was the antagonism of his pure
and noble soul against the base wicked-
ness of Dathan and Abiram. (a)

2. His truthful self-vindication. “1
have not taken one ass from them,
neither have I hurt one of them.”
“Moses was not one of them,” says
Trapp, “that follow the administration
of aes as a trade only, with an


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; NUMBERS.





unquenchable and unconscionable desire
of gain. This is but robbery with au-
thority, and justifies the common re-
semblance of the courts of justice to the
bush, whereto while the sheep flies for
defence in weather, he is sure to lose
part of his fleece.” Moses could truth-
fully appeal to the Lord that although
he was their ruler he had taken no tri-
bute whatever from them or oppressed
them in any way or degree. Comp. 1
Sam. xii. 3. '

3. His solemn prayer. ‘ Moses said
unto the Lord, Respect not Thou their
offering.” Comp. Gen. iv. 4, 5. It
may at first sight appear that in this
request Moses manifests an unworthy
spirit. But really “he craveth of God
no more than to show and make mani-
fest his own innocency and upright-
ness, which was to be decided by that
offering.”

Lessons.

1. That man, having entered wpon on
evil course, unless arrested by some re-
straining force, proceeds to greater daring
in and deeper depths of wickedness. Se
Dathan and Abiram grew bold and
insolent in sin, “ Evil men and se.
ducers shall wax worse and worse,” &e,
Character is never stationary. It grows
either towards perfection or towards
perdition, In the case of the wicked
their dread progress in wickedness is
not difficult of explanation, (1) The
heact becomes hardened ; less suscep-
tible to good influences; less amenable
to conscience, &o. (6) (2) The pro-
pensity to evil increases in power, As
the soul falls the momentum with
which it falls increases. (3) The cir-
cumstances into which they bring them-
selves by sin urge them onward. One
sin seems to make other sins necessary,
Shakespeare clearly expresses the idea
in Macheth—


“T am in blood
Stept in so far, that, should I wade no mora,
Returning were as tedious as go o'er.” (e)


Guard against entering on wicked, or
even questionable, courses.

2. The best of men are liable to tha
vilest misrepresentations, There was
not the shadow of reason for these


‘a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS, CHAP, XVI


a a ees eee Sessoms issues ioceesiosiowebo=ud- wemmnamasptsamnsnlinasepestit


‘harges against Moses. He was the
sast man to play the lord over any
people. “Those often fall under the
heaviest censures who have merited the
highest applause.”

3. The good man when suffering from
misrepresentation can carry his cause to
the Great Vindicator. Moses appealed
to God from the misrepresentations of
Dathan and Abiram. So did Job from


the false charges of his ‘ miserable
comforters.” So did David from the
slanders of his enemies. Comp. Job
xvi. 19 ; xxiii, 10-12. So may we when
falsely accused. ‘Commit thy way
unto the Lord; trust also in Him ; and
He shall bring it to pass, And He
shall bring forth Thy righteousness ag
the light, and Thy judgment as the
noon-day,”


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(@) There is a great difference between the
sin of one who is angry, and the cruelty of one
who holds another in hatred. For even with
our children are we angry; but who is ever
found to hate his children? Among the very
cattle, too, the cow, in a sort of weariness,
will sometimes in anger drive away her suck-
ling ealf ; but anon she embraces it with all
the affection of a mother. She is ina way
disgusted with it when she butts it ; yet, when
she misses it, she will seek after it. Nor do
we discipline our children otherwise than with
a degree of anger and indignation; yet we
should not discipline them at all but in love to
them,

So far, then, is every one who is angry from
hating, that sometimes one would be rather
eonvicted of hating if he were not angry ; for
suppose a child wishes to play in some river’s
stream, by whose force he would be like to
perish. If you see this and patiently suffer it,
this would be hating—your patient suffering
him in his death, How far better is it to be
angry and correct him, than by not being
angry to suffer him to perish! Great is the
difference, indeed, between one’s exceeding
due limits in some words through anger, which
he afterwards wipes off by repenting of it, and
the keeping an insidious purpose shut up in
the heart,— Augustine.

There is an anger that is damnable: it is
the anger of selfishness, There is an anger
that is majestic as the frown of Jehovah's
brow: itis the anger of truth and love, If
man meets with injustice, it is not required
that he shall not be roused to meet it; but if
he is angry after he has had time to think up-
on it, that is sinful. Ths flame is not wrong,
but the coals are,—H. W. Beecher.

High and gusty passions that sweep through
the soul are sometimes like fierce summer
storms that cleanse the air, and give the earth
refreshment by strong winds and down-pelting
rains, Men are better for knowing how to be
angry, provided the sun does not go down on
their wrath, and provided itis justified by the
occasions of it.—Jbid,

(6) Wilful disobedience to God’s commands
tends most powerfully to harden the heart;
for after we have once disobeyed, it becomes
more easy to repeat the disobedience, But


this is not all. If you disoboy, you must as-
sign some excuse to justify your disobedience,
or your conscience will reproach you, and ren-
der you uneasy ; ifno plausible excuse occurs,
you will seek one; if none can readily be
found, you will invent one. And when God
proceeds to enforce His commands by frowns
and threatenings, and to press you with mo-
tives and arguments, you must fortify your
minds against their influence, and seek other
arguments to assist youin doing it. This also
tends most powerfully to harden the heart. A
man who is frequently employed in seeking
arguments and excuses to justify his neglect
of religion, soon becomes expert in the work
of self-justification. He is, if I may so express
it, armed at all points against the truth; so
that in a little time, nothing affects him, no
arrow from the quiver of revelation can reach
his conscience, Urge him to what duty you
will, he has some plausible excuse in readiness
to justify himself for neglecting to perform it,
But if, as is sometimes the case, his excuses
prove insufficient, and his understanding and
conscience become convinced that he ought
to hear God’s voice to-day, he can avoid com-
pliance only by taking refuge in an obstinate
refusal, or by resolutely diverting his atten-
tion to some other object, till God's commands
are forgotten, or by a vague kind of promise
that he will become religious at some future
period, Whichsoever of these methods he
adopts, the present impression is effaced, and
his heart is hardened. He has engaged in a
warfare with his reason and conscience, and
has gained a victory over them. He has re-
sisted the force of truth, and thus rendered it
more easy for him to resist it again. In a
word, he has less religious sensibility ; he hae
become more inaccessible to conviction, and
less disposed to yield to it than before,—Z,
Payson, D.D.

(c) It is somewhere fabled in ancient litera-
ture that a certain stag and horse were at
variance; they battled for some time fiercely
with each other. At lergth the strength of
the horse failed him, und he sought the help
of a man, The man complies, gets on his
back, and chases the stag to death, So far
the noble steed overcame the difficulty of his
position, and gained his point; bat the very


CHAP, XVI,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS, (


ec se eee tS |e


means he adopted placed him in a far worse
position afterwards With a bit in his mouth
and saddle on ‘is back, he continued to the
end of his days the slave of the man whose
assistance he obtained, It is thus with those
who seek to overcome @ difficulty or avoid a
danger by recourse to immoral expedients,
This, alas! is often done, In business a man
contracts oblivations, He finds that his cre-
dit, reputation, and position are in danger un-
less they are fully met. The hour comes


when those obligations heavily press apr,
him. Ho struggles honourably with them for;


atime, At length he gives way, and has re-
course to forgeries, falsenoods, or some other
wicked device, For the moment he seems to
succeed; but the immorality he called in to
serve him for the hout becomes his master
and his tyrant, uses him as the man did the
horse in the fable—as a wretched beast of
burden, the victim of the bit, the saddle, and
the spur.— Zhe Clerical Year Book,


Tue REBELLION MAINTAINED IN THE vERY Presence oF Gon,


(Verses 16-22).


Consider :—

I, The test proposed by Moses to
the rebels.

“And Moses said unto Korah, Be
thou and all thy company before the
Lord,” &, (vers. 16, 17). Moses here
repeats the challenge which he had
previously made (vers. 5-7), with this
addition, he states that Aaron also shall
be there, and submit to the test. The
test includes three clauses, or articles.

1. That Korah and his company shalt
assemble at the tabernacle and burn in-
cense. This was a function reserved
to the priesthood: they had claimed
equality with the priesthood: thus let
their claim be put to proof.

2. That they should burn incense in
sight of God. All things transpire be-
neath His eye (Prov. xv. 3; Heb. iv.
13); but Moses gives special promin-
ence to the fact that the trial of their
claims was to take place “before the
Lord.” In this renewal of the chal-
lenge he twice mentions this solemn
fact (vers. 16, 17). Will they dare the
awful experiment in His holy presence ?

3. That they should burn incense in
the sight of God with a view to His
interposition for the settlement of the ques-
tion which they had raised. This was the
great object which they had in view in
this business, and was clearly stated by
Moses when he first proposed this
method of testing their claims. Truly
avery serious, and indeed awful pro-
posal, How will the rebels treat it ?

_ IL. The test accepted by the rebels.

On the morrow “they took every man

300


his censer, and put fire in them,” &o.
(vers. 18, 19). Notice:

1. The awful presumption involved in
their conduct. It was but recently that
they had witnessed Nadab and Abihu
burnt to death by fire from the Lord,
when they offered strange fire before
the Lord, and yet they presume with
unconsecrated hands and in a rebellious
spirit to burn incense in the door of
the tabernacle beforethe Lord. Terrible
is their sinful hardihood! (a)

2. The infatuation of Korah tn sin.
He “gathered all the congregation
against them unto the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation.” He
seems entirely confident of success.
Not a grain of prudence seems left to
him. Quos Deus vult perdere dementat
prius. ‘‘ Pride goeth before destruction,
and a haughty spirit before a fall.”

III, The interposition of the Lord
God.

“And the glory of the Lord ap-
peared untoall the congregation. And
the Lord spake,” &c. (vers. 19-21).
The interposition of the Lord was
characterised by—

1. The manifestation of His glory.
“The glory of the Lord appeared unto
all the congregation.” (See notes on
chap. xiv. 10, p. 248.)

2. The declaration of His judgment.
He called upon Moses and Aaron to
separate themselves from the congrega-
tion that He “ may consume them in a
moment.” By rallying to the taber-
nacle at the call of Korah the peopla
had made common cause with the rebels


_


}


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XVi.





and become sharers in their guilt, and
God threatens to destroy them in-
stantly.

3. His care for His faithful servants.
He “spake unto Moses and unto Aaron,
kaying, Separate yourselves from among
this congregation,” &c. Excellent are
the notes of Trapp on this: “Good
men are taken away from the evil to
come. When God pulls away the pil-
lars, what will become of the building?
Lot was no sooner taken out of Sodom,
but Sodom was taken out of the
world.” Comp. Gen. xix. 22-25. (0)

‘ IV. The intercession of Moses and
Aaron for the congregation.

“And they fell upon their faces, and
said, O God,” &c. (ver. 22).

1. ts object. The aim of the inter-
cession of Moses and Aaron was to
avert the threatened destruction of all
the congregation.

2. Its pleas. These are—(1) The
relationship of God to man. “O God,
the God of the spirits of all flesh.”
God is the creator and sustainer of
human life. “ He giveth to all life, and
breath, and all things.” “The Father


of spirits.” Will He not then have
mercy upon these misguided spirits, of
which He was the author and preserver 4
“Like as a father pitieth his children,
so the Lord pitieth,” &o. (Psa. ciii., 13-
18). “Thy mercy, O Lord, endureth
for ever: forsake not the works of
Thine own hands.” Comp, Isa. lxiv. 8,
9. (c). (2) The justice of God. “ Shall
one man sin, and wilt Thou be wroth
with all the congregation?” As com-
pared with Korah, the author of the
rebellion, the great multitude of the
people were almost innocent. Would
God sweep them all away in the same
judgment ? Comp. Gen. xviii. 23, 25.

Mark the magnanimity of Moses and
Aaron in thus interceding for the
people. The people were ever ready
to join in any rebellion against their
leaders, yet those leaders were ever
ready to entreat God for them. “The
good man,” says a Hindoo epigram,
“goes not upon enmity, but rewards
with kindness the very being who
injures him. So the sandal-wood while
it is feng, imparts to the edge of the
axe its aromatic savour.”


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(@) Every presumption {s properly an en-
eroachment, and all encroachment carric. in it
still a farther and s farther invasion upon the
person encroached upon. It enters into the
soul as a gangrene does into the body, which
spreads as well as infects, and with a running
progress carries @ venom and @ contagion all
over the members, Presumption never stops
in its first attempt, If Casar comes once to
pass the Rubicon, he will be sure to march
farther on, even till he enters the very bowels
of Rome, and breaks open the Oapitol itself.
He that wades so far as to wet and foul him-
self, cares not how much he trashes farther, —
Robert South, DD.

(6) “No doubt,” said the Rev. J. Brown, of
Haddington, ‘‘I have met with trials as well
as others, yet so kind has God been to me, that
I think if He were to giveme as many years
as I have already lived in the world, I should
not desire one single circumstance in my lot
changed except thatI wish I had less sin, It
might be written on my coffin, ‘ Here lies one
of the cares of Providence, who early wanted
both father and mother and yet never missed
them,’ ”—“ The Sunday School Teacher.”

(c} The Creator is faithiul, He absdes by
His creation, maithar deserting, nor repudi-


ating it. Though nature has become a mad-
house of fierce passions and deadly strife, His
devotion to it knows no abatement. He will
not fail nor be discouraged until He has put
down all evil, and established righteousness,
even “ everlasting righteousness.” “A faith-
Jul Creator” involves the idea of a tenaer
Redeemer,—John Pulsford.

God never loses sight of any one thing He
has created, and no created thing can continue
either to be, or to act independently of Him,
His eye is upon every hour of my existenve
His spirit is intimately present with every
thought of my heart. His inspiration gives
birth to every purpose within me. His nand
impresses a direction on every footstep of my
goings, Every breath I inhale is drawn by
aa energy which God deals out to me, This
body, which, upon the slightest derangement,
would become the prey of death, or of woful
suffering, is now at ease, because He at thia
moment is warding off from mea thousand
dangers, and apholding the thousand move-
ments of its complex and delicate machinery,
His presiding influence keeps by me through
the whole current of my restless and ever-
changing history, When I walk by the way-
side, He is along with me. When I enter into

301


CHAP, XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


ea! SS


company, amid all my forgetfulness of Him,
He never forgets me. In the silent watches
of the night, when my eyelids have closed
and my spirit has sunk into unconsciousness,
the observant eye of Him who never slumbers
is upon me, I cannot fly from His presence.
Go where I will, He tends me, and watches


me, and cares for me; and the ssme Being
who is now at work in the remotest domains
of nature and of Providence, is also at my
right hand to eke out to me every moment of
my being, and to uphold me in the exercise
of all my feelings and of all my faculties, —
Thomas Chalmers, D.D., LL.D,


Tun Spirit AND THE SOVEREIGN oF Man,


(Verse 22.)


“The God of the spirits of all flesh.”

These words suggest three considera-
tions.

I. The grand distinction of human
nature.

The glory of human nature is not in
anything physical, eg., the upright
form, the steady and penetrating glance
of the eye, &c. ; but in the fact of its
spirituality. Man is a spirit in a ves-
ture of flesh. “There is a spirit in
man; and the inspiration of the Al-
mighty giveth them understanding.”
(a). Concerning the human spirit con-
sider—

1. Its attributes. (1) Unity. The
body is composed of an indefinite num-
ber of separate and separable parts.
But the spirit is one and indivisible,
We are conscious of our individuality
as thinking, feeling, acting beings. (2)
Voluntary activity. Bodies have no
power of spontaneous motion ; being at
rest, they will remain so for ever, un-
less acted upon by some power which
is not inherent. But the spirit acts
independently; man is gifted with
volition, he chooses and rejects, &,
(3) Thought. The body does not
think ; after the death of the body the
brain may remain perfect, but it does
not reflect. But the spirit thinks, re-
flects, compares, judges. How wonder-
ful is this power! and how great and
glorious are its achievements! (4)
Sensation. It is not the mere body
which feels: when life has departed
from it you may subject the body to
any treatment whatsoever, but you will
not discover in it any sign of sensation,
But the spirit feels: it is capable of the
deepest, intensest misery, and of the


most exquisite and unspeakable joy.
303


(5) Religtousness. Bodies are incapable
of admiration or veneration ; but spirits
have capabilities of worship and an in-
stinct or instincts for worship. By his
very nature man is a worshipper ; his
spirit wonders, admires, loves, adores.
How great, then, are the capacities and
faculties of the human spirit! More-
over the spirit acts without weariness.
The bodily organs through which in
our present state it acts are speedily
tired, but the spirit seems untiring in
its activities. And further, it appears
to be capable of indefinite growth and
progress, All the material forms of life
with which we are acquainted advance
and grow toa certain point, and then
begin to decay. But the spirit seems
to possess innate capabilities for never-
ending growth. How wonderful and
sacred are our spirits, possessing, as
they do, such attributes as these !

2. Its relationships. It is related—
(1) To angels. With holy angels it has
relations. ‘The angel of the Lord en-
campeth round about them that fear
Him, and delivereth them.” “ He shall
give His angels charge over thee, to keep
thee in all thy ways.” “ Are they not
all ministering spirits, sent forth to
minister for them who shall be heirs of
salvation?” These holy and heavenly
spirits minister to human Spirits upon
earth. The human spirit has relations
with evil angels also. Weare one with
them in the fact that we are rebellious
spirits. These evil angels act malig-
nantly on human spirits; they tempt
them to sin ; they seek their utter and
irretrievable ruin. “We wrestle not
against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, against powers,” &c,(Eph.
vi, 12). ‘The prince of the power of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





the air, the spirit that now worketh in
the children of disobedience.” (2) To
God. “God isa Spirit.” “The Lord
formeth the spirit of man within him”
(Zech. xii. 1). He is “the Father of
spirits” (Heb. xii. 9). ‘ We are also
His offspring” (Acts xvii. 28). He is
“the God of the spirits of all flesh.” We
were created in His image. His great
redemptive purpose is to renew us into
His image again. We may receive com-
munications from Him; may commune
with Him; may be “ workers together
with Him”; may participate in His
joy, &c. Weare called into this high
fellowship through Jesus Christ. He
restores the human spirit to those rela-
tions to God which sin had ruptured.
“ No man cometh unto the Father but
by Him.” How exalted and august are
these relations of the human spirit tu
God !

3. Its destiny. At death the body
“shall return to the earth as it was;
and the spirit shall return unto God
who gave it.” From the body the spirit
passes into the presence of God as the
great Judge ; and from His presence it
passes to its own place of retribution,
either to the Paradise of God or to the
prison of the lost. (5)

Here, then, is the grand distinction
of man that he is spirit with such won-
drous faculties, &c. Amongst all God’s
works in this world he stands alone in
this; for if we allow a spiritual prin-
ciple to animals it is greatly and ob-
viously inferior to the human spirit.

Man reverence thy spirit—reverence
thyself!

II, The supreme Sovereign of hu-
man nature.

“The God of the spirits of all flesh.”
God’s relations of Creator and Sustainer
of man were most probably present to
the mind of Moses in this appeal. We
have already spoken of Him as the
Creator of spirits. He is also their
Sustainer. “In whose hand is the soul
of every living thing, and the breath
of all mankind” (Job xii. 10). “He
giveth to all life, and breath, and all
things ” (Acts xvii. 25). His sovereignty
over human spirits rests upon these re-





OHAP, XVI.


lations which He sustains to them, and
it is manifest -—

1. In the claims which He makes wpon
the human spirit. He requires the sin-
cere worship and the supreme affection
of man: He claims the throne of our
being. Comp. Deut. vi. 4, 5; x. 12;
Ezek. xviii. 4; Luke x. 27.

2. In the power which He exercises over
the human spirit. We have seen that
He is its Creator; and its departure
from this world is in His hands. He
summons the spirit hence when He
pleases. Comp. Job xiv. 5, 20; Hocles.
viii. 8; Rev i, 18.

III. The inspiring hope of human
nature.

Because God is “the God of the
spirits of all flesh” Moses was en-
couraged to plead with Him that He
would not destroy “all the congrega-
tion” because of the rebellion of Korab
and his company. For the creatures
whom He has created and whom He
sustains He must have a kind regard,
Towards the spirits of which He is the
Father He must be gracious and merci-
ful. “Thou wilt have a desire to the
work of Thine hands” (Job xiv. 15).
Comp. Psa. ciii, 13-18; cxxxviii 8;
Isa. lxiv. 8, 9.

From the relations which He sus-
tains to our spirits we have a good hope
that He will ever deal graciously with
us. Comp. Lam. iii, 31-33.

Should we not leave the future des-
tinies of men (about which so many
minds are now much exercised) calmly
and confidently to “the God of the
spirits of all flesh”? It is absolutely
certain that He will deal righteously
and kindly with His creatures in this
and in all things,


Conclusion.

Realise the greatness and dignity of
your being. You area spirit, created
in the image of God, redeemed by the
precious blood of Jesus Christ, and
destined for immortality. The time
comes on apace when you will realise
the unspeakable importance of your
spirit. Let your great concern be to
secure its well-being. (c)


Ghat, XVL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


a
ILLUSTRATIONS.


(@) To say there fs no such thing as matter
would be a much less absurd inference, than
to say there is no such thing as mind. The
very act of inferring, as we do by reasoning,
that the object which effects our senses exists
apart from ourselves, is wholly incapable of
giving us any knowledge of tho objxct’s oxist-
ence, without, at the same time, giving us @
knowledge of our own, that is, of the mind’s
existence, An external necessarily implies an
internal, That there may be anything beyond
or without, there must necessarily be some-
thing beyond or without which it is said to
exist. That there may be a body which we
feel abiding separate from us, namely our own
body, one part of which gives us sensations
through another part, there must be a ws, an
us, that is, a MIND. If we have a right to call
spirit, or soul, or mind, a mere negation of the
qualities of matter; surely this might just as
well be retorted by saying that matter is only
a negation of the qualities of mind. But in
truth the materialists cannot stir one step
without the aid of that mind whose existence
they deny. . . . The truth is that we be-
lieve in the existence of matter because we
cannot help it. The inferences of our reason
from our sensations impel us to this conclusion;
and the steps are few and sbort by which we
reach it, But the steps are fewer and shorter,
and of the self-same nature, which lead us to
believe in the existence of mind; for of that
we have the evidence within ourselves. and
wholly independent of our senses. Nor can
we ever draw the inference, in any one in-
stance, of the existence of matter, without, at
the same time, exhibiting a proof of the exist-
ence of mind ; for we are, by the supposition,
reasoning, inferring, drawing a conclusion,
forming a belief: therefore, there exist» some-
body, something, to reason, to infer, to conclude,
to believe; that is, wx, not any fraction of
matter, but a reasoning, inferring, believ-
ing being; in other words, a Mind. If scep-
ticism can have any place in our system,
assuredly it relates to the existence of matter,
far more than of mind.—Lord Brougham.

(6) Nothing is more difficult than to realise
that every man has a distinct soul—that every
one of all the millions who live or have lived,
is as whole and independent a being in him-
self as if there were no one else in the whole
world but he. To explain what I mean...
When we read history, we meet with accounts
of great slaughters and massacres, great pes-
tilences, famines, conflagrations, and so on;
and we are accustomed to regard collections of
people as single individuals. We cannot un-
derstand that a multitude is a collection of
immortal souls, I say immortal souls, Hach
of those multitudes not only hud, while he wag
upon earth, but has a soul, which did in its own
tirce but return to God who gave it, and not
perish, and which now lives unto Him, All
those millions upon millions of human beings


304


who ever trod the earth, and saw the sum suoc-
eessively, are at this moment in existence all
together. Every one of those souls still lives,
They bad their separate thoughts and feelings
when on earth; they have them now. They
had their likings and pursuits, they gained
what they thought good, and enjoyed it; and
they stiJl somewhere or other live. and what
they then did in the flesh surely has its in-
fluence upon their present destiny. They live,
reserved for a day which is to come, when all
nations shall stand before God...... AU
the names we see written on monuments in
churches or churchyards; all the writers
whose names and works we see in our libraries;
al) the workmen who raised the great build-
ings far and near, which are the wonder of the
world, they are all in God’s remembrance—
they all live.

Moreover, every ene of all the souls which
have ever been on earth, is in one of two
spiritual states, so distinct from one another
that one is the subject of God’s favour, and
the other under His wrath; the one in the way
to eternal happiness, the other to eternal
misery. This is true of the dead, and is true
of the living also, All are tending one way or
the other; there is no middle or neutral state
for any one, though as far as the sight of the.
external world goes, all men seem to be in a
middle atate common to one and all, Yet,
much as men look the same, and impossible as
it is for us to say where each man stands in
God’s sight, there are two, and but two, classes
of men, and these have characters and des-
tinies as far apart in their tendencies as light
end darkness, This is thocase even of those
who are in the body, and it is much more true
of those who have passed into the unseen
state —J. H. Newman, D.D.

(c) Endeavour then, my brethren, to realize
that you have souls, and pray God to enable
you todo so. Endeavour to disengage your
thoughts and opinions from the things that are
seen; look at things as God looks at them,
and judge them as He judges, Pass a very
few years, and you will actually experience
what as yet you are called on to believe,
There will be no need of the effort of mind to
which I invite you. When you have passed
into the unseen state, there will be no need of
shutting your eyes to this world, when this
world bas vanished from you, and you have
nothing before you but the throne of God, and
the slow but continual movements about it in
preparation of the Judgment, Iu that interval,
when you are in that vast receptacle of disem-
bodied souls, what will be your thoughts about
the world which you have lett? How poor will
then seem to you its highest aims, how faint
its koenest pleasures, compared with the in-
finite aims, tho infinite pleasures, of which
you will at length feel your souls to be
capable! QO, my brethren! let the thought be
Upon you day by day, especially when you are


HUMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XVi.


tempted to sin. Avoid sin as a serpent; it
looks and promises well; it bites afterwards.
{tis dreadful in memory, dreadful even on
earth; but in that awful period, when the
fever of life is over, and you are waiting in
silence for the Judgment, with nothing to dis-
tract your thoughts, who can say how dread-
ful may be the memory of sins done in the
_ body? Then the very apprehension of
their punishment, when Christ shall suddenly
visit, will doubtless outweigh a thousandfold
their gratification, such as it was, which you


felt in committing them; and if so, what will
be the proportion between it and that punish-
ment, if, after all, it be actually inflicted ?
Lot us lay to heart our Saviour’s own moat
merciful words. ‘‘Bo not afraid,” He says,
“of them that kill the body, and after that
have no more that they can do. ButI will
forewarn you whom ye shall fear. Fear Him
which, after He hath killed, hath power te
cast into hell. Wea, I say unto you, fear
Him,”—Jbid,


THE PREPARATION FOR JUDGMENE


' ( Verses


In this section of the narrative we
have the final steps before the inflic-
tion of punishment upon the rebels.

I The complete separation of the
people from the rebels.

“And the Lord spake unto Moses,
saying, Speak unto the congregation,
saying, Get you up from about the
tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram,” &c. (vers. 23-27). In these
instructions we have—

1. A manitfestution of the justice of
God. In his intercession Moses had
pleaded the justice of God ; and this is
the Divine answer to his prayer. God
will not consume all the congrega-
tion because of the sin of a portion
of that congregation. “ All His ways
are judgment: a God of truth and
without iniquity, just and right is He.”
“The just Lord will not do iniquity;
every morning doth He bring His judg-
ment to light, He faileth not.” (a)

2. An wlustration of the peril of evil
associations. The people that were in
the immediate neighbourhood of the
rebels were in danger of sharing their
dread fate. ‘“ Depart, I pray you, from
the tents of these wicked men,” &c.
(ver. 26). Lot’s residence in Sodom
well nigh ruined him. Jehoshaphat’s
partnership with the wicked Ahaziah
ended in disaster (2 Chron. xx. 35-37).
*The companion of fools shall be
destroyed.” (6)

3. An illustration of the necessity of
human effort in the attainment of salva-
dion. If the people would avoid the
doom of Dathan and Abiram they must

x


23-30.)


hasten away from the tents of those


. wicked men. Lot had to make a speedy


departure from Sodom. If the sinner
would be saved from the punishment
and power of sin, he must ‘flee for
refuge to lay hold upon the hope set
before him.” (c)

The people obeyed the word of the
Lord spoken by Moses: “They gat up
from the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan,
and Abiram on every side.” The in-
stinct of self-preservation would urge
them to swift compliance with the
Divine instructions. Thus the rebels
and their families were separated from
the rest of the people.

II. The final statement concerning
the decision of the question which the
rebels had raised.

“And Moses said, Hereby ye shall
know that the Lord hath sent me,” &c,
(vers. 28-30). It has been well said by
Dr. Kitto: “ From the beginning of
the world unto this day, no man ever
made so bold and noble an assertion
of Divine approval, or subjected his
claims in the presence of a nation to a
test so immediate and so infallible.”
And Matthew Henry: “The judgment
itself would have been proof enough of
God’s displeasure against the rebels,
and would have given all men to
‘understand that they had provoked
the Lord’; but when it was thus
solemnly foretold and appealed to by
Moses beforehand, when there was not
the least previous indication of it from
without, the convincing evidence of it
was much the stronger, and it was put

30


CHAP. XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





beyond dispute that he was not only a
servant but a favourite of Heaven, who
was so intimately acquainted with the
Divine counsels, and could obtain such
extraordinary appearances of the Divine
power in his vindication.” How ex-
traordinary and sublime was the con-
fidence of Moses in allthis! Calmly he
makes this remarkably bold declaration,
and leaves the issue in the hands of the
Lord God. He knew well that he was
not seeking his own in any respect;
that his great aim was to promote tke
glory of God in the service to which
He had appointed him ; and, therefore,
he could confidently leave the issus
with his great Lord.

IIT. The final opportunity afforded
to the rebels of turning from their evil
course.

The warning which was given to
the people to separate themselves
from the tents of the rebels, and the
final statement of Moses as to the
settlement of the question in dis-
pate, afforded the rebels another Op-
portunity of desisting from their re-


bellion, acknowledging the authority
of their rightful leaders, &. The Lord
is slow to anger. He affords to the
greatest sinners many opportunities of
turning from their sin, before He smites
them in wrath. The Divine mercy in
this case is the more conspicuous, inas-
much as Dathan and Abiram having
refused to go to Moses and the elders,
Moses and the elders go to them.
Dathan and Abiram may yet be saved
if they will. How great is the long-
suffering of God! (d)

IV. The persistent and terrible au-
dacity of the rebels.

“Dathan and Abiram came out, and
stood in the door of their tents, and
their wives, and their sons, and their
little children.” “ As outfacing Moses,”
says Trapp, “and scorning the judg-
ment threatened. Hardened sinners
make no more of God’s dreadful threat-
enings than Behemoth doth of iron
weapons, which he esteemeth as straws.”
“He that being often reproved harden-
eth his neck, shall suddenly be de-
stroyed, and that without remedy.”


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(@) Here we open the Bible, in which we
find that to whom much is given, from him
shall much be required, and that it shall be
more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the day
of judgment than for nations which enjoyed a
fuller revelation of Divine purpose and re-
quirements, The heathen are a law unto
themselves. Five talents are expected to pro-
duce more than two, The Divine plan of
judgment, therefore, is not arbitrary, but
moral, If we lose hold of this principle, we
Shall see confusion where we might see the
order of righteousness. First of all, and last
of all, it must be our settled and unalterable
conviction that God must do right, or Ho is no
longer God. Everything must perish which
epposes this law. We are not, however, to
look at incomplete cases, and regard them as
final criteria by which to test the wisdom and
righteousness of the Almighty. In many
eases we shall have to repress our impatience,
and calmly to wait until fuller light is granted,
—Joseph Parker, D.D,

(6) Be cautious with whom you associate,
and never give your company or your confi-
dence to persons of whose 800d principles you
are not certain, No person that is an enem
to God can be a friend to man, He that has
already proved himself ungrateful to the Au-
thor of a blessing, will aot scruple, when


it will serve his turn, to shake off a fellow=
worm like himself. He may render you in-
strumental to his own purposes, but he will
never benefit you, A bad man isa curse to
others; as he is secretly, notwithstanding all
his boasting and affected gaiety, a burden to
himself, Shun him as you would a serpent
in your path. Ba not seduced by his rank,
his wealth, his wit, or his influence. Think
of him as already in the grave; think of him
as standing before the everlasting God in
judgment, This awful reality will instantly
strip off all that is now so imposing, and pre-
sent him in his true light, the object rather
of your compassion and of your prayers than
of your wonder and imitation —Bp. Coleridge,

(c) If a man knew that the ship in which
he and his family were sailing, and which con-
tained all his property, was leaking day and
night, do you Suppose he would be careless
about it? Would he not be constantly baling
out the water lest it should sink the vessel
with its precious freight? If a man under-
stood that a spark from the flue of the furnace
had set fire to the timber of his dwelling, and
that, smothered, it was creeping along and
charring the wainscoting and partition, do you
Suppose he would content himself merely with
@aying, “T have no doubt that this house ig
on fire, and that itis dangerous?” Would


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XVI.


se


he not do something? Many men read the


Bible, and say, “ My dear children, we are all
sinful; we are sold in sin; may God lead us
out of our sinfulness, and draw us toward
Him!” and yet put forth no effort to reform
their lives. Meanwhile their sinfulness in-
creases, and envelops them and consumes
them, Thousands and thousands of men have
- died in that way, and been utterly destroyed,
If a man is wise, no sooner does he have the
slightest intimation that there is fire threat-
ening the destruction of his house and all that
are in it, than he calls for men, and sets them
to work to put an end to the mischief, And
when a man is touched by the Spirit of God,
and he is made conscious that the fires of hell
are in him, with what earnestness does he
enter upon a course ofrepentance! How does
he say, “God have mercy on me, Help me;
teach me; lead me! ”"—H. W. Beecher.

(@) He doth often give warning of judg-
ments, that He might not pour out His wrath.
He summons them to a surrender of them-
selves, and a return from their rebellion, that
they might net feel the force of His arms. He
offers peace before He shakes off the dust of
His feet, that His despised peace might not
return in vain to Him to solicit a revenge
from His anger. He hath a right to punish
the first commission of a crime, but He warns


men of what they have deserved, of what His
justice moves Him to inflict, that by having
recourse to His mercy He might not exercise
the rights of His justice, God threatens
Nineveh, by the prophet, with destruction,
that Nineveh’s repentance might make void
the prophecy. He fights with men by the
sword of His mouth, that He might not pierce
them by the sword of His wrath. He threat-
ens, that men might prevent the execution of
His threatening ; Ho terrifies, that He might
not destroy, but that men by humiliation
might lie prostrate before Him, and move the
bowels of His mercy to a louder sound than
the voice of His anger. Ho takes time to
whet His sword, that men may turn them-
selves from the edge of it, He roars like a
lion, that men, by hearing His voice, may
shelter themselves from being torn by His
wrath, There is patience in the sharpest
threatening, that we may avoid the scourge,
Who can charge God with an eagerness to re-
venge, that sends so many heralds and so
often before He strikes, that He might be pre-
vented from striking? His threatenings have
not so much of a black flag as of an olive
branch, He lifts up His hand before He strikes
that men might see it and avert the stroke
(Isa, xxvi. 11).—Charnocke,


Tae Duty or SEPARATION FROM THE WICKED,


(Verse 26.)


The statement of this duty needs to
be very guarded.

This duty is different from the self-
righteousness of the Pharisee described
by our Lord in Luke xviii. 11, 12.
Comp. Isa. lxv. 5.

This duty is not binding as regards
the legitimate transactions of business
with wicked men. “I pray not that
Thou shouldest take them out of the
world, but that Thou shouldest keep
them from the evil.”

This duty does not preclude associa-
tion with the wicked with a view to
their spiritual good. As followers of
Jesus Christ it is our duty to endeavour
to turn the wicked from his wicked-
ness,

But it is our duty to avoid all
voluntary and friendly association with
the openly and defiantly wicked, all
such association as may appear to
courtenance their wickedness. The
testimony of the Sacred Scriptures on

x2


this question is unmistakable. See
Psa. i. 1; Prov. i. 10-16; iv. 14, 15;
ix. 6; Acts ii 40; 2 Cor. vi. 17, 18;
Rev. xviii. 4.

Moreover, our text insists on the
thoroughness of this separation. “Touch
nothing of theirs.” We must separate
ourselves from their (1) society; (2)
friendship ; (3) pursuits ; (4) customs,
&c. In enforcement of this duty con-
sider, that by friendly association with
such wicked persons —

I, We countenance them in theirsins.

It is the duty of every man to dis-
courage evil ; to wage determined and
incessant warfare against wickedness ;
to agree to no truce with the devil. If
we would discourage wickedness, we
must separate ourselves from notorious
evil-doers; we must not allow them
any reason to suppose that we consent
even by silence to their sins. Comp.
1 Cor. v. 11; Eph. v. 11; 2 Thess.


iii, 14. (a) aor


CHAP, XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


eee eS


II. We are in peril of being drawn
into their sins.

The contagion of their example may
take hold upon us. Friendly assovia-
tion with the wicked is full of danger
to our own spiritual health. Comp.
Isa. lit, 11. Such association also
makes us partakers of their sins.
Comp. 2 John 10, 11. (8)

III. We are in peril of the judg-


ment which will fall upon them for
their sins.

This was the peril of the congrega-
tion about the tents of Korah, Dathan,
and Abiram. They must speedily get
away from those tents “lest they be
consumed.” This was the peril of Lot
in Sodom. “ A companion of fools shall
be destroyed.” Comp. Jer. li. 6, 45 ;
Rev. xviii. 4


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) Every person is most sacredly bound, in
times of prevailing degeneracy, to act an open,
firm, and decided part in favour of virtue and
religion; and resolutely endeavour, by his ex-
ample, to discountenance vice and impiety in
every shape, In an especial manner should
he avoid the very appearance of those evils
which are most prevalent around him, and
practice with double care and diligence those
virtues which are most generally neglected
and despised...... It has been justly re-
marked, that when God confers on us the power
to do good and repress evil, He lays us under
an obligation to exert that power, Agreeably,
the Apostle informs us, that to him who know-
eth to do good, and doeth it not, to him it is
sin, Honce it follows that we are accountable
for all the good which we might, but have not
done; and for all the evil which we might, but
have not prevented, By conniving at the sins
of others, therefore, we make them ourown. If
the name of God be profaned, if His holy day
be dishonoured, if a tellow-creature by intem-
perance render his family wretched, spread a
snare in the path of his children, destroy his
health, and finally plunge himself into eternal
ruin, when we, by proper exertions, might
have prevented it, a righteous God will not
hold us guiltlees, nor will rivers of tears, shed
in secret over these sins, wash out the guilt
thus contracted.— £. Payson, D.D.

(5) There is but one resource for innosence
among men or women, and that is, an embargo
upon all commerce of bad men. Bar the win-

bolt the door! nor answer their strain,


if they charm never so wisely! In no othe1
way can you be safe. So well am I assured of
the power of bad men to seduce the erring
purity of man, that I pronounce it next to im-
possible for man or woman to escape, if they
permit bad men to approach and dally with
them.—H. W. Beecher.

Let no young man or woman go into a social
circle where the influences are vicious or hos-
tile to the Christian religion. You will begin
by reproviug their faults, and end by copying
them, Sinis contagious. You go among those
who are profane, and you will become profane.
You go among those who use impure language,
and you will use impure language, Go among
those who are given to strong drink, and you
will inevitably become aninebriate, There is
no exception to the rule. A man is no better
than the company he continually keeps, It
is always best to keep ourselves under Chris-
tian influences. It is not possible, if you mingle
in associations positively Christian, not to be
made better men or women. The Christian
people with whom you associate may not be
always ta.king their religion, but thereis some-
thing in the moral atmosphere that will be
life to your soul, You choose out for your
most intimate associates eight or ten Christian
people, You mingle in that association; you
take their counsel; you are guided by their
example, and you live a useful life, and die a
happy death, and go to a blessed eternity,
There is no possibility of mistaking it; there
is not an exception in all the uuiverse or ages


not one.—7’, de Witt Talmage, D.D,


Carist’s Dears a Proor or His Divinity.


(Verse 29.)


We wish simply to take the fact
that an uncommon death, a “ visitation,
which is not after the visitation of all
men,” was made a sign or evidence of
the Divine mission of Moses. We wish
to see whether a precisely similar sign
or evidence may not be urged for the


308


Divine mission of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ. We mean to assert
that our blessed Saviour did not “dia
the common death of all men ;” and
from and by this very circumstance
we strengthen our belief in His hav:
ing been the Son of God; yea, God


Es


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. ¥VI


eee — eee —


as well as man. We wish you to well
examine whether there were not power-
ful indications in the mode in which
our Lord and Saviour submitted to His
last sufferings, that He did not die as
an individual man, but as a sacrifice
for the sins of this creation.

Three out of the four Evangelists
make express mention of Christ’s cry-
ing with a loud voice, immediately
before He gave up the ghost. And this
loud cry preceding almost instanta-
neously His decease, produced in the
centurion who stood by, the persuasion
that Jesus was indeed the Son of God
(Mark xv. 39). Now let us see what
it was which thus wrought on the cen-
turion. There was before him a Being
nailed to a cross, dying in a manner
as lingering as it was painful. The
thing to be expected was that the vic-
tim would gradually sink, growing
weaker and weaker, until exhausted
nature gave way and the soul escaped
from the body. Since this mode of exe-
cuting malefactors was ordinarily so
tedious that the legs of the sufferers
were broken in order to hasten their
dissolution, we must conclude that no
crucified person would have naturally
died, unless through the slow process
of exhaustion, life having ebbed away
as though drop by drop, till there was
nothing more for the torture to exact.
It was therefore quite unnatural that
our Lord should have had strengtb to
utter aloud cry at the very moment
of the separation of the soul from the
body. He showed that there was no-
thing like an exhaustion of nature ; and
yet the mode of death was such, that
it was only through exhaustion of na-
ture that dissolution could take place.
Indeed, we have additional testimony
that Christ’s dying as He did might
justly be called unnatural, for He died
long before those who were crucified
with Him—in a time so unusually
short, that when Joseph of Arimathea
applied for leave to take the body,
Pilate marvelled if he were already
dead, and would not believe it till he
had called the centurion and obtained
certain information. Our Lord, though


crucified, did not die in strict truth
through the effects of crucifixion: He
did not die, as the thieves did, through
any necessity of nature, or because His
enemies had been able to reach the
citadel of life. And it was the mani-
fest voluntariness of the death of Christ
which overcame the centurion. He
could not but perceive that, through
some mysterious ordinance or preroga-
tive, our Lord had His life entirely in
His own keeping ; so that in place of
being subjected to death, He seemed
to have literally the lordship over lite.
Comp. John x. 17, 18. It may sound
like a paradox, but it is nevertheless a
truth, that death had no power over
Christ even when Hedied. He breathed
His last only becanse choosing to sus-
pend that animation, of which, as Him-
self alone the author, Himself alone
could be the destroyer. And if, then,
Christ did not ‘‘die the coramon death
of all men,” who can wonder that the
centurion was confounded at the spec-
tacle, or that he broke into an exclama-
tion which showed that he felt the
Sufferer was something more than a
mere man? “Of a truth this Man
was the Son of God.”

But now let us take a wider survey,
and accompany our Redeemer through
the scenes of His agony. We have on
other occasions pointed out to you the
striking and almost inexplicable con-
trast bet ween the deportment of Christ,
and that of numbers of His followers,
as the hour drew nigh of departure
from earth. It is a contrast which
seems all in favour of the disciple
rather than the Master; for whilst
there has been tranquility, and even
triumph, in those who have been dying
in the faith of the Redeemer, there was
perturbation and anguish in that Re-
deemer Himself. The bold defender of
truth has gone up to the stake or the
scaffold rejoicing in being thought
worthy to suffer for his Lord, and
cheered by bright glimpses which he
caught of immortality. How different
was the demeanour of Christ when
anticipating death from the hands of
His enemies! I see Him casting Him-


309


CHAP. XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


ns


self on the grouud, praying that “if it
be possible the cup might pass from
Him ;” &c. I hear Him uttering the
most touching and thrilling complaints,
as though His spirit were sorely dis-
quieted and actually deserted of God.
Yes, Christ is evidently not dying “ the
common death of all” Christians.

But let us see whether on this very
account there be not reason for con-
cluding Him to be God’s own Son,
For what are the causes which com-
monly make death terrible to men?
In the first place, to a perfectly
righteous individual nothing would
make death so terrible as uncertainty
with respect to the immortality of the
soul. To the good man the thought
of annihilation would be utterly in-
supportable.

But now let us view Christ as nothing
more than an eminently rightevuus man
who is about to submit to death to
confirm the doctrines which be had
taught. Died there ever the man so
certified of the great truth of the soul’s
immortality? Had He not been Him-
self the preacher of that truth? (2
Tim. i 10)... . But what are we to
say when we behold Him literally
overcome with terror, manifesting a
perturbation which could not be ex-
ceeded ifthe future were all darkness,
or there were even a knowledge that
the soul perished with the body? Oh!
we can only say that the agony of the
Mediater proves Him less than man,
or more than man. It is what no mere
man, at least no mere Christian man,
passing from one world to another,
with just his own account to make up
and his own pains to undergo, ever
had, or could have, to sustain. We
think ourselves warranted in calling
upon you to apply the reasoning of our
text ; and to conclude that God had
sent Christ as a propitiation for sin,
forasmuch as He does not “die the
common death of all men ;” and is not
“visited after the visitation of all men.”

We go on to observe, that however
assured a man might be as to the soul’s
immortality, he might be harrassed


310


with doubts as to his acceptance with
God; and this would necessarily pro-
duce a painful shrinking from the act
of dissolution. In ordinary cases it is
just herein that the distressing thing
lies. This is true in the case of the
righteous. We cannot be surprised if
they are sometimes daunted as they
view death at hand.

But now, can you think that there
ever lived the man so persuaded of the
favour of God, so secure of happiness
at death, as Jesus of Nazareth? Had
He not been pure in thought, and word,
and deed; so that there could be no
place for repentance, as there had been
none for sin# And was He not tho
roughly certain that He was about to
enter on a recompense such as had
never been awarded to any created
being ? (Heb. xii. 2). Who then shall
meet death composedly—who triumph-
antly—if not Jesus Christ? ... . But
how is the expectation answered? That
afflicted and agitated Man, prostrated
on the ground, trembling and aston-
ished and convulsed—is this the Being
who has everything in His favour, and
over whom we have felt it impossible
that death could exert any terrifying
power?.... What account do we
give of this? This should make you
feel that He must be sustaining some
lofty and responsible character—that
in the scene which is so counter to
expectation He has to bear some vast
burden which that character entails.
We contend that the doctrine of the
atonement—the doctrine that Christ
died as a sin-offering and propitiation
for the offences of the world—furnishes
the only explanation of the anguish
and the horrors of the sufferer.

Blessed be His name! we may meet
death with confidence, because He met
it in terror; for “by His stripes we
are healed.” He took away the sting
of death, but it was by bearing that
sting in His own soul; He scattered
the darkness of the grave, but it was
by Himself enduring the eclipse of the
face of His Father.—Heury Melville,
B.D.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,





CHAP. XVI,





Tun Exnouriow oy JupGaMens


(Verses 31-35.)


These verses watrant the following
observations :—

IL That God vindicates the charac-
ter of His faithful servants from the
misrepresentations by which they may
be assailed.

By this stern judgment on the rebels,
Jehovah fulfilled the word of His ser-
vant Moses, and splendidly vindicated
the character and calling of both Moses
and Aaron. By it He also honoured
the extraordinary confidence which
Moses had exercised in Him, in the
calm and unshaken declaration which
he made that God would manifest in a
certain miraculous manner whether He
had commissioned him or not. God
always honours the faith of His ser-
vants ; and they may confidently leave
the vindication of their character and
call to Him. Such vindication may be
delayed, but it is certain. Comp. Psa.
xxxvii. 5, 6.

IL That the Divine threatenings
are certain of fulfilment.

“And it came to pass, as He had
made an end of speaking all these
words, that the ground clave asunder
under them,” &c. The declarations of
His judgment against sin are spoken
not merely in terrorem. His threaten-
ings are as true as His promises. If
any soul will persist in rebellion against
God he will find to his cost that the
punishment denounced against sin will
be inflicted. (a)

III, That everything in the universe
may be employed by God as the in-
strument of His judgments.

In this history we find that the earth
and the forces that are at work within
it were the instruments of His judg-
ment upon Dathan and Abiram, and
the fire upon Korah and the two hun-
dred and fifty who burnt incense. (0)

IV. That the wicked often involve
those who are innocent of their sins
in the consequences of such sins.

“The earth opened her mouth, and


swallowed them up, and their houses,
and all the men that appertained unto
Korah, and all their goods,” &c. (vers.
32, 33). Thus these rebels brought
destruction upon others. Some of the
penalties of sin seldom fall merely upon
the sinner. One man sins, and others
suffer by reason of his sins. (See notes
on this point on pp. 34 and 264.)
This fact—

1. Shows the heinousness of sin.

2. Should act as a restraint from sin.

V. That hardened rebels are prone
to cry out when the judgment of God
falls upon them.

When the judgment of God fell upon
them the rebels cried out so lamentably
that the people who were round about
fled in alarm lest the same judgment
should overtake them. A little while
ago they were bold and defiant ; now
they are terror-stricken, “Who may
stand in Thy sight when once Thou art
angry t”

1. Their cries were selfish. They
were the expression of terror, not of
repentance.

2. Their erves were too late. They
should have cried before, while mercy
might have been obtained; but now
their cries are utterly in vain, Comp.
Prov. i. 24-31. (c)

VI. That the judgments of God
occasion alarm amongst men.

“And all Israel that were round
about them fled at the cry of them:
for they said, Lest the earth swallow
us up also.” “ Others’ ruins should be
our warnings.” Generally the alarm
which is awakened by the Divine judg-
ments speedily passes away (as it did
in this case) and leaves no good result.
“ Law and terrors do but harden.”

Conclusion.

Here is very solemn warning to im-
penitent sinners. ‘ Because there is
wrath, beware lest He take these away
with His stroke: then a great ransom
cannot deliver thee.” (d)


$11


_——_


CHAP. XVI,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


ES
ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) Is God all-mighty, all-mighty? Then
do not imagine you can escape His judgments.
His lightnings find us out. His sharp spear
penetrates our secresy. You have evaded Him
now fifty years, and you think you can do it
fifty more. Believe me, as speaking the word
of the Lord, you cannot. Has the ox that has
been driven into the fat pasture escaped the
knife? Look at the noble animal there,
Look at the rich grass or clover, and see
the sunshine falling upon the scene, and the
ox says, “I am at rest, I have escaped the
knife of the slayer,” not knowing that the
pasture is on the way to the slaughter-house,
and that next to its death stands the rich
blessing of its life, There are many oxen
that are being prepared for the slaughter
when they little think it—Joseph Parker,

.D.

(6) Mark here, how all creatures obey their
Creator, and are at His commandment; when
God willeth the earth to open her mouth, it
openeth: when He willeth it to swallow, it swal-
loweth up: when He willeth it to close again, it
closeth : when He willeth the fire to come
down, it cometh: and to consume, it consum-
eth, The sounding of the rams’ horns threw
down the high walls of Jericho at His com.
mandment, The waters of the Red Sea stood
still, and Jordan fled back at His word. The
fire could not burn, nor the lions devour when
it pleased the Almighty. Acknowledge there-
fore His infinite power for our instruction;
and let us rest upon it in all dangers for our
eonsolation,—Attersoll,

God is not confined to one method of punish-
ment, He toucheth a man’s bones, and they
melt; He breathes upon a man’s brain, and
henceforth he is not able to think, He comes
in at night-time, and shakes the foundations
of man’s most trusted towers, and in the
morning there is nought but a heap of ruins,
He disorganizes men’s memories, and in an
instant they confuse all the recollections of
their life-time ; He touches man’s tongue, and
the fluent speaker becomes a stammerer, He
breaks the staff in twain, and he who was re-
lying upon it is thrown down in utter help-
lessness,— Joseph Parker, D.D.

For another illustration on this point see p,
252.

(c) Now these rebels begin to cry, but they
cry out and howl when it is too late: they
should have cried unto God for mercy and for-
giveness while it was time and pardon was
offered, Thus no doubt did many men of the


old world cry out when they _were fm the
water, but then the acceptable time was past;
they should have watered their hearts with
the tears of repentance when Noah preached
unto them. The Sodomites no doubt cried out
when fire and brimstone was come down upon
them, but they should have cried to God when
He cried to them by Lot whom He sent among
them. But then was the time of judgment;
the time of merey was gone and past. So it
was with Esau, when he had sold his birth-
right, and lost his blessing, he cried with a
great cry and a bitter, but it was too late.
Heb. xii. 17; Gen. xxvii. 88. So did the rich
man, being in hellin torments, Luke xyi. 23;
then he called for mercy, but mercy was de-
parted from him, Here is time and place for
mercy, but there is no mercy to be had in
hell, The earth is the school of instruction;
hell is the house ¥ correction. There the
reprobate cry and yéll, where is nothing but
weeping and gnashing of teeth, but it is with-
out ease, withoutend, without profit, They that
could shed never a tear to God in this life,
shall be constrained to shed abundance of
tears in the pit of destruction, The tears of
repentance that we pour out ascend up unto
heaven, and are kept in a bottle of remem-
brance ; but the tearsthat are wrung from the
reprobate in hell, are never gathered up, nor
regarded of God, and are utterly unprofitable
to ourselves, Let it therefore be our wisdom
to make use of the time of God’s mercy and
patience, and know that there is no place of
repentance after this life.—Adversoll,

(d) When the death-thirst isin your throat,
what do you think you will do without God?
To die in God’s presence, is simply to let life
blossom into something better than life; but
to die without God must be horrible! You
will not want your boon companions then,
The drink will not pacify you then. Musio
will have no charms for you then. The love
of a tender and gentle wife can yield you but
sorry comfort then, You may have your
money bags at your side, but they will not
calm your palpitating heart then. You will
hear the booming of the waves of the great
sea of eternity; you will feel your feet slip-
ping into the dreadful quicksand; you will
clutch about for help, but there will be none!
Instead thereof invisible hands shall begin to
pull you down, and down through the dark
sea you must descend to those darker deptha, °
where dread despair will be your everlasting
heritage.—C, H. Spurgeon,


Tae Jupement or Koran.
(Verses 31-33.)


A reference to the words of Moses
recorded in verses 29 and 30, will show
that the death of these men was a

312


supernatural event. Moses foretells
the exact manner in which it should
take place ; he calls it “a new thing ;*


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


CHAP, XVI,





he stakes his Divine commission upon
it—“ Hereby shall ye know that
Jehovah has sent me.” It was new as
the dividing of the Red Sea had been
new, or the standing still of the sun in
after days in obedience to the command
of Joshua, and was as miraculous as
either of those events. God alone could
have given such an attestation to the
mission of a man; the death of Korah
was an emphatic and terrible answer to
the charges which had been brought
against Moses; and its following so
immediately upon his words adds an-
othersupernatural element to the event.
We may learn from it and from what led
to it—

1. That the human character which
most approaches perfection, and the
most qualified leader of men, may be
falsely accused by those to whom he
is a blessing. Probably Moses never
had a superior either in character or
ability, yet to him it was said, “ Ye take
too much upon you” (ver. 3).


2. It must depend upon the character
and not upon the number of the people
whether their voice is to be taken as
the voice of God. Nearly all Israel, it
appears (ver. 21), were with Korah
and his associates, yet Moses, although
almost alone, had God and right on his
side.

3. That God will, sooner or later,
vindicate those of His servants who
have been falsely accused. False
charges have rested upon many for
centurtes, and at the end of that time
the truth has come tv light. There is
to be a day which shall “declare it”
(1 Cor. iii. 13). The Son of God lived
and died under false accusation, but He
was vindicated by His resurrection;
and when He shall be revealed from
heaven ‘‘ with ten thousands of His
saints” (Jude 14), He will bring to light
men’s hidden motives, and make mani-
fest the counsels of the heart.—/rom
“ Outlines of Sermons on the Miracles and
Parables of the Old Testament.”


A Memoriat or JupaM=Enz,


(Verses 36-40.)


These verses teach the following im-
portant truths :—

I. That things appropriated to re-
ligious uses should be reverently
regarded.

‘And the Lord spake unto Moses,
saying, speak unto Eleazar the son of
Aaron the priest, that he take up the
censers out of the burning; for they
are hallowed for they offered.
them before the Lord ; therefore they
are hallowed.” Comp. Lev. xxvii. 28.
For notes and an illustration on this
' point, see pp. 56, 57. (a)

II, That the designs and doings of
wicked men are overruled by God for
the accomplishment of His purposes.

“ The censers of these sinners against
their own souls, let them make them
broad plates for a covering of the altar.”
In this way “ God’s altar was protected
by the means whist: had been used to
eolate its sanctity.” “Surely the wrath


of man shall praise Thee.” We have
a striking illustration of this in the
sins of Joseph’s brethren, and the way
in which they were used by God for the
carrying out of His gracious designs.
Comp. Gen. 1. 20.

III. That he who sins against God
injures himself.

“These sinners against their own
souls,” or, “against their own. lives.”
By sin man injures himself physically.
When the laws of health are violated
disease and misery follow. By sin man
injures himself morally, Sin blunts
the spiritual sensibilities, stifles the as-
pirations, and quenches the hopes of the
soul, &c. “He that sinneth against
Me wrongeth his own soul,” “Sin when
it is finished bringeth forth death.” (6)

IV. That the judgments of God
should be remembered and heeded.

These broad plates for a covering of
the altar were to “be a sign unto the

313


CHAP, XVI,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


Se


children of Israel. . . . ® memorial
unto the children of Israel, that no
stranger, which is not of the seed of
Aaron, come near to offer incense before
the Lord; that he be not as Korah,
and as his company.” Man is prone to
think that he may sin, and escape the
punishment of his sin, notwithstanding
the overwhelming evidence against such
a notion ; hence the importance of me-
morials such as this. The sternest
judgments of God are speedily lost sight
of by those who most need to keep them
in miaod; therefore this memorial was


fitted to answer a useful end in remind-
ing the people of this judgment, and so
deterring them from sin. “All these
things happened unto them for ensam-
ples; and they are written for our ad-
monition.” ‘Sodom and Gomorrah,
and the cities about them, are set forth
for an example, suffering the vengeance
of eternal fire.”


Conclusion:

Seeing that God is so cencerned to
guard us against sin, it surely behoves
us to flee from it as from our worst foe,


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) The Obristian dispensation, although
it is a dispensation of universality, and bases
all its promises and sanctions upon the fact
of spiritual service, has not annulled the
seemly and the sacred in connection with the
worship of God. The false pride of Gerizim
is humbled by its superior light. The
haughtiness which would build an exclusive
altar at Jerusalem is rebuked by every
word of its inspired lips. It proclaims
that everywhere where need compels, and
where hearts prompt, and where the wealth
of love constrains the offering, man may
build a temple and look for acceptance
and blessing. But it nowhere approves the
idea that all places are equally sacred, or that
God has ceased to visit Zion, and to dwell in
its tabernacles with His manifestations of
peculiar regard. There is a sentimental de-
votion that has become very fashionable now-
a-days, a sort of spurious spirituality, minced
out cemmonly from the lips of most unspiritual
people—a kind of domestic pantheism, whose
flame of devotion is too subtle to be kindled
in houses made with hands. They tell us—
and it is true—that the heart which God has
touched will find Him everywhere, in every


gracious prodigality of nature, and in every
bounteous ministry of life ; that to His tuned
spirit the wild heatherbells sing Sabbath
knells, Well, itis true; but it is true also—
a profounder truth in theory, and a commoner
experience in fact—that God has special
honours for the places that are devoted to His
worship; and it is true, too, that the spirit
tuned to the music of the sanctuary is the
keenest in its recognition of those tremulous
airs of worship-song which are floating all
the universe around.— W. M. Pxnshon, LL.D,

(6) You have heard of the Spartan youth
who concealed a stolen fox under his garment,
and although it was eating into his bowels,
he would not show it, and therefore died
through the creature’s bites. You are of that
sort, sinner; you are carrying sin in your
bosom, and it is eating out your heart, God
knows what it is, and you know what it is,
Now, you cannot keep it there and be unbitten,
undestroyed. Why keep it there? Oh, cry
to God with a vehement cry, God save me
from my sin! Oh, bring me, even me, to the
foot of Thy Son’s cross, and forgive me, and
then crucify my sin, for I see clearly now that


sin must perish or I must.—C, H. Spurgeom,


Tue Coverine or THE ALTAR, AND ITs TEACHINGS,


(Verse 38.)


Let us inquire what these plates on
the altar would teach the people.

I. How futile it is for any one to
oppose God, and how God can make
the opposition of men helpful to
His cause.

How easily God brings down the
pride os ae No weapon that is


formed against Him can prosper. (Job
ix. 4.) “ He is wise”—man cannot out-
wit Him: “He is mighty in strength”
——man cannot overcome Him. To
oppose Him is only to place thorns and
briers before a consuming fire: the
attempt is foolish, fruitless, and de-
structive, Angels rebelled, and it was


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XVI.





their ruin. Pharaoh opposed God, and
he was destroyed. It was the same
with the people in the Wilderness.
These plates would be lasting witnesses
of the madness and the futility of op-
posing God.

Further, they teach that God can
make use of the very opposition, and
turn what was meant to be destructive
to be helpful to His cause. These
censers were designed to be rivals to
those of Aaron; the avowed object of
the rebels was to take the priesthood
from the family of Aaron and to make
the altar common property. What did
God do? He caused these very censers
to be made into plates for a covering of
the altar, so as to preserve it from the
action of the fire that was ever burn-
ing on it. God permits evil, but He
ever controls it (Psalm lxxvi.10). We
should never tremble for the success of
God’s work. As a matter of fact no
opposition has ever hurt His work.
“The blood of the martyrs has been
the seed of the Church.” In all history
we see Him working out His own wise,
great, and good purposes from the
tangled web of human life.

II. That God wishes one age to
learn from another.

His ‘treatment of men is not only
punitive, but educational. These plates
were for a memorial; they were to
“be a sign,” &c. God did not want
‘he event to be forgotten. He teaches
us through human life. The Bible to
a great extent is made up of biography
—brief records of human lives. God
shows us how one prospers, and where
another fails ; and He means one age to
learn from another. The wrecks we
meet with in society, by drunkenness,
gambling and other sins (as with these
plates), God holds them up to “be a
sign unto” us.

III. That sacred things must be
treated reverently.

“They offered them before the Lord,
therefore they are hallowed.” God was


then teaching the people by practical
illustrations, and not by the mere an-
nouncing of principles. Thus here He
taught them and us the importance of
dealing reverently with sacred things.
There is need of this lesson in the
present day ; for there is a tendency to
“pooh pooh” many things which our
fathers held sacred. Human reason is
enthroned : Divine things are brought
to its bar, and are very freely and
irreverently handled. It is so in re-
spect of the Bible, the Lord’s day, the
fundamental truths of Christianity, &ec.
“ Hands off” these sacred things ! they
are hallowed to the Lord; let us not
treat them as if they were ordinary
things.

IV. That the sinner ever injures
himself.

God speaks of these men as “ sinners
against their own souls,” or lives. They
had brought ruin on themselves, These
plates would teach the people that “the
way of transgressors is hard,” and “ the
soul that sinneth it shall die,” and “he
that sinneth against Me wrongeth his
own soul.” Sin robs God, does harm
to others, but it ruins none but the
doer of it. Every sin of man is a
wrong to his own nature: we see it
so physically, mentally, and morally.
Every sin is a transgression of some
law, and the broken law insists on its
penalty. Sin hardens the soul, de-
prives it of good, alienates it from God,
defiles it, shuts it from heaven, makes
it only fit for hell, and exposes it to the
eternal curse. Through these plates
God cries to the sinful, “ Do thyself no
harm.”

Conclusion :—

1. What folly is a life of sin! The
Biblical definition of a sinner is—a
Fool.

2. To obey God and to please Him ts
true wisdom. He ever seeks our good,
knows what is best for us, so in obeying
Him we do ourselves the greatest pos-
sible good.—David Lloyd,


CHAP, XVI.


.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





Tax Aagcravatep REBELLION oF THE PxroPLE, THE ErrsotuaL INTHEROBSSION
oF THR Good, AND THE JusTIOgE AND Mzroy or Gop.


(Verses 41-50.)


Consider :—

I, The aggravated rebellion of the
people. :

“On the morrow all the congregation
of the children of Israel murmured
against Moses and against Aaron, say-
ing, Ye have killed the people of the
Lord.” In this fresh outbreak of re-
bellion we have—

1, Terrible disregard of Divine warn.
ings. These people had witnessed judg-
ment after judgment because of re-
bellion ; only yesterday they had seen
Dathan and Abiram swallowed up by
earthquake, and Korah and his company
consumed by fire frow the Lord, yet to-
day they break out into rebellion again.
Warnings seem to be utterly lost
apon them. “He that being often
reproved hardeneth his neck,” &c.
(Prov. xxix. 1).

2. Base ingratitude to Moses and
Aaron. “They murmured against
Moses and against Aaron,” &. It
seems as if the people believed “ that
Moses and Aaron had used some oun-
ning in this business, and that the
earthquake and fire were artificial ;
else, had they discerned the hand of
God in this punishment, oould they
have dared the anger of the Lord in the
very' face of justice?” Their charge


against Moses and Aaron was utterly,


unjust and basely ungrateful. It was
owing to the intercession of these holy
men (ver. 22) that the whole congrega-
tion was not consumed ; yet, &.

3. Profane characterization of the
wicked as the people of God. They speak
of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, and
their confederates, as “the people of
the Lord.” Thus they justify the un-
godly ; they canonise the most stout-
hearted rebels as vaints of the Lord.
This rebellion seems to us the worst
which has arisen in the history of this
rebellious people. The time of its oc-
currence—immediately after most awful
eee ) the form which it assumed,


this malicious charge against Moses and
Aaron ; and its reason, their sympathy
with hardened rebels whom God had
destroyed, render this rebellion one of
fearful aggravations How powerless
are the sternest judgments to change
men’s sinful hearts, or effectually to
restrain from sin! Only the grace of
God can do this.

II. The speedy interposition of Je-
hovah,

“ And it came to pass, when the con-
grezation was gathered against Moses
and against Aaron, that they looked
toward the tabernacle of the congrega-
tion: and, behold, the cloud covered
it, and the glory of the Lord appeared,”
&c. (vers. 42-45). Thus God interposes
by :—
fi The manifestation of His glory.
“ The cloud covered the tabernacle, and
the glory of the Lord appeared.” “As
the cloud rested continually above the
tabernacle during the time of encam
ment (chap. ix. 18 sqq. ; Exod. xl. 38),
we must suppose that at this time the
cloud covered it in a fuller and much
more conspicuous sense, just as it had
done when the tabernacle was first
erected (chap. ix. 15; Exod. xl. 34),
and that at the same time the glory of
God burst forth froi the dark cloud in
amiraculous splendour.” —Keil and Del.
This was done for—(1) A security to
His servants. (2) A check to the
rebels,

2. The declaration of the desert of the
rebels. “The Lord spake unto Moses,
saying, Get you up from among this con-
gregation, that I my consume them as
in a moment.” Had they been go con-
sumed, who could have questioned the
righteousness of their doom ?

III. The effectual intercession of
Moses and Aaron.

When God spake to Moses about con-
suming the congregation, he and Aaron
“fell upon their faces” in humble and
earnest prayer to Him for the guilty


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP, XVL





people. Moses discovered that the
plague had begun ; he directed Aaron
to “take a censer and put fire therein
from off the altar,” &c. (vers. 46-48),
Notice here :—

l. The kindness of Moses and Aaron.
The congregation had risen up in re-
bellion against them; this plague was
the punishment inflicted by God be-
cause of the rebellion ; yet Moses and
Aaron entreated God to spare the re-
bellious people. Freely thev forgive
them. Their conduct reminds us of
Him who prayed, “‘ Father forgive them ;
for they know not what they cv.” (a)

2 The courage of Aaron. He feared
neither the excited people who were
embittered against him, nor the pesti-
lence which was smiting down the
people by thousands; but “ran into
the midst of the congregation,” &c.

3. The zeal of Aaron. He was now
an old man, yet he “ran into the midst,”
&c, An example for Christian ministers.

4. The success of Awron. “The plague
was stayed.” His intercession was ac-
cepted by God, and it availed to arrest
the advance ¢f the pestilence. In this
we have very striking confirmation of
his priesthood. “Compare the censer


of Aaron here with ‘ the censers of those
sinners against their own souls.’ Those
provoked God’s anger, this pacified it ;
those destroyed men’s lives, this saved
them ; no room therefore is left to doubt
of Aaron’s call to the priesthood.”

How great is the power of prayer |
(James v. 16-18), (0)

If God thus respected the sacrifice
and intercession of Aaron, how great
must be the efficacy of the sacrifice and
intercession of the Lord Jesus Christ |

lV. The exercisé of the justice and
mercy of God.

1. Here ts an impressive display of
Divine justice. ‘They that died in the
piague were fourteen thousand and seven
hundred.” (¢)

2. Here is an encouraging manifesta-
ston of Divine mercy. Notwithstanding
the aggravated and oft-repeated provo-
cations of the people, they were not all
destroyed. It was of the Lord’s mercies
that they were not all consumed, (@)

Conclusion. Learn—

1. The heinousness of sin.

2. The great value of a fatthful
ministry.

3. The readiness of God to forgive


sin,


ILLUSTRATIONS,


(a) A forgiving spirit is a noble, generous
Christian virtue, It takes ite rise in that
love of God and man which is the fruit of the
Spirit and the fulfilling of the law; it is made
up of love and forbearance, united with the
tenderness of compassion towards those who
have injured us, and fortified by some just
sense of our own sinfulness and need of for-
_giveness from God. In the full sense of the
thing itself, is consists sf the inward spirit of
forgiveness and the outward act of reconcilia-
tion, It belongs to the heart, just as every
other grace has its seat in the inner man,
In this view of it, it is te opposite of revenge,
which angrily seeks rodress for injuries by
inflicting injuries in return. Itis the inward
exercise of kindness and goodwill towards our
enemies and those wo aave wronged us, It
_ is an abhorrence of their wrong, yet a kind
regard for the wrongdoer, It cannot ho
genuine unless it be sccompanied by these
benevolent emotions, ard at a great remove
from all bitterness and wrath. God requires
that we forgive from the heart. This inward
sptrit ought to be always in exercise, what-
soever may be the character of those who have


injured us, and whatever their present and
future conduct. We may feel benevolently to-
wards them, without at all committing our-
selves in favour of their conduct or cha) acter.
They may repeat the injury they have done
us every day of their lives, but this doos mot
warrant in us the spirit of malignity or un-
kindness. We should love them still, and
do them good as we have opportunity.—
Gardiner Spring, D.D.

6) The conduct of the eminent and justly
celebrated Francke, in the establishment of
the hospital and school for the poor, at Halle,
near Giaucha, in Saxony, is well known.
Having no permanent funds to meet the ex.
penses, it may be easily supposed that the
good man would be frequently reduced to
great difficulties; at such times the interposi-
tions of the Providence of God were truly
remarkable, About Haster, 1696, be knew
not where to obtain money for the expenses of
the ensuing week ; but when their food was
reduced to the very last morsel, one thousand
crowns were contributed by some entirely un-
known person. At another time, all their
provisions were exhausted, and the good


CHAP. XVI.


_ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


i


thinister wisely presented his requests to the
God of mercy, who careth even for the ravens:
when they ery. When prayer was over, just
as he was taking his seat, a friend from a
distance arrived with fifty crowns, which was
shortly followed by twenty more. At another
period, the workmen wanted thirty crowns,
when he remarked that he bad no money, but
that he trusted in God; scarcely had he
uttered the sentence, when, in this moment of
necessity, the precise sum arrived. “ Another
time,” says Francke, “all our provision was
spent; bnt in addressing myself to the Lord,
I found myself deeply affected with the fourth
petition of the Lord’s Prayer: ‘Give us this
day our daily bread;’ and my thoughta were
fixed in a more special manner upon the words
‘this day,’ because on the very same day we
had great occasion for it. WhileI was yet
praying, afriend of mine came before my door
in @ coach, and brought the sum of four hun-
dred crowns.”—A. Arvine, A.M. ti

(c) Goodness may punish; nay, it must
punish the ill-deserving. A good law pun-
ishes; a good judge punishes; and the more
certainly because they are good. However
inclined to forgive the Divine Lawgiver may
be, and however strongly moved to acts of
mercy bythe tenderness of His own kind na-
ture, justice has claims as weli as clemency
and compassion, And what shall eountervail
these righteous demards? Reason cannot;
conscience dare not, The whole history of
the Divine government is proof that sin can-
not go unpunished. The nature of the Deity
forbids it; because Ho is just and righteous
as well as good and kind. His law forbids it,
and stands forth a pledge to the universe that
it knows no such thing as impunity for crime,
It is essential to the character of God as Law-


giver, that wherever the claims of the law are
violated, His authority be enforced by the in~
fliction of its penalty ; otherwise it is no longer
law, and He no longer Lawgiver.— Gardiner
Spring, D.D. ‘

(d) The Scriptures everywhere magnify the
mercy of God, and speak of it with all possible
advantage, as if the Divine nature, which does
in all perfections excel every other thing, did
in this perfection excel itself, Andof this we
have a farther conviction, if we but liféup our
eyes to God, and then, turning them upon
ourselves, begin to consider how many evils
and miseries that every day we are exposed
to, by Hia preventing mercy are hindered, or,
when they were coming upon us, stopped or
turned another way. How oft our punishment
has He deferred by His forbearing mersy ; or,
when it: was necessary for our chastisement,.
mitigated and made light! How oft wo have
been supported in “ur afflictions by His come
forting mercy, an visited with the light of
His countenance, in the exigencics of our soul,
and the gloominess of despair! How oft wo
have been supplied by His relieving mercy im


‘our wants, and, when there was no hand to


succour, and no soul to pity us, His arm has
been stretched out to liff us from the mire and
clay, and, by a providential train of events,
brought about our sustenance and support!
And, above all, how daily, how hourly, how
minutely we offend against Him; and yet, by
the power of His pardoning mercy, we are
still alive! For, considering the multifude and
heinousness of our provocations, “it is of His
mercy alone that we are not consumed, and.
because His compassions fail not, Whoso is
wise will ponder these things, and He will
understand the loving-kindness of the Lord,”
—Archbishop Tillotson.


Tue Sin oF Man aND THE SaLvaTION oF GOD,
(Verse 46.)


“Whatsoever things were written
aforetime were written for our learning,
that we through patience and comfort
of the Scriptures might have hope.”
Israel’s judgments were recorded for
our warning ; Israel’s mercies, for our
encouragement. What Israel was, we
ere; what Israel suffered, we deserve ;
what Israel enjoyed, in the way of
mercy, we may hope for.

The principle of all this is very plain.
Human beings placed in the same cir-
cumstances act very much in the same
manner. They have the same hopes
and the same fears, they display the
same aay and the same guiJt}


and they can only be saved in the same
mysterious manner. And, accordingly,
God’s methods of grace towards them
are essentially the same inallages. The
censer and the incense and the atone-
ment of Aaron may fitly remind us of
the work and intercession of our great
‘High Priest..

I. There is an awful controversy
between a holy God anda rebellious
world,

“There is wrath gone cut from the
Lord ; the plague has begun.” A sen-
tence of death has been passed upon
every soul of man. Many have already
perished, dc. The world some of us


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XVI.


a


deem so fair and happy, is nothing
better than the camp of Israel ;—a
scene of mercy, it is true; but yet a
scene of misery, terror, and death. Our
sin resembles theirs in many aspects,
and has the same aggravations.

1. As t-directly strikes against the au-
thority and the grace of God, whatever
be the form it assumes. Israel pro-
fessedly murmured against Moses and
Aaron, but God viewed it as rebellion
against: Himself. How different often
is sin from what sin appears. “ Ye
have killed the people of the Lord ;”
but it was not Moses that killed them,
but God Himself... . . God struck
a blow which no human arm couldhave
inflicted to punish them for their mur-
murings, and in a moment fourteen
thousand and seven hundred die of the
plague by His omnipotent hand.

Learn that all sin, whatever form it
assumes, isin reality committed against
God. When the undutiful child rises
against his parent, he rebels against
God. When we complain of our circum-
stances and lot in life, we rebel. against
God. When we refuse the messages of
His mercy, and neglect the great salva-
tion, we rebel against God If the
office of Moses and Aaron were so much
to be regarded, how much more the
‘work and office of God’s beloved Son }
Comp. Heb. xii. 25.

Often when we complain of second
causes in our afflictions we sin against
God. Wemust take heed how we push
God out of His own world. He will be
acknowledged in our afflictions as well
as in our mercies. Comp. Job xxxvi.
24, Israel failed here. In reality they
justified Korah and his companions in
their rebellion, and secretly condemned
the judgment of God against them as
severe and harsh, But God will be


As Awrou Piacus anp


{Verses


The eolemn duties devolving wpon the
ministers of religion can never be too
deeply contemplated by themselves, or


justified when He speaks, and be clear
when He judges. He will be acknow-
ledged in the judgments that desolate
our families and wring our souls with
anguish, asin the mercies which yield
unmixed gladness and delight.

2. As tt isoften committed in the face
of frequent and awful warnings. Many
deem it hard to believe this obduracy
of Israel, and would think it. almost
too bad to be true. But the man who
knows himself believes it all: Which
of us has. not. despised His warnings,
trembling one day at His judgments
and inaking light of them the next?
in the hour of sickness binding our-
selves by solemn vows to His service,
and upon the return of health rising to
greater heights of iniquity than before ?

3. As et 18 heightened by the experience
of God's preserving and upholding
mercy.

II. There is at hand a prescribed
and Divinely approved remedy.

When wrath was gone out from God,
Moses was quick-sighted to discern it,
and as prompt to apply the remedy. Yet
observe, Moses does not take upon him
this reconciliation ; he calls upon Aaron:
to doso. I know not which to admire
more, the courage or the mercy of
Aaron. .

1, That our only escape from threaten-
ed wrath is through the mediation and
advocacy of our High Priest. As: the
trembling Israelites found in Aaron an
interposer and deliverer, so may we find
in Christ a Saviour.

2. That the plan of Salvation by Faith
18 as efficacious in reality ag st 3 simple
in its mode of application,

3. That an tmmediate application to
it ts vur only protection against certain
rum. ** Goquickly.”— The late Samue?
Thodey.


a, Surprisnie Reuepy,
46-48)
too seriously considered by their hearers


It is of consequence to us, that we may
clearly apprehend our duty ; conse:


GHAP, XVL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


i


quence to them, that by estimating our
responsibility they may judge of their
own. If both speakers and hearers
could see things now as they must see
them verysoon, when Death has done his
office, when the trumpet shall sound,
and the books be opened, and the retri-
butions of eternity shall take place,
what a change would be produced both
in our ministrations and in your wor-
ship. (a)

A very noble spirit displayed by
Moses and Aaron, They had been
deeply injured, yet, &.

I. An awful spectacle exhibited.

“There is wrath gone out from the
Lord; the plague is begun.” It was
awful in-itself—awful in its causes—its
concomitants — its issues; for after
death, the judgment. Awful to sce the
thousands of Israel in high rebellion
against God, to see the countenance
maddened with rage, suddenly smitten
with disease, then convulsed with an-
guish, then numbered with the dead.

It was the more awful, as it was not
a.cursory thing following in the ordi-
nary course of events, but it was a
direct judgment immediately following
the sin—a fearful visitation tremen-
dously signalising the most hardened
and obdurate sinners, What a circle is
here of sins and judgments! because
the people rose up against Moses and
Aaron, therefore God consumed them ;
and because God consumed them,
therefore they rose up against Moses
and Aaron; and now their third rebel-
lion draws down a more awful visita-
tion. “ Though hand join in hand,” &c.

O what has sin done! It has turned
angels into demons, man into an heir
of wrath, Paradise into a wilderness,
&c, Other evils are limited—the de-
structive forces of nature, the earth-
quake, the volcano, the deluge, the
wide-wasting conflagration, know their
bound; they have their period and
their issue and their appointed range ;
but sin has none ; it lays waste not here
and there a country, but a world. The
pestilence fastened only upon the body,
and after that had no more that it could
do ; be destroys the soul, by sepa-


rating it from the Sourca of Life~ nay,
it casts both soul and body into hell.

Mark one impressive circumstance.
Moses marks the wrath in its very com-
mencement, sees the beginnings of the
pestilence, when no other man dis-
cerns or suspects it, even as the physician
sees disease in what appears to be the
ripe bloom of health, or the veteran
siilor marks the prelude of the storm
before the heavens have lost their
brightness. Moses had heard the word
of God in the Tabernacle, &. ‘The
secret of the Lord is with them that
fear Him,” é&c.

There are signs in the moral world
of the commencement of evil, and the


going forth of wrath, which the wise .


observer cannot mistake. ‘“ The plague
is begun.” When the man first restrains
prayer—when the spirit of the world
creeps into the mind of Christians—
when they begin to lessen their fear of
sin, and to compromise principle, to
seck a more accommodating system of
religion, to lengthen the creed and
shorten the Decalogue—wlhien private


‘prayer is a task, and the minor moral-


ities of life begin to be disregarded—
there are fearful symptoms of decay
and declension. “The plague is begun.”
II. The surprising remedy found.
“Take a censer,” &c. . Where is the
physician who would have recommended
this as a cure for the plague? Who
would have thought that the appear-
ance of a single priest amidst the dying
and the dead should have stopped the
progress of the pestilence? Yet the
incense and the fire and the oblation
accomplish that for Israel which all the
wisdom of the Egyptians could never


have achieved. Who does not, in like |


manner, rebel against God’s appointed
method of pardon? or question the
mysterious virtue of Christ’s atoning
blood, and doubt the efficacy of faith,
repentance, and prayer? Who does
not say with Naaman, “Are not Abana
and Pharpar” &c. ?

Mark the promptitude and self-
votion of Aaron. He does not pause,
does not cavil at the insufficiency of
the means, but thrusts himself into the


en


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XVI.


renee,


post of danger. He stands boldly be- revive.


tween the living and the dead, ag
one who will either die with them
or have them live with him. Type
of Him who on Calvary said, “Father
forgive them.” How promptly -He
' came!

Mark the principles illustrated.
There is no cure for the evils which sin
has introduced but by arsacrifice of
atonement. “Without shedding of
blood,” &. And as a new offering could
not be presented, he was to take the
fire from the altar, the ashes of the
morning sacrifice, and put ..incense
upon that in the golden censer. If
Aaron’s sacrifice be thus accepted,
how much more the offering of the
great High Priest? “If the blood
of bulls and of goats,” &c. (Heb. ix.
13, 14.)

But it is not enough that the sacri-
fice be presented, but~ prayer must be
offered: Beautiful to see, wherever
Aaron moved, Death retire and Hope


More so to see the spiritually
dead quickened (Eph, ii. 4-6).

TII. A practical application de-
manded.

1. What injinite solemnity attaches to
all the offices of religion. Death and
life are involved. The two hundred
and fifty men that offered incense per-
ished: their spirit was bad. What if
we bring strange fire! Aaron’s offering
saves life. If awful to preach, so also
to hear. .

2. How dreadful if the plague be in
the heart, and we, unconscious of danger,
neglect the remedy. ‘‘Examine your-
selves.”

3. What need ministers have for the
prayers and sympathies of their people.
The whole camp looks to Moses and
Aaron. We have all the infirmities of
which you complain; we are exposed
to the infection, &c.

4. Rejoice un the absolute sufficiency of
salvation applied by thé Spirit.— Samuel
Thodey,


ILLUSTRATION,


(@) I know not what others think of these
concerns, but for my own part I am ashamed
of my insensibility, and wonder at myself
that Ideal no more with my own and other
men’s souls as becomes one who Jooks for the
great day of the Lord. I seldom come out of
the pulpit but my conscience smites me that
I have not been more serious and fervent. [t
ia no trifing matter to stand up in the fay


of a congregation and deliver a message of
salvation or damnation as from the living God
in the name of the Redeemer: it is no easy
thing to speak so plainly that the most igno-
rant may understand; soseriously that the
deadest heart may feel; and so convincingly
that contradictory cavillers may be silenced
and awakened.—Richard Baxter.


Tae Hicn Priest Stanpine Between THB Dzap anp THD LivING.
(Verses 47, 48.)


I desire to use the picture before us
asa great spiritual type of what the
Lord Jesus Christ has done for that
erring multitude of the sons of man
who “like sheep have gone astray, and
have turned every one to his own way.”

I, Look at Aaron as the lover of
the people,

In this case he was the aggrieved
party. The clamour_was made against
Moses and against Aaron, yet it was
Moses and Aaron who interceded and
saved the people. The old man with
generous love hastened into the midst

x


of the people, &c. Is not this the vexy
picture of our Lord Jesus? Had not
sin dishonoured Him? &o. Yet He
becomes the Saviour of His people.


“ Down from the shining seats above,
With joyful haste He fled,” &c.


Aaron in thus coming forward as the
deliverer and lover of the people, must
have remembered that he was abhorred
by this very people. They were seek-
ing his blood, &c. But into the midst
of their crowd he boldly springs (comp.
John i. 11) Jesus pe tare ae


CHAP. XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


Se a a a


Aaron might have feared death at the
hands of the people; Jesus Christ did
actually meet it, and yet there He
stood even in the hour of death, waving
His censer, staying the plague, &c.

Again, Aaron might have said, “ But
the Lord will surely destroy me also
with the people; if I go where shafts
.of death are flying they will reach me.”
‘He exposes his own person in the very
forefront of the destroying one. ....
The plague which Jesus kept from us
slew.Him. “The Lord hath laid upon
Him the iniquity of us all.”

Aaron deserves much commendation
from the fact that he ran into the host.
That little fact of hisrunning is highly
significant, for it shows the greatness
‘and swiftness of the divine impulse of
love that was within. And was it not
so with Christ? .... While I look
with admiration upon Aaron, I must
look with adoration upon Christ.

II. View Aaron as the great pro-
pitiator.: :

Wrath had gone out from God against
the people on-account of their sin, &e.

‘Adron as the Propitiator is to be
looked at as bearing in his censer that
which was necessary for the propitia-
tion, Even though God’s high priest,
he must take the censer, &c. Behold
the Great High Priest! His incense
consists first of His positive obedience
tothe Divine law. Then mixed with
this is His blood, &e. Our faith is
fixed on perfect righteonsness and com-
plete atonement, ©

Besides that, Aaron must be the
ordained priest ; for mark, two hundred
and fifty men fell in doing the act
which Aaron did. Aaron’s act saved
others ; their act destroyed themselves.
So Jesus, the propitiator, is to. be looked
upon as the ordained One, &c. Comp.
Heb, v. 4-10. None but Jesus; all
other priests and offerings we disdain.

We must look upon Aaron as being
ready for his work. The people wero
ready to- perish, and he was ready to,
save. Oh, my hearer, Jesus Christ
stands ready to save thee now. ‘Trust
Him.

Til, she Aaron ag the interposer,


The old Westminster Annotations
say upon this passage, “The plague
was moving among the people as the
fire moveth along a field: of corn.”
Aaron wisely puts himself just in the
pathway of the plague, interposing
himself between the darts of death and
the people. Just.so was it with Christ.
Wrath had gone out against us. “The
stripes must fall on Me,” He cries,
There is nothing between me and hell
save Christ. But He isenough. There
is nothing which can save the soul of
man, save Jesus Christ standing between
that soul and the just judgment of God.

IV. View Aaron as the saviour.

It was Aaron, Aaron’s censer, that
saved the lives of that great multitude.
Aaron, and especially the Lord. Jesus,
must be looked upon ‘as a gracious
Saviour. It was nothing but love that
moved. Aaron, &c. If Christ hath
saved ‘us He is a gracious Saviour
indeed. There is nothing in any man
to commend him to God, &e.

Aaron was an unaided saviour. He
stands alone! And herein is he a
great typo of Christ, who could say,
“‘T have trodden the winepress alone,”
&e. ‘There is none other name under
heaven,” &c.

_ Aaron as a saviour was all-sufficient.
Christ is an all-sufficient Saviour, able
to save; you cannot save yourself, but
He can save you. “Though your sins
be as scarlet, they.shall be as wool,”


&e. :

V. Aaron as the divider.

Aaron the anointed one stands here;
on that side is death, on this side life ;
the boundary between life and death
is that one man... . . The one great
division between those who are God's
people and those who are not, is Christ,
A man in Christ is a Christian: a man
out of Christ is dead in trespasses and
sins. On which, side, then, art thou
to-day? |

As Christ is the great divider now,
so will He’ be in the day of judgment,
He shall divide them the one from the
other, &¢. Oh! on which sido shall I
be when all these transitory things are
done away with? &«—C. A. Spurgeon,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


Aaron Srayine THE PLacua
(Verses 47, 48.)


Open with a brief account of the re-
bellion of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram,
and the awful punishment which befel
them from God. The people on the
_ next day as rebellious as before. . The
plague begun. Aaron’s intercession ;—

I The willingness of Aaron. "to
intercede,

He “ ran into the midst,” &., though
at this time of great age, above one
hundred years.. And this willingness
will be more manifest, if we observe
that he was—

1, Regardless of the plague ; he feared
not the contagion.

2. Regardless of the people's enmity ;
he dreaded not their malice; and for-
gave the injuries they had done him.

Show how in these respects Aaron
was an eminent type of the Lord Jesus.
The plague of sin had laid hold of our
race; yet see the willingness of Jesus to
come (Ps. xl. 7). ‘Lo, I come.”

1, -He shrank not from us because of
our pollution (Rom. viii. 3; Heb. ii.
14-17). Nay, He took upon Him our
curse (Gal. iii, 13; Isa. liii.). Our
guilt and perishing condition that which
moved His compassion.

2. He did not abandon His work be-
cause of our enmity, but though con-
tinually despised, rejected, &c., endured
the contradiction of sinners against
Himself (Heb. xii. 2,3; Rom. xv. 3),
and would not be turned from His pur-
pose of love.

Il. The nature of Aaron’s inter-
cession.

He took fire from the altar of burnt
offering, where the fire was always
burning ; und he put zncense upon the
fre, that a sweet savour of atonement

might.ascend to God. So Jesus offers


the sacrifice of His own most. precious
blood, and perfumes it with the incense
of His all- sufficient merit. The sacri-
fice of Jesus ever new; the fire always
burning. Jesus interposes between the
wrath of God and the perishing sinner.
‘Father forgive them,” &c. “ He made


intercession for the transgressors.”


Enlarge upon the intercession of Jesus,
—its.-constancy, its freeness—spon-


taneous.


III. The success of Aaron’s inter-
cession.

Aaron’s incense more powerful to pro-
cure pardon, than the people’s guilt to
call down punishment. The Lord
smelled a sweet savour,and turned away
His wrathful indignation.

Observe, the plague was stayed, Aaron
did not give over interceding until the
plague had ceased. So Jesus will never
give over interceding for a penitent be-
liever, until the plague of sin is perfectly
done away. And will never give over
interceding for His Church, until every
member of it has entered glory.


Conclusion :—

“1. Let us tremble. at the wrath of an
offended God. Address: the sinner.
‘Who can stand before this Ho.ny
Lorp Gop?” What wilt thou do in
the day of visitation? ‘No intercessor


then.


2. Let us rejoice in. the intercession of
our Great High Priest. What need we
any other mediators’ besides Him?
Look at Korah and his company ; were
their intercessions received ? And why
not? They were not the appoinied
mediators, Why, then, go to saints
and angels—the Virgin Mary tJ. D.
Lane, M.A.


Tas Puacue STAYED.
(Verse 48.)


Observe,—

I. The evil. ;

Murmuring agaiust God. Dissatisfac-
12


tion with God—His government, &o.

Now this is the essence of all sin.

Holiness is harmony—agreement with
323


CHAP, XVII


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


ert


God. Sin, -disagreement and murmur-
ing. So it was with the first sin, and
every sin since. This leads to irrever-
ence, complaining, and audacious pre-
sumption. How these abound—

1. In profane swearing,—horrid im-
precations._

2. In Sabbath profanation. Counted
as no sin.

3. In gross intemperance.

4, In general profligacy.

5. In scepticism. Denying God’s go-
vernment, &ec.

6. In recklessness — amidst Divine
judgments.

What a sight for a holy God to be-
hold! I come back to the first idea :
—All sin is contrariety to God—dis-
satisfaction with God; and hence, re-
bellion against His government,

Il, The punishment,

It was,—

1. Divine. God did it. No magis-
trate. No human pain or penalty.
God immediately did it. Often sin
mediately is its own punishment ; but
sometimes direct, &c.

2. Jt was by the plague. We do not
know precisely what it was. Some
sudden disease, which swept all before
it. It was, however, evidently—(1)
Fatal. Destroyed life. (2) Speedily
so. Like a blast. of wind, &o. (3)
Invariably so. No one knew of a
remedy. —

How analogous is the nature and
effect of sin! (1) Sin is the disease of
the soul. (2) It is deadly in three
senses—temporal, spiritual, and eter-


nal. (3) There is for it no human
remedy. All human skill, &c. failed.

III, The remedy.

1. In itself, not apparently adapted.
Doubtless, the air was charged with
death. But the-incense was not possi
bly adapted to decompose, and change,
and purify.

2. [t was connected with pious interces-
sion. In which there was confession of
sin, admission of the justice of God, and
the Divine mercy wasimplored, It was
@ direct appeal to God.

3. It was intercession grounded on
sacrifice. By the priest, in view of the
victims presented to God.

4, It was efficient. Completely. At
o1ice, .

Let us now turn to the great remedy
for sin. It is, (1) Not what human
)philosophy would have recommended.
(2) It is essentially connected with the
priestly work of Christ. His obedience,
sacrifice, resurrection, ascension, inter-
cession, (3) It is effectual. The curse
removed, wrath averted, mercy pub-
lished, life offered. Noung need now
die, no, not one. The connecting link
between a guilty world and the remedy
is, on God’s part, the preaching of the
Word ; on our part, believing the Word
so preached; by which repentance,
humiliation of soul, and devotedness to
God, are secured. Learn,—

1. The extreme evil of sin.

2. The riches of the grace of God..

3. The immediate duty of the sinner ;
to call earnestly on the Lord.—Jabes
Burns, D.D.


CHAPTER XVII


CriticaL AnD Explanatory Norss.


In this chapter the High-priesthood
of Aaron is further confirmed by a
supernatural and significant sign,

Verse 4. The testimony, ‘i.e. the Two
Tables of the Law; cf. Exod. xxv. 16.
No doubt the rods lay in front of the
Tables within the Ark.”—Speaker's
Comm.

Verse 5. Iwill make to cease from Me,


324


66 qow


ol!


Tiph. to. cause to sink, to


bring to rest, construed with yD in
® pregnant signification, to quiet in such
away that it will not rise again,”—
Keil and Del.

Verse 6. Twelve rods. “ Possibly the
two tribes of the children of Joseph
were reckoned together, as in Deut,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:. NUMBERS.


CaP. XVII.





xxvii. 12. But as these two tribes had
Separate princes, and it was with the
names of the princes that the rods were
marked (ver. 2), it is more probable that
the whole number of rods was twelve
exclusively of Aaron’s, as the Vulgate
expressly renders (‘fuerunt virge duo-
decim absque virga Aaron’).”—Speaker’s
Comm.

Verse 8. Yielded almonds, “ Or
rather ‘ ripened almonds,’ ¢.¢., ‘ brought
forth ripe almonds.’ Probably different
portions of the rod showed the several
stages of the process of fructification
through which those parts which had
advanced the furthest had passed, The
name almond in Hebrew denotes the
‘ waking tree,’ the ‘ waking fruit ;’ and
is applied to this tree because it blos-
soms early in -the season. It serves
here, asin Jer. i. 11, 12, to set forth
the speed and certainty with which, at
God’s will, His purposes are accom-
plished.”—Jé:d, ‘‘ This was miraculous
-*. « . for no ordinary branch would
have buds, blossoms, and fruits upon it,
all at once.”—H, Henry.

Verse 10. Fora token, &. Keil and
Del. translate: “ For a sign for the re-
bellicus, that thou puttest an end to


their murmuring, and they die not.”
Aaron’s rod was probably lost while the
Ark was in the hands of the Philistines ;
for it is stated in 1 Kings viii. 9 that
there was “ nothing in the Ark’ save the
two tables of stone,”

Verses 12, 13. “ A new section should
begin with these verses. They are con-
nected retrospectively with chap. xvi. ;
and form the immediate introduction
to chap. xviii. The people were terror-
stricken with the fate of the coms
pany of Korah at the door of the
tabernacle, followed up by the plague
in which so many thousands of their
numbers had perished. Presumption.
passes by reaction into despair. Was
there any approach for them to. the
tabernacle of the Lord? Was there any
escape from death, except by keeping
aloof from His presence? The answers
are supplied by the ordinances that
follow ; ordinances which testified that
the God of judgment was still a God
of grace and of love.” —Speaker’s Comm,

Verse 13. Keil and Del, translate :
Every one who comes near to tha
dwelling of Jehovah dies ; are we all td
die?”


Tas Divine Pian for Vinpicarine THe HicH-PRIESTHOOD OF Aaron, AND ITS
Moran TEACHING.


(Verses 1-5.)


The directions which are here given to
Moses teach us—~

L That true ministers of religion
are elected by God.

In directing Moses to place these rods
in the tabernacle, the Lord promises to
meet with him there, and He says,
“ And it sball come to pass, that the
man’s rod whom I shall choose, shall
blossom.” God called. Aaron to his
officé (Heb, v. 4). He here makes ar-
rangements for confirming that call,
and placing it’ beyond dispute. To
enter the Christian ministry for its
honours, or its emoluments, &c., is an
awfulsin. ‘To refuse to enter it when
convinced of the Divine call thereto is


alsoasin. ‘The authority of the true
minister of Christ arises from his being
sent forth by God. Comp. 1 Cor, xii.
4-11, 28; Gal. i. 13 Eph. iv. 7-13. (a)

Il. It is of great importance that
men should know that their ministers
of religion are called by God.

The Lord here- makes arrangements
for His own miraculous interposition, in
order that the Israelites might be com-
pletely convinced of the Divine author-
ity of Aaron in “his office. It is
important that people should be con-
vinced of the Divine call of their
ministers, in order that-—

1. They mightregard them with becom-
ing respec, ‘They are ee for


cuaP,xvi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,





Christ ; and should be treated as stich.
Comp. John xiii, 20; Phil. ii. 29; 1
Thess: y. 12, 13; 1 Tim. v. 17.

2. They might take heed to their’ mes-
sage. If the ministers of Christ come
to be regarded as mere lecturers on
religious themes, haying no authority
from God, their ministry will be pro-
ductive of little true and lasting good.
Crowds may gather round the eloquent
preacher, but they will be. like those
which gathered round the ancient pro-
phet (Ezek. xxxiii. 30-32).. When people
seein their ministers a Christlike life,
and manifest fitness for their sacred
duties, and the ‘signs of the Divine
approval of their ministry, let them rest
assured that such ministers have their
commission from.God, and their minis-
try should be received accordingly.
“Despise not prophesyings.” ‘“ Take
heed how ye hear.” (6),

III. The vitality of sin is of dreadful
tenacity.

The, miraculous sign for which Moses
is directed to make arrangements was


necessary to completely subdue the


murmurings of the children of Israel.
The previous judgments, although so
numerous and terrible, had not effec-
tually destroyed their tendency to mur-


mur against the leaders whom God had
appointed. ‘Many men’s lips,” says
Trapp, “like rusty hinges, for want of
the oil. of grace and gladness, move
not without murmuring and complain-
ing.” It is a thing of extreme difficulty
to eradicate any evil disposition from the
human heart. “ For such is the habitual
hardness of men’s hearts, as neither
ministry, nor misery, nor miracle, nor
mercy, can possibly mollify. Nothing
can do it, but an extraordinary touch
from the hand of Heaven.” (c) j

IV. God is'engaged in eradicating
sin from human hearts.

“I willmake to ceasefrom me the mur-
murings of the children of Israel,” &c,
He cries to the sinner, “O do not this
abominable thing, which I hate.” His


Jaws are all against sin. The great


redemptive mission of Jesus Christ aims
at thé destruction of sin. “ He appeared,
to put away sin by the sacrifice of Him-
ge 93! (d)

‘Since God is thus engaged, we may
confidently anticipate that the crusade
against sin’will be gloriously trium-
phant. ‘He shall -not fail nor be dis-.
couraged, till He have set judgment in
a earth ; and the islés shall wait for His
: we”


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) The ministry is the Divinely-appointed
agency for the communication of God’s will to
man. Asa Divine institution, it advanced its
claims in thé beginning, and in no solitary in-
stance have they been relinquished: since.
This Divine authorization and enactment are
still in- force, The Bible says, when Obrist
ascended up on high, ‘‘ He led captivity cap-
tive, and received gifts for men; and he gave
some apostles, and some prophets, and some
evangelists, and some pastors and teachers,
for the perfecting of the saints, for the work
of the ministry, for the edifying of the body
of Christ.” There might be something special,
perhaps, in this original commission, but the
principle of its Divine origin is evidently pre-
sented as the principle of the ministry itself;
for St. Paul, who was not then called, who
speaks of himself afterwards as one born out
of due time, earnestly and anxiously vindicates
the heavenly origin of his apostleship: “TI
certify you, brethren, that the Gospel which
was preached of me is not of men; for I neither
received it of men, neither was I taught it but
by the oun of Jesus Christ,” This it is

| 32


‘which is the elevation of the Christian minis-
try, which exalts it far above human resources
and human authority. Ittravelson in its own,
majestic strength—Heaven-inspired and Hea-
ven-sustained, Moreover, the same passage
which tells us of the institation of the ministry,
announces its duration, and telis of the period”
when it shall be no longer needed, “ Till we
all come in the tnity of the faith, and of the
knowledge of the Sen of God, unto a perfect
man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fulness of Christ.” Thia period, thue Divinely
appointed for the cessation of tho ministry,
has obvionsly not yot arrived.—- lV. Af. Pun-
shon, DL.D.

It would appoar to be a dificult losson for
the Church to learn, that God will choose His
own instruments, In spite of a thousand proofs
of sovereignty on this matter, the Church will
stubbornly try to have a band in ths choice of
ministers. Now that civilization has become
a very devil to us, wa say that God’s agents
shall not be carpontors, fishermen, tont-
makers, or ploughmon. No, certainly not;
they shall be sons of gentlomen ; they shall


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XVIL


ATE a AL NT I TI OE PO SA eS A SS


have hands unhardened by labour; they shall
be favourites of conventional fortune. God
will not have this;-He will not be indebted to
His creatures. The shepherd: shall be en-
trusted with His thunder, and the husbandman
shali wield His lightnings; the little child shall
subdue the dragon; and the suckling shall not
= ae cf the cockatrice.—Joseph Parker,


(5) How many hear the Gospel, but do not
hear it attentively! A telegram on the Ex-
change—they read it with both their eyes—
will there‘ be a rise or fall of stocks? An
article from which they may judge of the
_ general current of trade—how they devour it
with their minds, they suck in the meaning,
and then go and practise what they have
gathered from it. A sermon heard, and. lo,
the minister is judged as to how he preached
it—as if 2 man reading a telegram should say
the capital letter was not well inked on the
press, or the dot to the “i” had dropped off
the letter; or as if a man reading an article of
business should simply criticise the style of
the article, instead of seeking to get at its
meaning, and act upon its advice. Oh, how
men will hear and think it to be right, to be
the height of perfection, to say they liked or
disapproved of the sermon! As if the God-
sent preacher cared one doit whether you did
or did not like his sermon, his business being
not to please your tastes, but to save your
souls; not to win your approbation, but to win
your hearts for Jesus, and bring you to be re-
conciled to God.—C. H, Spurgeons

(c) That plant must- possess great vitality
which increases by being uprooted and cut
down. That which lives by being killed is
strangely-full of force. That must be a very
hard substance which is hardened by lying in
the blast furnace, in the central heat of the


fire, where iron melts and runs like wax,
That must be avery terrible power which
gathers strength from that which should re-
strain it, and rushes on the more violently in
proportion as it is reined in. Sin kills mon
by that which was ordained to life, It makes
Heaven’s gifts the stepping stones to hell,
uses the lamps of the temple to show the way
to perdition, and makes the Ark of the Lord,
a3 in Uzz2h’s case, tho messenger of death.
Sin is that strange fire which burns the more
fiercely for being damped, finding fuel in the
water which was intended to quench it. The
Lord brings good out of evil, but sin brings
evil out of good, It is a deadly evil; judge
ye how deadly! O that men knew its nature
and abhorred it with all their hearts! May
the Eternal Spirit teach men to know aright
this worst of ills, that they may flee from it
to Him who alone can deliver.—Lbid,

(d) God stands between the right and the
wrong, not looking pleasant on the one and
equally pleasant on the other; not looking as
the sun looks, with a benignant face on the
evil and on the good ; and not as man looks,
with only a less benignant face on the evil,
He stands with all the fervour of His infinite
love and all the majesty of His unlimited
power, approving good, and legislating for it
on the one side; and disapproving evil, and
abhorring it, and legislating it down to the
dust, and beneath the dust, into infamy and
eternal penalty,on the other side, And if
there be one truth that speaks throughout the
Bible like the voice of God, and resounds with
all the grandeur of Divine intonation, it is the
truth that God does not look with an equal
eye upon the evil and the good, that He’ is a
discriminator of character, a lover of that


which is right, and a hater of that which is


wrong.—H, W. Beecher.


Aaron’s Rop an InbustRaTion oF THE TRUE CHRISTIAN MINISTRY.


(Verses 6-11.)


In this rod we have an illustration
of-—
L The characteristics of the true
Christian ministry.

1. Life. The rod of Aaron was
quickened into lite by God, while all
the other rods remained mere dead wood.
The true minister is alive spiritually.
The life of supreme sympathy with God
is his. “That which is born of the
Spirit is spirit.” ‘“ This is life eternal,
that they might know Thee, the only
true God, and Jesus Christ, whom Thou
haat sent.” ‘ He that hath the Son of.
God hath the life.” ‘I live; yet not I,


but: Christ liveth in mo,” &. The
true minister is aflame with zeal for
the glory of God, and the conversion of
sinners, and the sanctification of be-
lievers. Without this spiritual life man
is utterly unfit for the Gospel ministry,
even though he possessed every other,
qualification in great measure. (a)

2. Beauty. “The rod of Aaron for
the house of Levi was budded, and
brought forth buds, and - bloomed
blossoms.” It was not only living,
but beautiful. The true minister
of Christ is adorned with the beauties
of holiness. The Gospel re he


CHAP, XVIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


Le


preaches to others he endeavours to
illustrate in his own life ; he translates
his creed into his conduct. (0)

3. Fruttfulness. “The rod of Aaron
.... yielded almonds.” This was not
promised by the Lord (comp. ver. 5); it
makes the vindication of the priesthood
of Aaron more gloriously complete and
conclusive. God is often better than
His word : His performances never fall
beneath His -promises, but frequently
transcend them. The true minister,
like the rod of Aaron, is fruitful. His
life and work are blessed by God to the
conversion of sinners, and the edification
of beliovers in Christ, and the leading
of the young into the faith and service
of the Lord Jesus. He is useful in
quickening holy thoughts and noble
purposes, in training souls for spiritual
service, and in leading them in such
service. He is not only alive himself,
his ministry is life-giving to others. (c)

II. The origin of the true Christian

The transformation of the rod of
Aaron was the work of God. We have
an extraordinary manifestation of the
Divine power in giving life to this piece
of dead wood, and causing it to -put
forth buds, blossoms, and fruit. It was
unquestionably a supernatural achieve-
ment. The attributes of a true minister
of Jesus Christ are giftsof God. Spiri-
tual Uife is His gift. “Born of the
Spirit.” “The gift of God is eternal
life, through Jesus Christ eur Lord.”
“JT live; yet not I, but Christ liveth
in me.” Spiritual beauty is bestowed by
God. Itis “the beauty of the Lord


our God upon us.” We are beingtrans-
figured into the image of the Lord,
“from glory to glory, even as by the
Lord the Spirit.” “ The Lord will beau-
tify the meek with salvation.” Spiri-
tual fruitfulness is also the gift of God.
“As the branch cannot bear fruit of
itself, except it abide in the vine; no
more can ye, except ye abide in Me,”
&. (John xv. 4, 5.) “ Who then is
Paul, and whois Apollos, but ministers
by whom ye believed, even as the Lord
gave to every man” &, (1 Cor. iii,
5-7.) Thus every true minister is a
creation of God, and a gift of God to His
Church.

III. The influence of the true Chris.
tian ministry.

“And the Lord said unto Moses,
Bring Aaron’s rod again before the
testimony, to be kept,” &. Thus
this rod was to remain, and to continue
to exercise a beneficent influence in re-
pressing the disposition of the Israelites
to murmur against the servants of the
Lord. In like manner the true Chris-
tian ministry and its fruits are abiding
things; and the manifestation of those
fruits is calculated to silence murmnrers
and detractors. The holiest and most
useful ministers may be assailed by
detraction and even by cruel slander,
as Aaron was; but his life and work
will in due time silence the detractors
and cover them with shame. The re-
sults of the life and work of the true
minister will be the most effective vin-
dication of his Divine call, and will “put
to silence the ignorance of foolish” and
wicked men,


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(@) I onvéiivard & preacher who sorely
tempted me to say I would go to church no
more, Mon go, thought I, where they aro
wont to go, else had no one entored the temple
in the afternoon, A snow-storm was falling
arourd us. The snow-storm was real, the
preacher morely spectral; and the eye felt
the sad contrast in looking at him, and then
out of the window behind him into the beanti-
ful meteor of the snow. He had lived in vain,
He had ‘no one word indicating that he had
laughod or wept, was married or in love, had
been commended, or cheated, or chagrined. If
he had ever lived and acted, we were none the


wiser for it, The capital secret of his profes
sioa—namely, to convert life into truth—he
had not learned. Not one fact in all his exe
perience had he yet imported into his dos-
trine, This man had ploughed, and planted,
and talked, and bought, and sold; he had
read books; he had eaten and drunken;
his head aches; his heart throbs; he
smiles and suffers; yet was there not @
surmise, a hint, in all the discourse that he
had ever lived at all. Nota line did he draw
out of real history. The true preacher can
always be known by this, that he deals out to
the people his life—life passed through the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


GHAP. XVII.


TR A A NET CES eee


fire of thought. But of the bad preacher, it
could not be told from his sermon,what age
of the world he fell in; whether he had a
father or a child; whether he was a free-
holder or a pauper; whether ho was a citizen,
er any othor fact hi his history —R W.
Limerson,

For the spiritual being, man, the only real
life is in goodness; - Can it not be proved so?
If the fountain of all the life that flows
through the fields of the universo is God, God
is but another name for goodness, All the
dife that procesds from Him, therefore, must
be according to goodness or love, whether it
beats in the bosom of a sinless child, or nerves
the arm of a hero-saint; whether He rounds
& planet, or tints a roseleaf; whether He
balances the Pleiades in thoir spheres, or
adjusts the microscopic machinery of an-in-
sect’s wing ; whether tho aflatus of His Spirit
bears up the “ seraph that adores and burns”
before the throne, or lights the lamp of a
feeblor reason in these vessels of clay. Only
so far as we share in the Father’s goodness,
then, are we pariakers in His life. The
measure of our being, as living souls, is pro-
cisely tho measure of our excellence, In pro-

tion a3 our actions are in harmony with
Divine laws, and our familiar frame of feeling
with God’s will, we live. Herein is the Apos-
tolic saying true, “To be spiritually-minded
is life.’ Every rising-up of pure aspiration;
every clinging to principle when.you are
tempted ; every choice of abstract right above
politic selfishness; every putting down of
sensual passion by prayer; every preference
of _@ truth which inherits a cross, over the lie
that flatters you with a promise of prosperity
—is a palpable motion of God’s life within
you. Indeed, this is the most infimate sub-
jective knowledge you have of God. God,
out of His express revelation, never spoaks to
Us So andibly as when His Spirit prompts us
to struggle, or braces us for » sacrifice. A
generous impulse is the plainest pledge of His
presence; a devout trust in Him, the mightiest
démonstration of His Fatherhood.—/. D.
Huntington, D.D,

You know the difference between slow mo-
tion and rapidity, If there were a cannon
ball rolled slowly down these aisles, it might
not hurt anybody; it might be very large, very
huge, but it might be ao rolled along that you
might not rise from your seats in fear. Bust
if somebody would give me-a rifle, and ever so


small a ball, I reckon that if the ball flow


along the Tabernacle, some of you might find
it very difficult to stand inits way. It is the
force that does the thing, So, it ie not the
great man who is loaded with learning that
will achiove work for God ; it is the man, who
however small his ability, is filled with force
and fire, and who rushes forward in the energy
which Heaven has given him, that will ac-


complish the work—the man who has the


most intense spiritual life, who has real
vitality at its highest point of tension, and
living, while he lives with all the force of his
nature for the glory of God.—C. H. Spurgeon,

(6) Bsauty and love ought always to go to-
gether. Inthe highest moral-realm, in the
noblest moral traits, there shonld be the
beautiful. Religion is itself beautiful. Ita
fragmenis, like*shining particles of gold, are
beautiful; but at every stage and step of its
development toward moral perfection, it grows
in the direction of beauty, and the highest
conception of beauty is in character, Physical
beauty is but the outward symbol and the


lower representation of that which has its true


existence only in spiritual elements, Religion
is beautiful, because it is the service of the
God of beauty. Its inward and characteristic
experiences are full of besuty.—H, W.
Beecher,

A true. man after Christ will be the most
noble and beautiful thing upon the earth—tho
froest, the most joyous, the most fruitful in all
goodness, There is no picture that was ever
painted, there is no statue that was ever
carved, there was no work of art ever con-
ceived of that was half so beautiful as is a
living man, thoroughly developed on the
pattern of Christ Jesus.—Zbid,

(c) Vitality is a test of any system of doc-
trine, as it is of any teacher’s qualification.
If you-would fiad the value of any message,
ask of it, Does it live? Do vital pulses leap
through it? Does it reproduce its life? Does
it he!p men to live? Does it leave them more
alive or more dead than they were without it ?
Get an answer to these questions, and you will
find whether the given ministry is of heaven,
or of @ private self-interest—whother it comes
‘out of the all-quickening and all-comprehend-
ing God, or out of some dreamer’s brain,

Nothing goes with much momentum, in the
long trial, that does not carry life with it,
Accumulate the learning of a thousand
Melancthons; pile together the erudition of
ancient schools and modern universities; what.
does it contribute to the real treasure of men,
if it does not create life.in them? The alcoves
of libraries may be but the chambers of a
mausoloum,—sepulchres. of thought, instead
of nurseries—and meeting houses, spiritual
dormitories, Eloquence, burniag as Peter the
Hermit’s, is wasted breath, unless the succeed-
ing life of men shows that it reached the
springs from which that life was fod, So in all
communication of man with man. ‘Nothing
tedis, nothing does execution, nothing survives
very long, but what makes meu feel and will
and act,—notbhing but the “word of life.”
Find moa book, a speech, 2 preacher, a gespel,
that is not life-giving, and I know there is no
true message, no inspiration, no revelation
from God there,—F’, D. Huntington, DD.


999


GAP. XVIL


—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





‘fan Boppine or Aaron’s Roo,


(Verse 8.)


Notico—

I, The threefold significance of the
rods which were-laid to settle, the
‘question in dispute.

1. They were historic. The rods of
the tribes were handed down from one
generation to another, outliving many
generations, and reminding the men of
the present of the events of the, past, as
the mace of acity in England calls up to
our minds events which have been con-
nected with it in the past.

2. They were representative. They
represented every man of the tribe as a
mace represents every citizen, or as the
heraldic sign of a noble ae represents
each member of the house, and the
number upon the colour of each re-
giment represents each soldier in the
regiment.

3. The rod wasa sign of personal au-
thority when borne by the man who
alone was euititled to carry it—the head
of the tribe. The macebearer- derives
no authority from bearing the sign of


it, but in the hands of the chief:
magistrate it is an emblem of official:


power. The coronet in the hands, or'
even upon the head; of a commoner,
means nothing ; but it means rank upon
the brow of him to, whom it rightfally
belongs.

II. Aaron’s rod represented more
remarkable historic events, and signi-
fied more authority, than the rods be-
longing to the heads of the other
tribes.


It is generally supposed to have been
the rod used by him and by Moses in
the performance of the miracles of Egypt
and the. wilderness (comp. Exod. vii. 9,
19, &.). It was, therefore, connected
with a miracle in the past—it had been
alive. And it signified an authority not
derived from birth (Exod. vi. 16-20), but
conferred by the special selection of
God. The present miraculous manifes-
tation may suggest—-


330 - -


1. That the creation of life is the higheet
manifestation of Divine power. Miracles
of increase may to some extent find an
analogy in the works of man when he
works in co-operation with the estab
lished laws of nature. He sows a seed
and réaps thirty-fold, and soon. But
there is life in the seed to work upon.
The giving of life to the dead can in no
way be imitated by man. The charac et
of .this niiracle, therefore, seems in-
tended—

2. To vindicute most forcibly the right
of God to decide who should be, not only
the head of the tribe of Levi, but the
priestly head of the entire nation. He
who could thus dispense with all
the seasons in the production of
the flowers and fruit upon the rod,.
had a right to set aside the ordinary
laws of primogeniture. God is not
handcuffed by either His natural or
social laws. He can break all laws
except those of moral rectitude. To
violate them is His blessed impossi-
bility. ,

3. It may further suggest that the
choice of God would be justified in the
after history of Israel. The choice for
special service begins with God. The
selection of an earthly ambassador
springs, not from himself, but from the
king who sends him: So the Saviour.


‘and King of men said to His ambas-
ssadors, “Ye have not chosen Me,


but I have chosen you.” But His
choice was justified by their “ bringing


forth fruit which remained” (John xv.
16). So the choice of Aaron’s family


‘was justified by the fruit which some
members brought forth to bless the
nation. Their faith aud courage in
entering Jordan, the zeal of Phinehas
(Num. xxv. 7), &c., were typified in the


budding and fruit-bearing rod which


was their symbol.—/rom ‘‘ Outlines of.
Sermons on the Miracles and Parables of
the Old Testament.”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


CHAP. XVII


NN oats


Tus Buppep Rop, a Typs or CuHrist,


(Verse 8.)


Let us advance from the ancient
_record to the still-living Gospel of the
fact. The Rod in many graphic tints
shows Jesus. The very name is caught
by raptured prophets—Isa. xi. 1 ; Zech.
vi. 12,13. Thus faith gleans lessons
from the very title—Rod.

But the grand purport of the type is
to rejectall rivals. It sets Aaron alone
upon the priestly seat. The parallel
proclaims, that similarly Jesus is our
only Priest. God calls—anoints—
appoints—accepis, and ever hears Him;
but Him alone. In His hands only do
these functions live,

Next, the constant luxuriance has a
clear voice. In nature’s field, buds—
blossoms—fruit, soon wither. Not so
this Rod. Its verdure was for ever
_ green; its fruit was ever ripe. Beside
the Ark it was reserved in never-fading
beauty. Here is the ever-blooming
Priesthood of our Lord. Psa. cx. 4;
Heb, vii, 24... .. Because Christ
ever lives, and ever loves, and ever
prays, and ever works, therefore His
kingdom swells. And so it shall be
while the need remains. But when the
last of the redeemed is safely gathered
in, then heaven shall no more hear
the interceding Priest, Then the one


sound from the vast throng shall be—
Hallelujah.

Mark, moreover, that types of Jesus
often comprehend the Church. It is
so with these rods. The twelve at first
seem all alike. -They are all sapless
twigs. But suddenly one puts forth
loveliness ; while the others still remain
worthless and withered. Here is a pic-
ture of God’s dealings with a sin-slain
race. Since Adam's fall, all are born
lifeless branches of a withered stock.
When any child of man arises from the
death of sin, and blooms in grace, God
has arisen with Divine almightiness.

Believer,the Budded Rod givesanother
warning. It is a picture. of luxuriance.
Turn from it and look inward. Is your
soul thus richly fertile? Instead of
fruit, you often yield the thorn. John


xv. 8. Whence is the fault? John
xv. 4. Perhaps your neglectful soul
departs from Christ. Meditate in God’s


law day and night, and you “shall be
like a tree planted by the rivers of
water,” &, Psa. i. 3.

But if the Budded Rod rebukes the
scanty fruit in the new-born soul, what
is its voice to unregenerate worldlings $
Heb. vi. 8.—Henry Law, D.D,


Tas Cry or tHe Suspunp: Rasa.
(Verses 12, 13.)


This last miraculous interposition,
coming after the preceding judgments,
awakened asalutary dread in the minds
of the rebellious pecple, and led them
to cry to Moses in great bitterness of
spirit, Behold, we die, we perish, we
all perish,” &c. This cry of theirs
suggests the following observations :—

I. That sinners are prone to pass
_ from one extreme of evil to the oppo-
site one,

A little while ago they went to the
extreme of presumption, now they are


in theextreme of despair. ‘Seo,” says
Dr. A. Clarke, “the folly and extrava-
gance of this sinful people At first,
every person might come near to God, for
all, they thought, were sufficiently holy,
and every way qualified to minister in
holy things. Now, no one, in their ap-
prehension, can come near to the taber-
nacle without being consumed (ver. 13).
In both cases they were wrong; some
there were who might approach, others
there were who might not. God had


‘put the difference. His oi should


CHAP, XVI,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


2 ; : ere


have been final with them; but sinners
are ever running into extremes.” “In
the preceding events,” says Scott, “they
‘despised the chastening of the Lord ;’
and now they fainted when rebuked by
Him.” For another instance of their
swift transition from one sinful extreme
to another, comp. chap. xiv. 1-5, with
40-45.

Il, The Divine judgments may pro-
duce outward submission, while the
heart remains as rebellious as ever,

These Israelites were subdued, but
they were not penitent. They do not
recognise the fact that the thousands
who perished, perished because of their
sins; they do not confess their own
sins. Their cry is that of a people who
are painfully conscious that they have
to do with a Being against whose judg-
ments they cannot stand; but who
evidently feel themselves injured by
those judgments, Their cry wasreally
a complaint against God. They felt
themselves unable to cope with Him,
and, therefore, yielded an unwilling sub-
mission to Him. Law and judgment
may subdue rebellion, but they cannot
enkindle loyalty ; they may compel to
submission, but they cannot convert.to
affection, Itis only love that can do
this,

IIt, The Divine judgments may pro-
duce outward submission while the
mind entertains most erroneous moral
opinions,

The people cried, ‘“ Whosoever cometh
anything near unto the tabernacle: of


the Lord shall die.” They are still in -


error. They have renounced the error,
that allmen might approach the taber-
nacle, but they have adopted the error
that no one might approach unto it.
There were those who might come near
unto it; the priests might do so; it was
their business to do so, And all might
avail themselves of the offices of the
priests ; and were under solemn obliga-
tions to do so. But the judgments
which they had experienced had not
taught them this, Under the judg-
ments of God men are not in a fit state
for learning much concerning their
relation to Him. And judgments are
neither designed nor fitted to teach
much, except man’s utter inability to
withstand God. Judgments are for cor-
rection rather than instruction. They
have been used with effect for the
destruction of the false and evil, but
they are not fitted for building up the
true and good. It was correction that
Tsrael most needed when they were
visited by these judgments. ‘They per-
sistently refused instruction. And, as
is remarked by Keil and Del., “ if this
fear of death was no fruit of faith, it was
fitted for all that to prevent any fresh
outbreaks of rebellion on the part of
the rejected generation,”

IV. The most stout-hearted rebels
against God must, sooner or later,
submit to Him.

If they will not submit willingly,
they will be compelled into submission.
Comp. Job. ix. 3, 4; xl. 93 xxii. 213
Psa.-ie 12; 1 Cor. xv. 25. (a)


ILLUSTRATIONS,


(a) If wo were profane enough to imagine
the Lord to be vulnerable, yot whore is the
bow and whore the arrow that could reach
Him on His throne? What javolin shall
pierce Jehovah's buckler? Lot all the nations
of the earth rise and rage against God, how
shall they reach His throne? They cannot
even shake his footstool. If all the angels of
heaven should robe) against the Great King,
and their equadrona should advance in serried
ranks to besiege the palace of the Most High,
He has but to will it and they would wither as
autumn Jeaves, or consume as the fat upon
the alter, Reserved in chains of darkness,
the carry of his power would for ever


become mementoes of His wrath, None can
touch Him; He is the God that ever liveth,
Let us who dolight in the living. God bow be-
fore Him, and humbly worship Him as the
God in whom we live and move and have our
being.—C. H. Spurgeon, e
As you stood some stormy-day upon a sea-
cliff, and marked the giant billow rise from
the deep to rush on with foaming crest, and
throw itself thundering on tho trembling
shore, did you ever fancy that you could stay
its course, and hurl it back to the depths of
octan? Did you ever stand beneath the
leaden lowering cloud, and mark the light.
ning’s leap, as it shot and flashed, dazzling


GOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.
A eee


-athwart the gloom, and think that you could


grasp the bolt and change its course? Still
more foolish and vain his thoughts, who
fancies that he can arrost or turn aside the
purpose of God, saying, “‘ What is the Almighty
that we should serve Him? Let us break His
bands asunder, and casi away His cords from
us!” Break His bands asunder! How He


‘that sitteth in the keavons shall laughl—=


Thomas Guthrie, D.D. :
Prosperity is not found in opposing God,

It is only by falling tn with His arrangements

and following His designs. A prosperous


_ woyage is made by falling in with winds and


currents, and not in opposing them; pros-
porous agriculture is carried on with coincid-
ing with the favourable seasons of the year,
aud taking advantage of the dows, and rains,
aud sunbeams that God sonds, and not ia


CHAP. XVIt.





épposing them; prosperity in regard to health
is found in taking advantage of the means
which God gives to secure it, and not in
opposing them. And the sinner in his course
has no more chance of success and prosperity,
than a man would have who should make it
® point or principle of life always to sail
against tides, and currents, and hoad-winds;
or he who should set at defiance all the laws of
husbandry, end plant on # rock, or in the
dead of winters or he who should feed him-
self on poison rather than on nutritious food,
and cultivate the nightshade rather than
wheat. If aman desires prosperity, he must
fall in with the arrangements of God in His
providence and grace; and wisdom is seen in
studying these arrangements, and in yielding
to thom.—Albert Barnes, D.D.


Tas Rum anp raz Remepy.


(Verses 12 and 13.)


This was the language of desperation,
remorse, and enmity to God. Israel
had deeply transgressed and hardened,
themselves in transgression, and a
just God had repeatedly visited them
in wrath. Korah, Dathan, and Abiram,
and their company, had been swallowed
up, and 250 men bearing impious fire
had been consumed, and the surviving
rebels said,—* Ye have killed the people
of the Lord.” .When further punished,
crushed, but not humbled, again they
murmur against God, as in the text.

Affecting description of the ravages
of sin and death. Let us consider—

ZL The devastations of death.

A true picture of all mankind—
‘¢Bohold, we die, we perish, we all
perish—we are consumed with dying.”

1, Sad universal picture. True in all
ages, countries,{climes. Death is univer-
sal and_ unavoidable: no exemption, old
and young, stroig and weak, rich and
poor, tyrant and oppressor, the wise
man and the fool—all die. Same
phenomena, sickness, pain, suffering,
decay—in all lands. (Job xiv. 1, 2,
&e.; Isa. uzxviii. 12; xl. 6-8.) How
many gone from among us, and we are
hasting after them, and soon shail be


with them.


2. And whither are they gone? Ask
the philosopher, the sceptic, the Deist—


they cannot tell you—they have no
comfort for you: perhaps your departed
ones are annibilated, or they wander in
other bodies, or are absorbed in Deity !
Ah! man without God’s Word knows
nothing of the future.

They are in the separate state—they
have begun to be eternally happy or
miserable—eternal woes or eternal bliss
—a second death—oh! terrible: tha
first death is sad, but what is the
second? “Where their worm never
dies,” &c.

II. The cause of these widespread
desolations of death.

Again ask the philosopher, the phi-
lanthropist, the disbeliever in the
Scripture account of it—Why all thia
misery, pain, death? How do you
reconcile it with a God ‘of benevolence %
They are silent. Our answer is one
word—* Sin” —“ our iniquities, like the
wind, have taken us away.” (Isa. Ixiv.
6.)

1. This world ts a penal state: A
fact much overlooked. It so. far resem-
bles the future world of suffering, with
this difference—this world is both penal
and probationary, that is penal only.
But this world is a state of punishinent—
we are born into it under the curse and
wrath of God—and every pain, sorrow,
grief—bodily, mental, aS a


CHAP. XVIIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBL ERS.


ee ee eee nn


punishment for original sin, or the
effect of actual sin. “ We die, we perish,
we all perish,” because we sin, we all
sin. Universal death proves universal
sin; because death is the penalty of
sin. (Rom. v. 12.) Almost all men
hasten death and shorten their lives by
sin. It peoples gaols and madhouses,
and feedsthe tomb, (Rom. vi. 23.) The
mortal wound—“ sting of death is sin.”
(1 Cor. xv. 56.) “ Brings forth death.”
(James i. 15.)

2. Alas, this, too, peoples hell! “The
wicked turned into hell.” (Psa. ix. 17 ;
Matt. xxiii. 33; 2 Pet. ii 4.) First
death only dark portal to the second.

III. The remedy for this widespread
desolation of sin and death.

It was that very “tabernacle” which
these frightened, but desperate sinners
dreaded. There only was their refuge ;
there the mercy-seat; there the pro-
pitiation—the sacrificing priest, the
altar, and a sin-forgiving God above it.
Yet they said, “ Whosoever cometh
near the tabernacle of the Lord shall
die.” And perhaps they were right—
for as of the Gospel it typified, so the
tabernacle was a means of life or death,
according as it was approached—“ of
life unto life, or uf death unto death.”
(2 Cor. ii. 16.) But there was no other
refuge, no other salvation.

Now Christ ts our true tabernacle.
(Heb, viii. 2.) “ He hath put away sin
by the sacritice of Himself.” (Heb. ix.
26.) “ He hath abolished death.” (2 Tim.
i. 10.) He has offered one sacrifice for
sins. (Heb. x. 12.) Heis our “ Apos-
tle and High Priest ;” our living ‘ Adva-
cate with the Father.” (1 John ii. 1.)

Here ts the universal remedy—Christ


Jesus the Lord—He is “ the tree, whose
leaves are for the healing of the nations.”
(Rev. xxii. 2.) “The shadow of a great
rock in a weary land.” ‘He healeth
broken hearts”—“ wipes tears from
sorrowing faces”—lights up the grave
with joy—makes men “ long to depart”
that they may “be with Him.”
By faith in Him His people rejoice in
tribulation—count temptations “all
joy ”—heavy burdens are lightened, long
troubles shortened and sweetened : and
they have “a hope full of immortality.”
Well has He said, “ Oh death, I will be
thy plagues!” (Hos. xiii, 14.)

With what mew do you regard Al-
mighty God ?—as terrible, revengeful,
cruel, relentless? Do you read these
attributes in the present miseries of the
world? Do the promised miseries of
another world confirm them? Does the
language of the text suit you? Then
it is because you do not know God.
Conscious guilt and dread of punish-
ment we have in common with devils
who “believe and tremble ;” but only
repent, humble your proud hearts, lay
low that unbelieving spirit, and seek
mercy through the Son of His love, and
then you “shall seethe end of the Lord,
that He is very pitiful and of tender
mercy.” Some men will “treasure up
wrath against the day of wrath ;” but
if you “fice from the wrath to come,”
and lay holdon theall-sutlicient Saviour,
you shall taste the sweetness of His
mercy:

Let all who know Him, and love Him,
cleave unto Him in His tabernacle, His
mercy-seat ; they shall find His name
“Love,” and shall rejoice before Him,—
F, Close, D.D.


CHAPTER XVIII


CriticaL anpD Expuanatory Norns,


In this chapter we have the answer
of the Lord to the cry of the people
recorded at the close of the preceding
chapter. And after the confirmation of
the priesthood of Aaron and his family,
these Divine directions as to the duties

834


and emoluments of the Priests and Le-
vites come in very appropriately. The
greuter part of these directions were
addressed by the Lord directly to Aaron
(vers. 1-24). But the regulations as
to the tithes to be paid by the Levites


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XVIII


pene ener


to the Priests were addressed to Moses,
as the head of all Israel (vers. 25-32),
Verse l. The iniquity of the sanctuary.
“¢.e, the guilt of the offences which an
erring people would be continually com-
mitting against the majesty of God,
-when brought into contact, through the
ordinances, with the manifestations of
His presence. Of. Exodus xxviii. 38 ; also
viii. 19.”"—Speaker’s Comm.
The iniquity of your priesthood. *“ As
the priests themselves were but men,
they could no more than others abide
it, if God were extreme to mark what
was done amiss. An atonement was
consequently ordained for them (Lev.
xvi.) ; and they were strengthened to
bear the iniquity of their own uninten-
tional offences, by being entrusted with
the ceremonial means of taking it away.
The word ‘ bear’ has, in the Old Testa-
ment, this double sense of ‘enduring’
and ‘removing ;’ but in the person of
Christ, who atoned by His own endur-
ance, the two are in effect one.”—Jbid.
And thy father’s house with thee. *'The
father’s house of Aaron, t.e., the Leviti-
cal family of Kohath, was also to join
in bearing the iniquity of the sanctuary,
because the oversight of the holy vessels
of the sanctuary devolved upon it (chap.
iv. 4, sqq.).—Keil and Del.
Verse 2. Thy brethren also of the tribe
of Lew . . . « may be joined unto
the. “There is a fine paronomasia,
or play upon words, in the original.
Lew comes from the root lavah, to join
to, couple, associate : hence Moses says,
the Levites, yillavu, shall be josned or
associated with the priests; they shall
conjointly perform the whole of the
sacred office, but the priests shall be
principal, the Levites only their asso-
ciates or assistants."—Adam Clarke,
LL.D.
Verse 4 A stranger, 4.e., everyone
who was neither a priest nor a Levite.
Comp. chap. i. 53 ; iii. 7.
Verse 5. Ye shall keep, &. Ye,
viz., Aaron and his sons.
Verse 7. I have given your priest’s

office, &c. “This office, which brought
them into the closest fellowship with
the Lord, was a favour accorded to


them by the grace of God. This is ex-
pressed in the words, ‘as a service of gift
(a service with which I present you) J
gwe you the priesthood.’ "—Keil and Del.

Verse 8. By reason of the anointing.
Keil and Del. e ad, translate, “for a
portion.”

Verse 10, In the most holy place,
ze, “in the court of the tabernacle
(see Lev. vi. 9, 19 ; vii. 6), which is called
‘most holy’ here, to lay a stronger
one upon the precept.” —Xeil and

el,

Every male. Only the males of the
priestly families could eat of the things
mentioned in ver. 9.

Verse 11. To thy sons and to thy
daughters. Both the males and females
of the priestly families, provided they
were legally clean, might eat of the
things mentioned in this verse,

Verse 15. Surely redeem . . «. .
redeem. ‘‘A stronger expression ig in-
tentionally used in reference to the
redemption of the first-born of man .
than in reference to that of unclean
beasts. For the rule as to the former
admitted of no exception : the owner of
the latter, if unwilling to redeem, might
destroy the beasts (Exod. xiii. 13;
xxxiv. 20). Usually, of course, he would
redeem them, but in the case of a
diseased or maimed animal he might
well be excused from making a pay-
ment for that which, if redeemed,
would be worthless. As to the mode
of redemption of unclean beasts, it had
been originally enjoined that the first-
ling of an ass should be redeemed with
a lamb. But the owner of the beast
might not be always able to provide a
lamb, especially in the wilderness, and
the liability was accordingly commuted
(Lev. xxvii, 27). Into all the detaila
of this the present ordinances do not
enter. Their object is not so much to
prescribe accurately to the people what
should be paid, as to assign to the
priests their various revenues.”—Speak-
er’s Comm.

Verse 19. A covenant of salt, “That
is, an incorruptible everlasting cove-
nant. As salt was added to different
kinds of viands, not only pee them


CHAP. XVIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





a relish, but to preserve them from
putrefaction and decay, it became the
emblem of tncorruptebility and per-
manence. Hence, a covenant of salt
signified an everlasting covenant. Among
the Asiatics, eating together was con-
sidered a bond of perpetual friendship ;
and as salé was a common article in
all their repasts, it may be in reference
to this circumstance that a perpetual
covenant is termed a covenant of salt ;
because the parties ate together of the
sacrifice offered on the occasion, and
the whole transaction was considered
as a league of endless friendship. See
Lev. ii, }3."—A. Clarke, LL D,

Verse 20. Comp. Deut. x. 9; xviii.
{,2; Josh. xiii. 33. “ No tract of land
was peculiarly assigned to them, as
were to the other tribes, as fields nor
vineyards ; they had fields appointed
them, and they had houses and cities
devoted to the Lord which fell to them,
and others they had by gift or legacy,
- or by purchase, as had Jeremiah, the
priest, and Barnabas, the Levite, Jer.
xxxii. 9 ; and Acts iv. 36, 37 ; but they


had no share in the distribution of
the land of Canaan at the time of the
division of it among the tribes ; no,
not even in the spoil of the cities of
the land of Canaan when they were
conquered.” —Hvang. Synopsis.

Verse 21. Comp. Lev. xxvii. 31-33;
Neh. x. 37 ; xii. 44.

Verses 22, 23. Comp. chap. i. 53 and
viii. 19.

Verse 26. Tho Levites are here
commanded to give to the priests, as
an offering to the Lord, a tithe of the
tithes which they received.

Verse 27. Shall be reckoned, &c.
“That is, it should be as acceptable
to God as if they had fields and vine-
yards, threshing-floors and wine-presses,
of their own, from whence corn and
wine were taken.”—Dr, Gill.

Verse 29. Of all the bestthereof. Heb.
as in margin, “ Of all the fat.”

Verse 32. Netther shall ye pollute, &c.
“Rather, ‘And by not polluting the
holy things of the children of Israel, ye
shall not die.’”—Speaker’s Comm.


A GRAVE PERIL AND A GRAGIOUS PRECAUTION.


(Verses 1-7.)


Two preliminary points :

First : Here is the answer of the Lord
to the cry of the people. The inquiry
concerning the approach to the taber-
nacle of the Lord, with which the pre-
ceding chapter closes, receives a clear
response in the paragraph now before
us. Man may draw near to God, but
it must be in the way which He has
appointed, Mic, vi. 6-8; John xiv. 6.

Second: Here is a solemn reminder to
Aaron that his great honours involved
great responsibilities, The Lord had
abundantiy vindicated his priesthood,
and now He reminds him of the serious
responsibilities of his charge. “Thou
and thy sons and thy father’s house
with thee shall bear,” &c. (ver. 1).
“ And ye shall keep the charge of the
sanctuary,” &c. (ver. 5). Wherefore
let them “not be high-minded, but
fear.” (See pp. 32, 33.) (a)

$36


Let us now consider—

I. The grave peril referred to,

There was danger that the wrath of
God might be again kindled against
them by reason of—

1. Sin tn relution to consecrated places
and things. No one was to come nigh
unto these except upon such occasions
as were permitted by God, eg., when
bringing their sacrifices to the priests,
&c. “A stranger shall not come nigh
unto you.” “The stranger that cometh
nigh shall be put to death.” Korah
and his company had sinned in this way,
and they were consumed by “ fire from
the Lord.” Aaron and his sons, with
the Levites as assistants, must bear the
responsibility of the charge of the
sacred places and things. As with the
Israelites there was danger of sin by
unwarranted approach to the taber-
nacle ; so our best services are impet


ES a ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XVII1L


rs reer ep


fect; even our worship is marred by
wandering thoughts and lukewarm af-
fections ; our religious exercises need
the merits of the gracious Saviour. (6)
2. Sin in consecrated persons, “The
Lord said unto Aaron, Thou


_ and thy sons with thee shall bear the


iniquity of your priesthood” (see Ez-
planatory Notes on ver. 1). The holiest
of men in the holiest office is, in the
present state, exposed to temptation,


. and liable to sin, and stands constantly


in need of “the grace that is in Christ
Jesus.” (c)

Sin, whether in priests or in people,
is a perilous thing; it issues in death
(James i. 15); it kindles the wrath of
God. “Sin and punishment,” says
Trapp, “ come under one name, as being
tied together with chains of adamant:
where the one dines the other will sup;
where the one is in the saddle, the
other will be upon the crupper. Memo
crimen gerit in pectore qui non idem
Nemesin in tergo. Sin doth as naturally
draw and suck judgments to it, as the
loadstone doth iron, or turpentine
fire.”

II. The gracious precaution against
this peril.

By appointing the priests and Le-
vites to the charge of the consecrated
places and things; by appointing to
them means of atonement for sin (Lev.
xvi.); and by solemnly warning the
people against intruding into sacred
places or intermeddling with sacred
duties, the Lord endeavours to guard
them against the perils to which they
were exposed. But there are several
particulars which call for notice :—

1, The Dwine distribution of duty.
To the priests and the Levites res-
pectively certain duties were allotted
(comp. chaps. iii, and iv., and see
pp. 48, 49, 56, 57).

2. The Divine recognition of dif-
ferences of rank amongst men. The
Levites, though brethren to the priests,
were to serve them. They shall “ be
joined unto thee, and minister unto
thee.” Differences of rank are inevit-
able amongst men. (See pp. 12, 13.)
The Church of Christ is no exeeption

B


in this. (See p. 4%) As tho Levites
were to serve under Aaron, so Chris-
tians work under Jesus Christ, the
Great High Priest. (d)

3. In the differcnces of rank the com-
mon brotherhood of all must not be lost
sight of. Though servants to the priests,
the Levites were their brethren.
“Thy brethren” (ver. 2) ; “ your breth-
ren the Levites” (ver. 6). In the
Christian Church differences of rank do
not invalidate the brotherhood of all.
The elders of the Church are not to be
“lords over God’s heritage.” “One is
your master, Christ; and all ye are
brethren.” Even “ Hu is not ashamed
to call them brethren.” (e)

4. Men of every rank are called to
service. The priests must serve ; so also
must the Levites; and those whe be-
longed to neither of these orders were
called to serve in other departments of
the national life. From the highest to
the lowest no one was exempted from
this obligation. (See pp. 13, 56, 57.)

5. Each must faithfully fulfil hés
own service, and abstain from intrusion
into the province of others. The Levites
were not to interfere with priestly
duties; “They shall not come nigh
the vessels of the sanctuary and the
altar, that neither they, nor ye algo,
die.” They who were neither priests
nor Levites were to abstain from all the
sacred functions connected with the
tabernacle. ‘ Astrinzer shall not come
nigh unto you.” “The stranger that
cometh nigh shall be put to death.”
No one must intermeddle with duties
which belonged not to him. An excel-
lent rule for all times and places.

6. The faithful discharge of appointed
duty promotes the safety of the entire
people. ‘Ye shall keep the charge of
the sanctuary, and the charge of the
altar; that there be no wrath any mcre
upon the children of Israel.” The wel-
fare of the whole community is affected
beneficially or injuriously by the con-
duct of each member of it. The
faithfulness of even the feeblest and
most obscure member contributes to the
security and prosperity of the entire
commonwealth. (f/f)

337


GHAP, XVIII,








HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,





ILLUSTRATIONS.


(«) The groster the trust is of work and
power that is committed to us the greater is
our danger of contracting guilt, by falsifying
and betraying that trust, This is 3 good rea-
gon why we should neither be envious at
others’ honours nor ambitions ourselves of
high places, because great dignity exposes us
to great iniquity. Those that are entrusted
with the charge of the sanctuary will have a
great deal to answer for, Who would have the
care of souls who considers the account that
must be given of that care ?—Matthew Henry.

(6) The tewple itself is full of vacant wor-
ship, It resounds with rash vows and bab-
bling voices. It is the house of God; but man
has made it a nest of triflors, a fair of vanity,
2 den of thieves. Some come to it, as reckless
and irreverent as if they were stepping into a
neighbour’s house. Some come to i$, and feel
as if they had laid the most High under
e@bligation, because they bring a sheaf of corn
or a pair of pigeons; whilst they never listen
te God’s Word, nor strive after that obedience
which is better than sacrifice. Some come,
and rattle over empty forms of devotion, as if
they would be heard because of their musu
speaking. And some, ina fit of fervour, utter
vows which they forget to pay; and, when
reminded of their promise by the “angel ” of
the church, they protest that there must be
some mistake; they repudiate the vow, and
say it was an error.—James Hamilton, D.D.

(c) As a man who in the morning washeth
his hands, and goes abroad about his business
and affairs in the world, though he doth not
puddle in the mire, or rake among dunghills,
yet when he returns home again to dinner, or
at night, if he wash, he finds that he hath
contracted some uncleanness aud that his
hands are foul; we cannot converse in an un-
clean and dirty world with our bodies, but
some uncleanness will fasten upon them. So
itis with the soul; tho souls of the best, of the
purest, of the holiest, though they do not rake
in the dunghill, and wallow in the mire of sin
basely and filthily, yet they do from day to
day, yea, from moment to moment, contract
some filth and uncleanness, And in this sonse
it is that “there is no man that liveth and
sinneth not,” Every man hath a “fountain
of uncleanness” in him; and there will be
Avor rome sin, Bome filthiness bubbling and
boiling tp, if not fowing forth,— Caryl,

(d) The Levites were to serve undar Aaron,
the head of the priestly house. This teaches
usa fine lesson, and one much noeded by
Christians at the present moment. Wo ail
want to bear in mind that service, to be intelli-
gent and acceptable, must berendered in sub-
je2tion to priestly authority and guidance, The
whole tribe of workers wore associated with and
subject to the high priost, All was under hisim-
mediate controland guidance, So mustitbenow
in reference to all God’s workers, All Christian
service must be rendered in fellowship with
our Sa Priest, and in holy subjection


to His authority. It is of no value otherwise.
There may bea great deal of work done, thera
may be 2 great deal of activity; but if Christ
bo not the immediate object before the heart,
if His guidance and authority be not fully
owned, the work must go for nothing, But,
on the other hand, the smallest act of service,
the meanest work done under the eye of
Christ, done with direct reference to Him, has
its value in God’s estimation, and shall most
assuredly receive its dus reward. This is
truly encouraging, and consolatory to the
heart of every earnest worker, The Levites
had to work under Aaron, Christians have
to work under Christ. We are responsible to
Him,— Anon,

(e) You recognise in every nation, in every
tribe, your fellow men, your brethren. Go to
Egypt, and stund among the Sphinxes, the
Pyramids, the old and wondrous temples, and
you are a stranger in a strange land, and it
seems scarcely less thana ghastly dream. Go
farther East, behold the ruined architecture,
revive the manners and customs of the Syrian
and Babylonian empires, and you seem still
among a strange people. If they should rise
and speak to you, their tongusa would be as
strange lo you as yours would be to them,
But let a maiden speak her love, and instantly
you know that voice, The works that their
hands wrought are wondrous. The affections
that throb in their hearts are familiar, The
things that they lived for outwardly—see how
widely you are separated from these, How
different are their jaws, their institutions, and
their methods of commerce from ours! How
strange tous are their political economy and
their ecclesia: tical system! Touch that which
man fashioned and formed, and man is dis-
jointed, and split apart by rivers, and moun.
tuinos, and times, and ages; but touch the
human heart, and let that speak, and all men
rise up and say, “That voice is my voice,”
Reach but the feeling of love, and every
human being says, “ It is my brother; it is
my sister,” Strike those cords that bring out
the experience of grief, and every man wails
with the hoary wailers of antiquity. Man is
not a unit by virtue of the fruits of his intele
lect and the works of his hand, but by virtue
of those eternal identities of sentiment and
affection which are common to all mon in all
nations and ages —A. W. Beecher.

(f) No man has a right to say he can do
noting for the benefit of mankind, who are
less benefited by ambitious projects than by
the sober fulfilment of each man’s -proper
duties, By doing the proper duty in the
proper place, a man may make the world his
debtor. ‘Che results of “ patient continuance
in well-doing ” are never to be measured by
the weakness of the instrument, but by the
omnipotence of Him who blesseth the sincere
efforts of obedient faith alike in the prince ana
in the cottager—H, Thompson,


HOMILETIC ‘COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XVIU.


ssc aS Rite TSR Rceairsemimnesmimensees=neees eee


Tas Fivenity oy Owns, tHe Savery oy Many.


(Verse 5.)


This applies—
I, To ministers of the Gospel, who
are—
1. To preach the whole truth.
_2. To guard the ordinances of reli-
gion.
_ _ 3. To urge the performance of duty,
that the people of their charge may be
saved from sin and wrath.

II. Tocivil rulers,

Who are to make and enforce laws
to maintain and increase the tone of
public morality.

III. To heads of families,

Who, by example and precept,
should seek to form good characters
and correct evil habits in their chil-
dren and servants.

Anillustration of fidelity.—The fidelity
of the keepers of the lighthouse once


on Minet’s Ledge, near Boston, may
well be imitated, In the terrible April
gale of 1851, this beautiful structure
was destroyed. Two men were in it at
the time; anda vast multitude were
gathered upon the shore, waiting, in
anxious distress, for the expected catas-
trophe. Every hour, however, the bell
tolled the time, and ever the light
pierced the dark raging storm, and bid
the sailor beware. No howling blast
could silence the one, or rising wave
extinguish the other. At last,one giant
wave, mightier than the rest, rose up
and threw its arms around the tower,
and laid it low in the waves. Then
alone was the bell silent ; then alone did
the light cease to shine.—J. M. Reid. —
Biblical Museum.


Tas Diving Provision For THE Prizsts AND LeEviTES, AN ILLUSTRATION OF
THE MAINTENANCE OF THE CHRISTIAN MINISTRY,


(Verses 8-32.)


The main subject of this portion of
the history has already engaged our
attention (see pp. 84-86) ; but there are
additional matters brought before us
here which demand notice.

The Redemption of the Firstborn
(vers. 15, 16) has also been already no-
ticed by us (see pp. 59, 60).

“These regulations concerning the
‘revenues of the priests and Levites
were in perfect accordance with the true
idea of the israelitish Kingdom of God,
Whereas in heathen states, where there
was an hereditary priestly caste, that
caste was generally a rich one, and held
a firm possession in the soil (in Egypt,
for example ; see at Gen. xlvii. 22), the
Levites received no hereditary landed
property in the land of Israel, but only
towns to dwell in among the other
tribes, with pasturage for their cattle
(chap. xxxv.), because Jehovah, the

52


God of Israel, would be their in-
heritance. In this way their earthly
existence was based upon the spiritual
ground and soil of faith, in accordance
with the calling assigned them, to be the
guardians and promoters of the com-
mandments, statutes, and rights of
Jehovah ; and their authority and in-
fluence among the people were bound ur
with their unreserved surrender of ther-
selves to the Lord, and their firm re-
liance upon the possession of their God.
Now, whilst this position was to be a
constant mecitement to the Levites te
surrender themselves entirely to the
Lord and His service, it was also to be-
come to the whole nation a constant
admonition, inasmuch as it was a
prerogative conferred upon them by the
Lord, to seek the highest of all good ir
the possession of the Lord, as its portion
and inheritance.”-—Kei and eae
3


CHAP. XVIIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


SS eS SES


The following observations are sug-

I. That the maintenance of the
Christian ministry devolves upon the
Christian Church,

This nationof Israelites was separated
unto the Lord, and is thus an illustra-
tion of the Chureh. God ordained that
the priests and Levites should be sup-
ported by the nation; the Christian
ministry should be supported by the
Christian Church,

1. This is righteous. The priests and
Levites were required to renounce the
paths of worldly ambition and profit ;
they had no share in the inheritance of
the children of Israel (vers. 20, 24);
they were to devote themselves un-
reservedly to the promotion of the re-
ligious interests of the people. Inasmuch
as they gave their time, their strength,
&c., to serve the people, the peoplecould
not neglect to provide for them without
dishonesty. The Christian minister has
aright to a liberal maintenance from
the church which he serves, What the
Lord said to the Levites might be said
to ministers to day respecting the
provision made for them, “It is your
reward for your service in the tabernacle
of the congregation ” (ver. 31). (a)

2. This is advantageous. It promotes
the prosperity of the Church. (See pp.
85, 86.)

3. This is scriptural. Matt. x. 9,10;
Luke x. 7; 1 Cor. ix. 7-14; Gal. vi. 6;
2 Thess. iii. 8, 9; 1 Tim. v. 17, 18,

II, That Christian ministers of every
grade who are devoted to the service
of the Church have a right to support
from the Church.

God gives directions for the worthy
support of the high priest, the priests,
and their servants, the Levites, also,
The claims of the poor, hard-working
curate upon the Churc>. for a respectable
maintenance are, in the sight of God,
as binding as those of the wealthy and
lordly bishop. The claims of many of
the most faithful and useful ministers,
who are working in inconspicuousspheres,
are most sadly ard sinfully overlooked
by the Christian Church. (6)

Ill. That the Christian ministry

340


should be supported liberally by the
Church,

“The revenue which the Lord
assigned to the Levites and priests, as
His servants, consisting of the tenths
and firstfruits, as well as certain portions
of the different sacrificial gifts that
were offered to Him, appears to have
been a very considerable one, especially
if we adopt the computation of J. D.
Michaelis (Mos. Recht. i. § 52) with
reference to the tithes. ‘A tribe,’ he
says, ‘which had only 22,000 males in
it (23,000 afterwards), and therefore
could hardly have numbered more than
12,000 grown up men, received the
tithes of 600,000 Israelites: conse-
quently one single Levite, without the
slightest necessity for sowing, and
without any of the expenses of agricul-
ture, reaped or received from the pro-
duce of the flocks and herds as much ag
five of the other Israelites,’ But this
leaves out of sight the fact that tithes
are never paid so exactly as this, and
that no doubt there was as little consci-
entiousness in the matter then as there is
at the present day, when those who are
entitled to receive a tenth often receive
even less than a twentieth, Moreover,
the revenue of the tribe which the
Lord had chosen as His own peculiar
possession, was not intended to be a
miserable and beggarly one ; but it was
hardly equal, at any time, to the
revenues which the priestly castes of
other nations derived from their endow-
ments.” —Keil and Del. It is deplorable
that the Christian Church, with its richer
spiritual heritage, should fall go far
below the Jewish Church in this
respect.

IV. That all the members of the
Church should contribute to the main-
tenance of the ministry.

Every one who brought a sacritice
contributed a portion of the same to
the priests, and those who had children
or cattle contributed the firstborn, and
those who cultivated the soil presented
the choicest of their productions and
the firstfruits, and to the Levites all
the tithes were given. So that, in one
way or another, all contributed to the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


CHAP, XVIII.





support of the priests and Levites,
£.nd surely the principle is just that all
who receive the services of the Christian
ministry should contribute to its sup
port. (c)

V. That all should contribute propor-


a tionally to the maintenance of the


SL eS ee eer”


=


SS


ministry.

Every Israelite contributed a tenth of
his possessions to the cause of God,
The rule for the Christian should be,
“Every man according to his ability.”
* As God hath prospered him.” “ Freely
ye have received, freely give.” (d)

VI. That out of their maintenance
Christian ministers should offer a por-
tion to the Lord. (Verses 25-29.)

“The Levites had to give up the
tentk of all the tithes they received to
tLe priests ; and the priests were to offer
to Jehovah upon the altar a portion of
the firstfruits, heave-offerings, and
wave-offerings that were assigned to
them. Consequently, as the whole nar
tion was to make a practical acknow-


ledgment, in the presentation of the
tithe and firstfruits, that it had re-
ceived its hereditary property as a ficf
from the Lord its God, so the Levites,
by their payment of the tenth to the
priests, and the priests, by presenting a
portion of their revenues upon the altar,
were to make a practical confession that
they had received all their revenues
from the Lord their God, and owed Him
praise and adoration in return (see Bahr,
Symbolik, ii. pp. 43 sqq.).— Kei and
Del. And the Christian minister, being
liberally maintained by the Church,
should be an example of liberality,
honouring God and doing good te men
with his temporal goods,


Application :—

1. Let the Church recognise and do
its duty in relation to the ministry ; and
do it as unto the Lord, and then it will
become a privilege.

2. Let ministers be faithful and dilie
gent in the discharge of their duties, dc.


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(@) You listen to a minister suspiciously
because he is paid for preaching. Very good,
I only insist upon your being consistent
throughout; then what will happen? When
you are drowning, you will ask the life-boat
men whether they are paid for their services,
and on being told that they live by their occu-
pation, you will nobly perish in the deep,
When your house is in flames, you will de-
mand, notwithstanding the stifling smoke and
cracking timbers, whether the fire-escape men
are paid for their work, and on learning that
they have a pound a week, you will embrace
the flames with a martyr’s rapture, Of course
you will do so, But let me tell you that mon
who try to save life never can be paid! A
man may pay for his coat, but he can never
pay for the services which, by the blessing of
God, redeem and sanctify his nature.—Joseph
Parker, D.D, :

(6) All in the ministry, whatsoever their
gifts be, are to be accepted; yea, though their
gifts oftentimes be small and slender. True
it is, they must all have some gifts to fit them
to teach the people, but howsoever they be
inferior to many others, yet for their office
gake they must be regarded, I donot say, the
people should depend upon them that are
utterly ignorant and unlearned, but if meanly
gifted in comparison of others, the people
must not forsake them, neither wander from
one Levite to another, Mark, therefore, that


ministers endued with a small, and yet a com-
petent measure of gifts, may, notwithstanding,
do unto God good service in the Church, and
gain glory to HisName. Ho putteth His rich
treasures in vessels, not of silver and gold,
but of earth. Among the Apostles, it is to be
thought that some had greater gifts than
others; some were “the sons of thunder,”
and some “laboured more abundantly than
others,” no doubt according to the gifts they
had received, yot all profitable to the Church.
Thero is “a difference of gifts by the same
Spirit,” nevertheless all “ given to profit
withal” (1 Oor, xii, 4-7), Ard Paul saith,
he spake with tongues more than others
(1 Oor, xiv, 18), Hxporience teacheth this
among ourselves, that many of mean gifts and
little human learning, yet have been profitable
teachers, and powerful instruments of much
good in the Church of God, and gaining many
to Him.— W, Attersoll.

(ec) As the great principle of love to Ohrist
will not allow the more opulent to give scan-
tily, so neither will it permit the poorest to
come before Him empty, It was one of the
Divine enactments even of the legal disponsa-
tion—None shall come before Me empty. But
that which was matter of law with the Israel-
ite, the Christian will seize as a golden op-
portunity for evincing his love to Christ; and
will bring, though it be oniy a grain of incense
for an offoring, or @ leaf for that wreath of


34]


CHAP, XVIII.





praise and honour which the Ohurech delights
to lay at the feet of Christ, Whatever Scrip-
ture example others may profess to copy, he
will select the example of the benevolent
widow; and, while others content themselves
with only admiring it, he will often reflect on
‘ts imitableness, Nor will the language of the
Apostle be ever heard by him but as an ad-
dress to himself,—* Tet him labour, working
with his hands the ¢hing which is good, that
he may have to give to him that needeth.”
“These hands have ministered unto my neces-
sities, and to those that are with me. I havo
showed you all things, how that so labouring
ye ought to support the weak, and to remem-
ber the words of the Lord Jesus, how He said,
It is more blessed to give than to receive,”
Agreeably with these sentiments, the man
who, at one time, imagined that his poverty
quite exempted him from the obligations of
charity, and only rendered him an object of it,
is no sooner made the partaker of grace, than
he feels himself impelled to place some offer-
ing on the altar of Christian benevolence; and,
with the ready eye and hand of affection, he
soon detects, for this end, somo sma}! super-
fluity which can be retrenched, or some leisure
time which can be profitably employed, And
when his mite-like offerings, the fruit of hard
self-denial, or of the sweat of his brow, is pre-
sented, nothing could inflict on his grateful
heart a deeper wound than to see that offering
rejected on the ground of its comparative
insignificance, or of his supposed inability to
give it. Itis the offering of a sinner’s grat
tude to a Saviour’s love, and heaven rejoices
over the oblation.—John Harris, DD,

(@) It is observablo that Abraham and
Jacob, om particular occasions, voluntarily


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


NUMBERS.


a ee





devoted to God—what afterwards became a
Divine Jaw for the Jewish nation—a tenth of
their property, Withont implying that their
example has any obligation on us, we may
venture to say that one tenth of our whole
income is an approved proportion for charity,
for those who, with so doing, are able to sup.
port themselves and familivs. For the morg
opulent, and especially for those who have no
families, a larger proportion would be equally
easy. For some, one half would be too little;
while, for others, a twentieth, or even a
fiftieth, would require the nicest frugality
and care, Indeed, of many among the poor it
may be said, that if they give anything they
give their share, they cast in more than all
their brethren,

But in determining the proportion to be
made sacred to God, the Christian would surely
rather exceed than fall short of the exact
amount, With whom is he stipulsting? For
whom is he preparing the offering? Well
may the recollection put every covetons
thought to instant flight tinging his cheek
with shame at the bare possibility of ingrae
titude; aad impelling him to lay his all at the
feet of Christ. Only let him think of the
greatlove wherewith Christ hath loved him,
only let him pass by the cross on his way to
the altar of oblation, and his richest offering
will appear totally unworthy of Divine accept-
ance. When Christ is the object to be
honoured, the affection of the pardoned peni-
tent cannot stop to caleulate tne value of ita
alabaster box of precious cintment—that is an
act to which a Judas only can stoop —its chief
and sole regret is that the unetion has not a
richer perfume and a higher value,—Jééd.


Tue Supreme Cuarms or Gon,


(Verse 12.)


“ All the best of the oil, and all the
best of the wine and of the wheat, the
first-fruits of them they shall offer unto
the Lord.”

God claims that the first and the best
of man’s possessions shall be devoted
anto Him.

i. Let us illustrate this claim.

1. It applies to ourselves, (1) He
claims the best of our persons. He
asks for our supreme love. “My son
give Me thine neart.” “Thou shalt
love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart,” &c. (2) He claims the best of
our life. Youth, with its freshness and
enthusiasm and hope, is His. “They
that seek Me early, shall find Me.”

342


“Remember now thy Creator in the
days of thy youth.” Manhood, with
its maturity and strength and firmness
and wisdom, is His. He summons men
to His service,—‘ Son, go work to-day
in my vineyard.” He condescends by
His Apostle to entreat men to comply
with His demands. “I beseech you
therefore, brethren, by the mercies of
God, that ye present your bodies,” &o,
He will not be satisfied with the dregs
of life, or with the fragments of life :
He demands its first, and best, and all.

2. It applies to our possessions, (1)
Our time He claims: not the remnant,
after the claims of business and pleasure
have all been met. He will be served in





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PUMBERS.


CHAP. XVIIL





all. His demand must be met first, or it
is slighted. (2) Our treasures also He
claims, Man of wealth ! God lays His
hand upon thy property, and calls it
His own. Man of genius! God calls
thee to lay thine eloquence and logic,
thy poetry and philosophy, upon His
altar, Consecrate thy gifts to Him.
Even the friend or relative who ix more
dear than life to us, He asserts His
claim upon, and we are bound to submit.
He demanded the first-born of Israel
as peculiarly His; and He may claim
that our first-born, or our Benjamin,
shall be entirely surrendered to His
service here, or He may call them away
to serve Him in higher spherea The
choicest of our possessions and of our-
selves; all that we have and all that we
are, He asserts His right to.

IL Let us enforce this claim.

We may do this on the following
grounds ;

1. He has given to us whatever of
good we possess. “ Every good gift and
every perfect gift is from above.” &e.
“What hast thou that thou didst not





receive?” “He gtveth to all life, and
breath, and all things.” “He giveth us
richly all things to enjoy.” He gives te
us not absolutely, but as to stewards,
&<. (a)

2. He gave His Beart ws. How dear
is His Son to Him! “Mine elect, in
whom My soul delighteth.” “My beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased.” Yet
He gave Him to us. “ God so loved
the world that He gave His only
begotten Son,” &e. And He gave Him
to humiliation and want, to suffering
and sorrow, to shame anddeath. “He
spared not His own Son, but delivered
Hiss up for us all” Having given His
Best so freely to us—and such a Bett /
He surely has an indisputable right to
our best. (5)

3. If we have complied with His great
demand, and given ourslocs to Him, we
shall nt hesitate to gowe Him the beat
of cur possessioms. If we have given our
hearts fully to Him, we shall not keep
back anything which He requires of
us (¢)


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(@) Think of the right which He hes in all
you possess, There is a sense in which no
man can be said to an exclusive #3
irres ible right in property, even in re
tion fo his cae a st The land whieh
he calle Ais own, ia still guarded and watched
over by a public law which would hold him
responsible for ita destruction. But if man thus
claims a common interest in the most inde
pendent description of property, how much
more does God holds right in your posscesions?
He created them at first; and hence He bas
ap original and supreme property in them.
The world is His, and the fulness thereof. He
continues them in existence every moment;
and is thus every moment asserting afresh
His original rights and establishing a new
title to dominion over thom. You have not
brought into existence a single mite; ail that

ou have done ia to collect together what He
had made ready to your hands, And whence
did you derive the skill and ability to do this?
“Thou must remember the Lord thy God, for
it is He that giveth thee power to get wealth,”
Hence He cautions you against the ein of
“saying in your beart, my power, and toe
might of mine own hand, hath gotten me this
wealth,” lest you should fall into the conse.
quent sin of forgetting that He ie still the
supreme Proprietor of all you possess, And






henes too He solemnly reminds you that your
enjoyments are His gifts, only in the sense
that you had notning wherewith to purehase
them, and not in the soues that He has given
away His right in them: that they are de
porited with you as His steward, not alienated
from Him and vested in you as th-ir master;
that both they and you are His to do with as
seemeth good in His si

The moment you lose sight, therefore, of
His absolute right to all you possess, you are
embezzling your Lord’s , and realiz-
ing the ehzracter of the unjust steward, You
are provoking God to resume His own, and to
transfer it to more faithful hands .... Then
basten to His throne and acknowledge His
right, Take all that you have into His pre
sence, and dedicate it afresh to His service.
Inscribe His blessed name on all your posses.
sions,—John Harris, D.D.

(6) * God so loved the world, that He gave
His only begotten Son.” “Herein is love !”
The universe is crowded with proofs of His
beneficenee; but bere is a proof whieh out
weighs trem all, How much He loved us we
e2n never compute; we have no line with
which to fathom, no standard with which to
compare it, but He so loved us that He sent
His oly begotten Son to be the propitiation
for our sins. Cee rt ge


OHAP. XVIII,’


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


a nT


be unto God for His unspeakable gift.” ....

Nor is this all: He invites you to advance
from the altar of sacrifice to the holiest of all
within the veil ;—in other words, He hath
given you Christ that He may give you Him-
self, It was by wandering from Him that
man first became sulfish and unhappy. It was
by losing Him that man was reduced to the
necessity of looking for happiness in the
ereature, And, because no single kind of
ereated good can satisfy the soul, man sought
to accumulate all kinds, to monopolize every
thing—he became selfish, But the blessed
God, by offering to bring you back again to
Himself, is offering to make you independent
of all inferior things; to put you in possession
ef a good which vhall enable you to look down
with disdain on those things about which
others aro selfish; to lead you to an infinite
good; a good, therefore, about which you
need not be selfish, for were all the universe
to share anc enjoy it with you, it would
atill be an unexhausted infinite fulness of
happiness,

Now let the most miserly individual come
suddenly into the possession of great wealth,
he would be conscious, st least for a short
time, of kind and generous emotions. What
then should be your emotions at discovering
thet, through Christ, you have found a God?
And think, what a God He is! Enumerate
Bis perfections; call up in your mind His
exalted attributes; recollect some of the dis-
plays of His glory, the splendours of His
throne, the amplitude of His dominions, the
angelic orders of His kingdom, the richness
of His gifts, the untouched ocean of happiness
yet in reserve for His people—and when your
mind is fijled, repeat to yourself the wondrous
truth, “This God is my God for ever and
ever.” And, then, think what it is to have
Him for your God: it ia to have a real, parti-
cipating, eternal interest in all that He is; to
have Him for your ‘‘all in all”; to be “ filled
with all the fulness of God.” Obristian, are
you aware of your wealth? have you yet
awoke to a conscious possession of your infi-
nite wealth? Do you not feo! that you could
give away the world itself as a trifle, while
you stand and gaze at these infinite riches?
All who have truly and fully returned to God
have felt thus. They gazed on this glory and
the world was eclipsed ; they thought of it,
and their heart became too large Jor earth;
they reached after it, and the world fell from
their hands, from their hoarts, Having found
the true source of happiness, they would fain
have had all mankind to come and share it
with them. And when He commanded them


to call the world to come to Him and be happy,
they gave away everything, even life itsolf,
in the noble employ, and from love to His
name.—TLbid,

(c) It is related in Roman history, that
when the people of Collatia stipulated about
their surrender to the authority and protection
of Rome, the question asked was, “Do you
deliver uy yourselves, the Collatine people,
your vity, your fields, your water, your »ounds,
your temples, your utensils, all things that
are yours, both human and divine, into the
hands of the people of Rome?” And on their
replying, ‘‘ We deliver up all,” they were ree
ceived, The voluntary surrender which you,
Christian, have made to Christ, though not se
detailed and specific as this formula, is equally
comprehensive, And do you not account these
your best moments when you feel constrained
to lament that your surrender comprehends no
more ? Can you recall to mind the way ia
which He has redeemed you, the misery from
which Ho has snatched you, aud the biessedness
to which He is conducting you, without feeling
that He has bought you a thousand times
over? that you are His by the tenderest,
weightiest obliyations? And when you feel
thus, how utterly impossible would it be for
you at such a moment to stipulate for an ex-
ception in favour of your property !—to hare
bour a mental reservation in favour of that?

Can you think of the blessedness attending
the act itself of dedication to God,—that you
are wedding yourself to infinite riches, uniting
yourself to infinite beauty, allying yourself to
infinite excellence; giving yourself to God,
and recsiving Godin return, so that heaceforth
all His infinite resources, His providence, His
Son, His Spirit, His heaven, He Himself, ali
become yours, to the utmost degree in which
you can enjoy them,—can you think of this
without often repeating the act? without
feeling that had you all the excellencies of a
myriad of angels, His love would deserve the
eternal devotion of the whole? Realize to
your own mind the nature of Christian dedi-
cation, and the claims of Him who calls for it,
and so far from giving penuriously to His
cause, you will take every increase of your
substance into His presence and devote it to
His praise ; you will regard every appeal which
is made to your Ohristian benevolence as an
appeal to that solemn treaty which made you
His, and you will honour it accordingly ; you
will deeply feel the penury of ali riches as an
expression of your love to Him; Lebanon would
not be sufficient to burn, or the beasts thereof
an offering large enough to satisfy the crave
ings of your love.—Jbid,


THE SupREME Portion oF Man.
(Verse 20.)


“The Lord spake untoAaron;....
Iam thy part and thine inheritance
among the children of Israel.”

344


“The possession of the priests and
Levites did not consist in the revenues
assigned to them by God, but in the


eS eee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XVIII





possession of Jehovah, the God of Israel.
In the same sense in which the tribe
of Levi was the peculiar possession of
Jehovah out of the whole of the people of
possession, was Jehovah also the peculiar
possession of Levi ; and just as the other


. tribes were to live upon what was af-


forded by the land assigned them as a
possession, Levi was to live upon what
Jehovah bestowed upon it. And inas-


.much as not only the whole land of


the twelve tribes, with which Jehovah
had enfeoffed them, but the whole
earth belonged to Jehovah (Exod. xix.
5), He was necessarily to be regarded
as the greatest possession of all, beyond
which nothing greater is conceivable,
and in comparison with which every
other possession is to be regarded as
nothing. Hence it was evidently the
greatest privilege and highest honour
to have Him for a portion and possession
(Bahr, Symbolvk, ii. p. 44). “ For truly,”
as Masius writes (Com. on Josh.) ‘‘he
who possesses God possesses all things ;
and the worship (cultus) of Him is in-
finitely fuller of delight, and far more
productive, than the cultivation (cultus)
of any soil.”—Xedl and Del.

God is revealed in His Word as the
portion of all godly souls (see Psa.
xvi. 5; lxxiii. 26; cxix. 57; Lam. iii.
24). This is the pre-eminent portion ;
no inheritance can be compared with
this.

I. This portion is all-sufficient.

God is the portion of His people in-
asmuch as they possess His mnd; He
has revealed to them His thoughts and
will concerning them. They possess
His heart ; He is profoundly and affec-
tionately interested in their welfare ;
He loves them with an infinite love.
Our position is that having Him they
have all-sufficiency,—they have—

1. His wisdom for their direction. “I
will instruct thee and teach thee in the
way which thou shalt go: I will guide
thee with Mine eye.”

2. His power for their protection. “1
will say of the Lord, He is my refuge
and my fortress,” &c. (Psa. xci. 2-13).
“He will not suffer thy foot to be
moved,” &c. (Psa. cxxi. 3-8).


3. His providence for their supply.
“No good will He withhold from them
that walk uprightly.” “ Bread shall be
given him; his waters shall be sure.”
hee God shall supply all your need,”

Ce
4, His grace for their spiritual sup-
port. “ My grace is sufficient for thee ;
for my strength is made perfect in
weakness.” “God is able to make all
grace abound toward you,” &c. (2 Cor.
ixs8):

5, His Heaven fortheir home. * In my
Father’s house are many mansions,” é&e.
(John xiv. 2, 3). He has begotten them
“to an inheritance incorruptible, and
undefiled,” &e. (1 Pet. iii. 5). “ Behold
the tabernacle of God is with men, and
He will dwell with them,” &. (Rev.
xxi. 3, 4).

Well did Savonarola enquire, “ What
must not he possess who possesses the
Possessor of all?” a)

II. This portion is joy-inspiring.

In the realization of the presence and
love of God there is the highest, holiest
joy. “In Thy presence there isfulness
of joy,” &c. The perfection of the
blessedness of heaven is in the full
manifestation of His gracious presence.
Possessing Him,—

1. The joy of satisfied affections is
ours. “God is love; and he that
dwelleth in love dwelleth in God,
and God in him.” The heart loves
God, and rejoices in being loved by
Him who is infinitely true and beautiful
and good, who changeth not, and who
abideth for ever.

2. The joy of sweet and sanctified
fellowship is ours. “ Our fellowship is
with the Father, and with His Son
Jesus Christ.” The influence of this
fellowship was well expressed by the
two disciples at Emmaus,—“ Did not
our heart burn within us while He
talked with us?” &,

3. The joy of true progress is ours.
Under the influence of His blessed pre-
sence all the capacities and faculties of
our being are quickened into holy ac-
tivity, and sustained in continuous pro-
gress. Realizing His presence and
fellowship our being grows ete


@HAP, XVIII, HOMILETIC





to Him; aro such -owth is unspeak-
ably joyous. ‘T'aus the conscious pos-
session of God as our “ part and inherit-
ance” ds the highest blessedness. (6)


“O this is life, and peace, and joy,
My God, to fiud Thee so—
Thy face to see, Thy voice to hear
And all Thy love to know.” — Buber.


I. This portion is inalienable.


Where shall we find a secure and last-
ing inheritance. Not in this world;
not in anything material, or temporal.
Ftiches are not inalienable ; they “ cer-
tainly make themselves wings ; they fly
away,” &. ‘Trust not in uncertain
riches.” Pleasures are not inalienable.
The pleasures of this world can only be
enjoyed for a season, and that a brief
one. Honours are of very uncertain
tenure ; the heroof one day is frequently
execrated the next. Friends are not
abiding ; sometimes they are lost to us


COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,





by u:.faithfulness ; sometimes they are
removed from us by death. Our bodily
health is precarious. Even our mental
sanity and strength we cannot claim ag
unchangeably, and for ever ours. There
is but one immutable and inalienable
“part and inheritance,” that is Gop.
He changes not ; “ the same yesterday,
and to-day, and for ever.” “ With Him
is no variableness, neither shadow of
turning.” He abideth for ever; He
loveth for ever. ‘I have loved thee
with an everlasting love.” Even death
cannot deprive us of this inheritance.
“My flesh and my heart faileth ; but
God is thestrength of my heart, and my
portion for ever.” Death rather makes
our inheritance more fully and perfectly
ours ; it introduces us to a more com-
plete and constant realization of His
presence. After death “we shall see
Him as He is.” ‘So shall we ever be
with the Lord.” (e)

Is this “ part and inheritance” ours $


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(¢) We have a right, each of us—if we are
in Christ—we have a right to expect this
sufficiency, because it is promised in the Bible,
We gather it from the declarations of Scripture,
Listen to them, they are yours. ‘Thus saith
the Lord who created thee, O Jacob, who
formed thee, O Israel, Fear not, I have re-
deemad thee, I have called thee by thy name.”
What @ beautiful thought thatis! Just get
the meaning and beauty ont of it. How many
thousands of believers, thousands upon
thousands of believers, have there been in the
world from the beginning of its history until
now—thoucands in the patriarchal ages who
locked through the glass, and who saw, dimly,
the streak of the morning mm the distance, and,
even with that streak of light, were glad—
thousands, in the prophetical times, who dis-
cerned it in the brightness of a nearer vision—
thousands who looked in its full-orbed lustre,
when Christ came into the world—thousands
upon thousands, since that time, who have
washed their robes and made them white in the
blood of the Lamb—thousands who are now
upon the earth, working out their salvation
with fear and trembling—thousands upon
thousands that shall come into the Church in
the time of its millenial glory, when the gates
of it shall not be shut day nor night, because
the porter shall have no chance of shutting
them, the people crowd in so fast. Now, get
all that mass of believers, past, present, and
future, a company that no man can number ;
546


and to each of them God comes in this promise,
and says, “I have called thee by thy name,
I know all about thee,”—that is, [have not a
merely vague, indefinite knowledge of thee;
as an individual believer I know thy name, I
could single thee out of millions, I could tell
the world all thy solicitudes, and all thy ap-
prehevsions, and all thy hopes, and all thy
sorrows—‘‘T have ealled thee by thy name.”
Oh, precious promise! Take it to your hearts,
“T have called thee by thy name; thou art
mine; when thou passest through the waters
I will be with thee; aud through the rivers ”—
deeper than the waters—‘“they shall not
overflow thee. When thou walkest through
the fire thou shalt not be burned, neither shall
the flames kindle upon thee.”Listen again,
“The Lord God is a sun and shield "light
and protection ; that nearly embraces all our
wants—“ He will give grace and glory.” Is
there anything left out? And if there are any
of you so perversely clever and go mischiey=
ously ingenious in multiplying arguments in
favour of your own despair, that you can con-
ceive of some rare and precious blessing that
is not wrapped up either in grace or glory—
“No good thing will He withhold from them
that walk uprightly.” “Fear not, for I am
with thee; be not dismayed, for I am thy
God.” “Castall thy care.” “Nay,” the rebel
heart says, “there is come little of it I must
bear myself; something that has reference to
the heart’s bitterness, that it alone knoweth-


HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY:


NUMBERS. CHAP. XIX.


SS SSS ssn rss rssh


or to the heart’s deep, dark sorrow, with which
no stranger intermeddles—that I must bear
myself.” “Oast all thy care upon Mo, for I
care for thee.” What! distrustful still? Oan
you not take God at His word? Hark! Ho
sondescends to expostulate with you upon your
anbelief; “Why sayest thou, O Jacob, and
speakest, O Israel, my way is hid from the
. ford ”—how often have you said that in the
time of your sorrow! you know you have—
“My way is hid from the Lord, my judgment
is passed over from my God. Hast thou not
known, hast thou not heard, that the ever-
lasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends
of the earth, fainteth not, neither is weary ?
There is no searching of His understanding.
He giveth power to the faint.” He does not
merely take his swoon away and leave him
weakly; He makes him strong, ‘“ He giveth
power to the faint; and to them that have no
ight He increaseth strength”, ... Brethren,
sre youin Ohrist ? Then all that belongs to
she covenant is yours. Yours is the present
neritage, yours is the future recompense of
reward.— W. M. Punshon, LL.D.

(4) Haws, that are for hogs, grow upon
every hedge; but roses, that are for men, only
grow in pleasant gardens. Though many
have counterfeit jewels, yet thera are bat a
few that have the true diamond; though many
have their earthly portions, yet there are but
a few that have God for their portion,.....
Why have the saints in heaven more joy and
delight than the saints on earth, but because
they have a clearer and a fuller know.edge of
their interest and propriety in God than the
others have? The knowledge of a man’s pro-
priety in God is the comfort cf comforts. Pro-
priety makes every comfort a pleasurable
comfort, a delightful comfort, When a man
walksin a fair meadow, and can write mine
upon it, and into a pleasant garden, and can
write mine upon it, and into a fruitful corn-
field, and can write mine upon it, and into a
stately habitation, and can write mine upon it,
and into a rich mine, and can write mine upon
it; oh! how doth it please him? how doth it


deuighi him? how doth it joy and rejoice him ?
Of all words, this word meum is the sweetest
and the comfortablest. Ah! when a man can
look upon God and write meum; when he can
look upon God, and say, “This God is my
portion;” when he can look upon God, and
say with Thomas, “ My Lord and my God”
(John xx. 28), how will all the springs of joy
rise in his soul! Oh, who can but joy tobe
owner of that God who fills heaven and eart |
with His fulness ? who can but rejoice to have
Him for his portion, in having Whom he hath
all things, in having Whom he can want
nothing? The serious thoughts of our pro-
priety in God will add much sweet to all our
sweets; yea, it will make every bitter sweet.”
— Brooks,

(c) None of your dearest and most cherished
loves are at all worthy to sit upon the throne
of your heart—far down in the scale must
they be placed, when the God who gave them
to you is brought into comparison. That
broad bosom of your beloved husband beats
fondly and faithfully, but when death lays it
low, as ere long it must, how wretched will be
your condition if you have not an everlasting
Comforter upon whose breast to lean! Those
dear little sparkling eyes, which are like stars
in the heaven of your social joy, if these be
the gods of your idolatry, how wretched will
you be when their brightness is dim, and the
mother’s joy is mouldering back to dust!
Hapovy is he who hath an everlasting joy and
an uncying comfort; and there is none in
this respect like unto the God of Jeshurun.
There wouid be fewer broken hearts if hearts
were more completely the Lord’s, We should
have no rebeilious spirits if, when we had our
joys, we used them lawfully, and did not toe
much build our hopes upon them. Ail beneath
the moon will wane. Everything on these
shores ebbs and flows like the sea. Every:
thing beneath the sun will be eclipsed, You
will not find in time that which is only to be
discovered in eternity, namely an immutable
and unfailing source of comfort,—C, H.
Spurgeon,


CHAPTER XIX.


CriticaL AND Expianatory Norzs.


“ Ordinances respecting purification
from the uncleanness of death.”

The association of death with sin
(Gen. ii. 17) sufficiently explains the
ideas on which these ordinances are
based. The.principle that death and
all pertaining to it, as being the mani-
' festation and result of sin, are defiling,
and so lead to interruption of the
liviee relationship between God and


His people, is not now introduced for
the first time, nor is it at all peculiar to
the Mosaic law. It was, on the con-
trary, traditional amongst the Israelites
from the earliest times, is assumed in
various enactments made already (cf.
wa, 4x, 6, sq0.5 Levs>x. 1, 7;:xt 8,
11, 24; xxi. 1, sqq.), and is traceable
in various forms amongst many nations
of antiquity.....
a 347


CHAP. XYX.


The rites of purifying prescribed

amongst these various nations have
points of similarity to those laid down
in this chapter; and indeed sprinklings
and washings would naturally form a
part in them all (cf. ch. viii. 7)
Moses then adopted here, as elsewhere,
existing and ancient customs, with
significant additions, as helps in the
spiritual education of his people.
’ The ordinance was probably given at
this time because the plague, which
happened (xvi. 46-50) about the matter
of Korah, had spread the defilement of
death so widely through the camp as
to seem to require some special measures
of purification, more particularly as
the deaths through it were in an ex-
traordinary manner the penalty of sin.
Occasion is accordingly taken to intro-
duce a new ordinance on the whole
subject, which might serve to re-assure
the affrighted people at the time,
supply a ready means of relief from
this sort of uncleanness for the future,
and by tLe typical character of its
new elements, provide a vehicle for
important instruction as to a more
real Atonement afterwards to be re-
vealed.” —Speaker’s Comm.

Verse 2. The ordinance of the law.
Keil and Del. : “A ‘statute of instruc-
tion,’ or law-statute, This combination
of the two words commonly used for
law and statute, which is only met
with again in chap. xxxi. 21, and there,
as here, in connection with a rule
relating to purification from the unclean-
ness of death, is probably intended to
give emphasis to the design of the law
about to be given, to point it out as
one of great importance,”

Red heifer “iT is not a cow gene-


rally, but a young cow, a_ heifer,
Sdpadis (1xx.), jwvenca, between the
calf and the full-grown cow.....
The sacrificial animal was not to be
a bullock, as in the case of the ordi-
nary sin-offering of the congregation
(Lev. iv. 14), but a female, because the
female sex is the bearer of life (Gen,
ii, 20), a ITB, te, dit, the fruit-
bringing; and of a red colour, not
because the blood-red colour points to
34g


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


sin, but as the colour of the most
‘intensive life,’ which has its seat in
the blood, and shows itself in the red
colour of the face (the cheeks and lips);
and one ‘upon which no yoke had ever
come,’ t.¢., whose vital energy had not


-yet been crippled by labour under the


yoke. Lastly, like all the sacrificial
animals, it was to be uninjured and
free from faults, inasmuch as the idea
of representation, which lay at the
foundation of all the sacrifices, but
more especially of the sin-offerings.
demanded natural sinlessness and or
ginal purity, quite as much as imputed
sin and transferred uncleanness.
Whilst the last-mentioned prerequisite
showed that the victim was well fitted
for bearing sin, the other attributes
indicated the fulness of life and power
in their highest forms, and qualified it
to form a powerful antidote to death
As thus appointed to furnish a re-agent
egainst death and mortal corruption,
the sacrificial animal was to possess
throughout, viz., in colour, in sex, and
in the character of its body, the fulness
of life in its greatest freshness and
vigour.”— Keil and Del.

Verse 3, Unto Hleazar. Not unto
Aaron, the high priest, because the
ordinance was closely connected with
death and the uncleanness arising
therefrom, and such uncleanness the
high priest was commanded to avoid
(Lev. xxi. 11),

Without the camp, because the de-
filement was regarded as transferred to
the sacrificial animal,

Slay her. It was not the business
of the priest to slay her, but she was to
be slain “before his face,”

Verse 4. Sprinkle of her blood di-
rectly, &&. The priest was to sprinkle
the blood in the direction of the front
of the tabernacle.

Seven times, Seven indicating per-
fection. Comp. Lev. iv. 6, 17.

Verse 5. Burn the heifer, &c. “The
defilement, being external, extended to
the whole body of the animal: hence
the propriety of burning the victim
entire and everything connected with
it.” —Speaker’s Comm,


.


AIMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XIX,





Verse 6. Cedar-wood and hyssop, é&e.
“In this sacrifice, the blood, which was
generally poured out at the foot of the
altar, was burned along with the rest,


- and the ashes to be obtained were im-


pregnated with the substance thereof.
But in order still further to increase the
strength of these ashes, which were al-
ready well fitted to serve as a powerful
antidote to the corruption of death, as
being the incorruptible residuum of the
sin-offering which had not been de-
stroyed by the fire, cedar-wood was
thrown into the fire, as the symbol of
the incorruptible continuance of life ;
and hyssop, as the symbol of purifica-
tion from the corruption of death ; and
scarlet-wool, the deep red of which
shadowed forth the strongest vital
energy—(see Lev. xiv. 6)—so that the
ashes might be regarded as the quin-
tessence of all that purified and strength-
ened life, refined and sublimated by the
fire.” (Leyrer.)—Keil and Del.
Verses 7-10. All who had to do with
the heifer or her ashes became unclean
until the evening, because of the defile-
ment of sin and death which had been
transferred to her. Comp. Lev. xvi. 21,


22, 26.


Verse 11. Unclean seven days. “ How


low does this lay man! He who touched
a dead beast was only unclean for one


days.


day (Lev. xi. 24, 27, 39); but he who
touches a dead man is unclean for seven
This was certainly designed to
mark the peculiar impurity of man,


and to show his sinfulness—seven times
worse than the vilest animal! O thou
son of the morning, how art thou
fallen!” — Adam Clarke, LL.D.

Verse 17, Running water shall be put,
&c. Heb. as in margin : “ Living waters
shall be given.” “The waters of wells
and fountains are called living waters,
and are very much esteemed ” (Lev. xiv.
5, 50; Num. xix. 17).—John Jahn, D.D.

Verse 19. On the third day and on the
seventh day. The double purification
indicates the depth of the defilement
which was to be removed.

Verse 20. That soul shall be cut off,
&c. This is repeated here from verse
13, to render the warning more impres-
sive. Some interpret the phrase as
meaning cut off by death; others, cut
off by exclusion from the political and
religious privileges of the nation. “In
Exodus xxxi. 14, 15, death is prescribed
as the manner of cu/ting of from among
the people the Sabbath-breaker ; see
also xxxv. 2. In Lev. xvii. 4, cutteng
of from among the people is the penalty
of killing a clean beast and not bring-
ing it as an offering; but in xxiv. 17,
‘He that killeth any man shall surely
be put to death.’ (See also Exod. xxi.
12; Num. xxxv. 31.) In Lev. xviii.
29, cutting off is the punishment for
unnatural crime; in Exod. xxii 19,
death. So that it would appear as if
cutting off generally, but not always,
implied death at man’s hand.”—J.
Alford, D.D., on Genesis xvii. 14.


Tux Orpinancs or THE Rep Herren; a ParaBux oF THE POLLUTION oF SIN


AND THE Divine Mersop


oF CLEANSING THEREFROM.


(Whole Chapter.)


Let us consider—

L. The defiling nature of sin.

On this point the chapter suggestse—

1. Sin is defiling inits nature. A dead
body and everything pertaining thereto
are represented as polluting those whe


came near to them. Death, and the


corruption arising from it, are set forth
as a Parable of sin and its influence.
Most of the deaths which occurred in the


wilderness were literally the punishment
of sin, Thousands died by the plague
on account of their rebellion (chap. xvi.
49). The whole of one generation, with
very few exceptions, was doomed to die
in the desert because of unbelief (chap.
xiv. 28-30). Thus death would speak to
them of the sin which caused it. Sin
isa polluting thing. It defiles the soul
even in its purest affections ; or ee


CHAP. XIX. HOMILETIC


CUMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





its principles ;it poisons its motives, &ec.
No one can have anything to do with
sin without incurring contamination.

2. The defiling power of sin is of great
virulence. ‘The extreme virulence of
the uncleanness is taught by the regu-
lations that the victim should be wholly
consumed outside the camp, whereas
generally certain parts were consumed
on the altar, and the offal only outside
the camp (comp. Lev. iv. 11, 12); that
the blood was sprinkled towards and
not before the sanctuary; that the
officiating minister should be neither
the high-priest, nor yet simply a priest,
but the presumptive high priest, the
office being too impure for the first,
and too important for the second ; that
even the priest and the person that
burnt the heifer were rendered unclean
by reason of their contact with the
victim; and, lastly, that the purifi-
cation should be effected, not simply by
the use of water, but of water mixed
with ashes, which served as a lye, and
would therefore have peculiarly cleans-
ing properties.” The virulence of the
uncleanness is also manifest in the
ways in which it was incurred. If a
person entered a tent, wherein anyone
had died, before it was purified (ver. 14),
or touched the bone of a dead man, or
a grave (ver. 16), he became unclean ;
and if he, before his purification,
touched anyone, the person so touched
also became unclean (ver. 22). We
have in this a striking parable of the
virulence of the contagion of sin. As-
sociation with sinners is perilous.
Man’s safety is in loathing sin and
shunning it in all its forms. (a).

3. The defiling power of sin is wide-
spread. Death was present in the
tent, and in the open field. The Is-
raelite that would avoid its contami-
nation had need to exercise constant
watchfulness. Sin surrounds us, In
this world the moral atmosphere is in-
fected with it. The danger of contami-
nation is great and constant. In our
amusements, in literature, in society,
in business, in »olitics, in every de-
partment of life, sin is present and
active.

350


II. The necessity of cleansing from
sin.


The legislation of this chapter was
based upon that necessity. If any
person failed to cleanse himself from ~
the pollution of death, he was “cut off
from among the congregation,” he was
excluded from the society, and deprived
of the privileges of hisnation. If sin
be not cleansed from the soul, it will
prove its ruin. The presence and
blessing of God are indispensable to our
spiritual well being, But sin separates
the soul from God (comp. Isa. lix. 2;
Col. i. 21), and so cuts it off from the
great Source of life and light. Sin
excludes from the fellowship of the
people of God. Generally and as a rule
it does so in this world ; the Church
of Christ should be pure, and striving
for perfect purity. Sin invariably and
infallibly excludes from Heaven (Rev.
xxi. 27). We must getrid of sin or be
utterly undone.

_ UL The provision for cleansing from
sin.

Regarding this as illustrated by the
arrangements for cleansing those who
were defiled by death, we notice—

1. Jt ts Divine in tts origin. God
instituted this cleansing ordinance of
the Red Heifer ; ‘‘ the Lord spake unto
Moses and unto Aaron, saying, This is
the ordinance,” &c, The provision for
spiritual cleansing is of God. The idea
of getting rid of sin came from Him.
The sacrifice by which it is put away
He bestowed. The agencies which are
used in the work He instituted. He
gave His Son, His Spirit, Gospel
ministries, &o. Human salvation is of
Divine origin.

2. It involves the sacrifice of the most
perfect life. The directions concerning
the sacrificial victim, given in verse 2,
as to its sex, its colour, and its non-ac-
quaintance with the yoke, all point to
intensity and fulness of life and power
(see Explanatory Notes on verse 2).
Further, it was to be perfect : “ wherein
is no blemish.” Moreover the “ cedar
wood and hyssop and scarlet,” which
were burnt with the heifer, indicated
strength and continuanse of life, and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XIX.





purifying power (see Lxplanatory Notes
on verse 6). All this clearly points to
the perfect sacrifice of the perfect life of
Jesus Christ, His was the pre-eminent
life. “In Him was life.” “As the
Father hath life in Himself, so hath
He given to the Son to have life in
Himself.” His was the perfect life,
“He offered Himself without spot
to God.” He was “holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from sinners.” (6).
By His self-sacrifice, which exhibits
the most perfect obedience and utter
devotion to the will of God, and the
fullest, sublimest expression of the
love of God, Christ cleanseth the souls
of men from sin. “ Tle blood of Jesus
Christ His Son cleanseth us from all
sin.” Here is the all-sufficient and the
only true provision for purifying the
soul of man from moral defilement. (c)

3. It is invariabl. in tts efficacy. “He
shall purify himself with it on the third
day, and on the seventh day he shall be
clean” (verse 12). “And tne clean
person shall sprinkle upon the unclean
on the third day and on the seventh
day,” &c. “Ifthe blood of bulls and
of goats, and the ashes of an heifer
sprinkling the urclean, sanctifiethto the
purifying of the flesh ; how much more
shall the blood of Christ, who through


the eternal Spirit offered Himself with-
out spot to God, purge your conscience
from dead works toserve the living God?”
Who shall say “ how much more”? The
blood of Christ cleanseth completely
from all sin all who seek Him in faith,

IV. The application of the provision
for cleansing from sin.

The Israelite who was defiled by the
dead must purify himself with the
“water of separation.” “A clean per-
son must take hyssop, and dip it in the
water, and sprinkle upon the unclean
on the third day and on the seventh
day,” in order that he may be purified.
If this were not done, the existence of
the provision for cleansing, so far from
profiting him, would rather be the oc-
casion of condemnation ; he refuses the
means of cleansing provided for him,
and he “shall be cut off from among
the congregation” (verse 20), And if
Christ be not received by faith He will
profit us nething. “If ye believe not
that I am He, ye shall die in your sins.”
“Ye will not come unto Me that ye
might have life.” If we believe not on
Him, we shall not only not be cleansed
and saved from sin, but shall be con-
demned for unbelief (comp. John iii.
18. 36). On Him let us believe; for
He alone can cleanse and save us, (d)


ILLUSTRATIONS,


(@) The impious lives of the wicked are as
contagious as the most fearful plague that in-
fects the air, When the doves of Christ lie
among such pots, their yellow feathers are
sillied. You may observe that in the oven
the fine bread frequently hangs upon the
 enarse ; but the coarse very seldom adheres to
the fine. If you mix an equal portion of sour
vinegar and sweet wine together, you will find
that the vinegar will sooner sour the wine,
than the wine sweeten the vinegar. That isa
_ sound body that continues healthy in a pest-
house. It isa far greater wonder to see a saint
maintain his purity among sinners, than it is
to behold a sinner becoming pure among
saints. Ohristians are not always like fish,
which retain their freshness in a salt sea; or
like the rose, which preserves its sweetness

among the most noisome weeds ; or like the
fire, which burns the hottest when the season
is coldest, A good man was once heard to
lament, ‘‘that as often as he went into the com-
pany of the wicked, he returned less s man


from them than he was before he joined with
them.” The Lord’s people, by keeping evil
company, are like persons who are much ex-
posed to the sun, insensibly tanned,— Wélliam
Secker.

(6) When you contemplate the Saviour,
you find all the virtues enshrined in Him ;
other men are stars, but He is a constellation,
nay, Ho is the whole universe of stars gathered
into one galaxy of splendour; other men are
gems and jewels, but He is the crown imperial
where every jewel glitters; other men furnish
but a part of the picture, and the background
is left, or else there is something in the fore-
ground that is but roughly touched, but He
furnishes the whole; not the minutest portion
is neglected; the character is perfect and
matchless, If I look at Peter,1 admire his
courage; if I look at Paul, I wonder at his
industry and devotedness to the cause of God ;
if I look at John, I see the loveliness and
gentleness of his bearing ; but when I look to
the Saviour. Iam not so much i ai by

1


CHAP, XIX,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





any one particular virtue as by tho siugular
combination of the whole. There are all the
spices—the stacte, the onvcha, aud the gal-
banum, and the pure frankincense ; the varied
perfumes combine to mako up one perfect
confection. —©, H. Spurgeon.

For an iljustration on the perfection of
Obrist’s sacrifice, seo p. 141.

(c) It is not because God is indifferent to
moral qualities that He loves sinners, His
love is medicinal. His life is a world-nursing
life, Ho cleanses whom He Joves, that He
may love yet more. God’s nature is infinitely
healing and cleansing. They that are brought
in contact with the Divine heart feel it by the
growth that instantly begins in them. And
His being is so capacious that all the wants
of all sinful creatures, through endless ages,
neither exhaust nor weary Him. Ten thousand
armies might bathe in the ocean, and neither
sully its purity, nor exhaust its cleansing
power. But the ocean is but acup by the
side of God’s heart. Realms and orbs may
bathe and rise into purity ; no words will ever
hint or dimly paint the height, and depth, and
length, and breadth of the Jove of Christ. It
is love that pours, endless and spontanecus,
just as sunlight does—simply because God is
love, By the side of Christ, a mother’s love
—thaton earth shines high above all other,
as a star above night candles—is in compari-
son like those glimmering, expiring stars
when the sun shines them into radiant eclipse,
In the bosom of such a God there is salvation
for every one that will trust Him And what
chances of safety or purity are there for


those who reject Him; who light their own
candle, and walk in its pais glimmer, rather
than in the noonday glory of God in Christ?
—H. W. Beecher.

(d) Man tries to act as a bleacher to his sin,
and he dips the stained garment into the
strong liquid whichis to make it white, hoping
that some spots will be removed; but when
he takes it out again, if his eye be clear, he
says, “Alas! it seems as spotted as ever. I
laid it to soak in tnat which I thought full
surely would take out the stain, but so far as
I can see, there is another stain added to the
rest, I find myself worse instead of better;
I must add a more pungent salt, I must use a
stronger lye. I must make my tears more
briny, I must fetch them up from the deep
salt wells of my heart.” He lays his vesture
again to soak, but each time as he takesit out
his own eyes become more keen, and he sees
more foulness in the garment than he had
observed before. Then goeth he and taketh
unto himself nitre and much soap, but when
he has used it all, when he has gene to his
ehurch, when he has gone to his chapel, when
he has repeated his prayers, attended to cere- |
monies, done I know not what to prove the
genuineness of his repentance, ah! the iniquity
is still there, and will be thera, and must be,
let him do what he may. Yet what your re-
pentings cannot do in thousands of years God
ean do for vou, sinner, and that in one single
day.— OC. H. Spurgeon.

For illustrations on the appropriation of the
provision see pp. 142, 190,


Tas Law or tHe Rep Huirer APPLIED.


(Whole Chapter.)


The symbols of the Jewish worship
were instituted at special times. God
did not put it forth as a system. It is
like a house to which have been added
rooms and offices and hall as the growth
of the family has demanded more scope
in which to maintain new and higher
thoughts. One of such additions is
frund in the ordinance promulgated in
this chapter. It had its origin in the
wish to assuage the vivid fears of the
feople that they were not able to go
near to the tabernacle and live. They
had seen a terrible punishment over-
take the men who had attempted to
interfere with the positions held by
Moses and Aaron : they had bven awed
when a sudden destruction was smitiag
down thousands iz the camp : and they
bad been made conscious that their sins

352


rendered them utterly unfitted to be
near the Holy One of Israel. But
mercy has exhaustless remedies for
human defilement. Aaron and the
Levites are appointed to bear the sins
of the holy things; a red unspotted
heifer is commanded to be slain and
burned, and its ashes to be used asa
means of purifying the flesh from the
uncleanness which hindered approach to
the Lord of glory. Thus the new sym-
bol is instituted when the people have
become conscious that social impurity,
impurity shared .thronzh and with
others, as well as personal transgres-
sion, dooms to death. Wider views of
what they need towards God cause Him
to send out the beams of a light which
is to dispel every doubt and fear,

In what ways did this ceremony lead


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS





Gnto such confidence? What were the
letters by which the people could spell
out God’s thoughts of peace ?

The chief lessons taught by the
ordinance of the Red Heifer seem to be
embraced in four propositions :—

I. Liability for social evil.

“ All the congregation of the children
of Israel murmured against Moses and
against Aaron” (chap. xvi. 41, sqq.).
Might not the survivors reason thus:
“ If those who have died did wrong we
have been equally wrong; if we are
not erased from the roll of the living,
there is, notwithstanding, an evil
chargeable to us; partakers in a like
offence we are worthy of a like con-
demnation ; the evil has not exhausted
itself on them, and we are liable in
some form for their calamities ; we can-
not in this state of pollution go into the
presence of God—is there not needed &
purification for those social ills whose
last and most affecting sign is death?”
A very similar feeling of liability might
be impressed on the men of our own
generation. There are houses in narrow
streets, badly ventilated, and steaming
with the odours of dirt-heaps and cess-
pools. Warnings have been given, that
such a position is laid open to dangerous
attacks on health and life; but the
warnings are trifled with or disbelieved.
Then comes the “ noisome pestilence.”
Young and old, strong and feeble, de-
graded and decent, are swept into the
abyss of the dead. ... . Viewing those
painfui scenes, could just men, who had
neglected to do us was advised, escape
from self-censure and condemnation %

II. The ignominy of death.

The presence of, or contact with, the
signs of the death of mankind, separated
from communion with God in His sanc-
tuary. Consciously or unconsciously no
one could always avoid these. The
human body becomesa loathsome thing
by the stroke of death, and we are fain
to bury it out of our sight. There is


_ reason for believing that death is the


opeuest. sign of ignominy in our nature.

. Only without us and above us,

in the death of Christ Jesus, and in His

rising trom the dead. is that which
aA





CHAP. XIX


shows, along with the fearfulness of ain,
the means of its removal.

lil. Freedom from the consequences
of sin is by application of a prepared
remedy,

The several parts in the process of
preparing the water of cleansing bear
emblems to show what God requires for
freeing from sin’ The slaying of the
Heifer, and the sprinkling cf its blood,
laid bare the foundation principles that
“it is the blood which maketh atone-
ment for the soul,” that “ without shed-
ding of blood is no remission of sins.”
. . . « Uncleanness incurred from the
dead prevents approach to the holy
Lord God. Separated from His presence
on earth is a forecasting of an eternal
separation—* that soul shall be cut off
from Israel” (verse 13). But He has
a remedy for this too. He provides
means of purification, and thus of re-
newed access to Himself. Not only is
the blood of bulls and goats shed, but
the ashes of a heifer is also to “‘ sprinkle
the unclean, in order to sanctify to the
purifying of the flesh,” and render fit
for all the privileges of acceptable wor-
ship. ‘He shall purify himself,” &c.
(verse 12). It is not enough that there
are ashes, and water, and scarlet wool,
and hyssop at hand; the persons need.
ing the removal of the dangerous un-
cleanness must get those materials ap-
plied in the prescribed manner.

The remedy was not dependent for
its efficacy upon its earthly aspects.
Human hands made it ready and con-
veyed it to the recipients ; but the sole
power to take away the defilement lay
in that of God which was in it. It
signified to the people that there was
another sphere than that in which they
moved, and in which they were rendered
unworthy to dwell in the Lord’s pre-
sence ; that they must stand by faith
amid the workings of God. Did the
eyes of any amongst them catch a
glimpse of another manifestation of the
love of God, in which Ong should be
made righteousness and sanctification as
well as redemption—a coming sacrifice
whose blood should be shed, not only to
be a “ propitiation for sins,” un also te


GHAP, XIX,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





be “sprinkled on the conscience to
purge it from dead works to serve the
living God $”. . . . Jesus has died, &.
The ransom price for our lives has not
to be paid—it is paid, &o. “The gift
of God is eternal life,” &o.

IV. To be without fitness for stand-
ing before God acceptably is inexcusa-
ble and irretrievable.


Once purified did not do away with
the necessity of being purified again
when another defilement had been in-
curred. The new impurity must be
removed by a new application, and the
cleansing remedy was constantly avail-
able (verses 9, 10),

What could justify neglect of this
remedy '—D. G. Wait, M.A.


Tue Rep Hirer aN ANALOGUE OF THE CaHRIST.


(Verses 1-10.)


Much has been written on the Red
Heifer as a type of Christ which appears
to us to be frivolous, and in no sense
worthy of regard as an exposition of this
portion of Scripture, because of the
absence of Scriptural evidence that such
things were intended in the ordinance,
But we are warranted in looking for an
analogy between the Red Heifer and the
Christ by the comparison between them
instituted in Heb. ix. 13,14. It appears
to us that the Red Heifer is an analogue
of the Christ—

I. In its characteristics,

These may be classified thus;

1. Fulness of life. “A Red Heifer
without spot, wherein is no blem-
ish, upon which never came yoke.”
“The sex of the victim (female, and
hence life-giving) ; its red colour (the
colour of blood, the seat of life) ; its un-
impaired vigour (never having borne the
yoke) ; its youth; all these symbolised
life in its fulness and freshness as the
antidote of death.” What Divine ful-
ness of life there was in Jesus Christ !
“In Him was life.” ‘As the Father
hath life in Himself, so hath He given
to the Son to have life in Himself.” “I
am He that liveth,” or “ the living One.”
He is the great antagonist of death and
giver of life. See Acts ii. 24 ; Heb. ii. 14,
15; 1 Cor. xv. 22 ; John x. 10; Col. iii.
3, 4.

2. Perfection of life. “ A Red Heifer
without spot, wherein is no blemish.”
“ Christ offered Himself without spot to
God.” He was ‘‘the Holy One aud the
Just ;” “tempted in all points like as

854


we are, yet without sin;” “holy, harm.
less, undefiled, separate from sinners ;*
“Christ. . . . & lamb without blemish
and without spot.” (a)

II. In the treatment to which it was
subjected.

l. The heifer was sacrificed. “One
shall slay her before” the face of the
priest. She was regarded as bearing the
uncleanness of the people, and was slain


as “a sin-offering” (NON, A. V., “a


purification for sin,” verses 9, 17) for
the people. Christ “bare our sins in
His own body on the tree” (comp. Isa.
liii. 5-9 ; John vi. 51 ; Rom. v. 6 ; 1 Cor.
xv.3; 2 Cor. v. 14, 15; 1 Thess, v,
10; Heb. x. 10). (6)

2. The heifer was sacrificed “ without
the camp.” It was taken outside the
camp because it was regarded as bearing
the uncleanness for which it was to be
sacrificed. Our Lord was crucified “‘ with-
out the gate” of Jerusalem, between
two thieves, as if He were the vilest of
men (comp. John xix. 17, 18; Heb,
xith, 21,12).

3. The heifer was completely consumed.
“One shall burn the heifer in his sight ;
her skin, and her flesh, and her blood,
with her dung, shall he burn.” The
sacrifice of Christ was unreserved. He
was “obedient unto death, even the death
of the cross.” He offered Himself
wholly, body, soul, and spirit, to God,
for the redemption of man from sin.
Pate a the purpose for which it was


sign
1. The red heifer was intended te


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XIX.


eee


cleanse from ceremonial defilement, The
ashes of the heifer were to be put in
spring water; this water was to be
sprinkled upon the unclean for their
purification (comp. Heb. ix. 13, 14).
Christ “ appeared to put away sin by the
sacrifice of Himself.”

2. The ashes of the heifer were eff-
cactous for this purpose (verses 12, 19).
The efficacy was not in the ashes them-
selves, but in the appointment of God,
and the faith and obedience of His
people. ‘How much more shall the
blood of Christ?” &c. He can cleanse
from sins of deepest dye, and make the
soul radiant in purity (comp. 1 John
i, 7; Rev. i. 5; vii. 14; Eph. v. 26,
27). (c)

3. The ashes of the heifer were amply
sufficient for this purpose.

(1) As to number. They were in-
tended for all the congregation of Israel
and for the stranger sojourning among
them (ver. 10), and were enough for all.
Christ “ died for all,” and His salvation
is sufficient for all, free for all, offered
to all (1 John ii. 2).

(2) As totime, The Jews say that
the ashes of this heifer served till the


captivity, or nearly a thousand years.
This statement is very questionable ;
but they would certainly last fora long
time, as it was necessary to use very
little at a time. Moreover, ashes
are very incorruptible ; so they sym-
bolise the abiding efficacy of the sacri-
fice of Christ. “ He offered one sacrifice
for sins for ever..... For by one
offering He hath perfected for ever them
that are sanctified.”


“Dear dying Lamb, Thy precious blood
Shall never lose its power,

Till the whole ransomed Church of God
Bo saved to sin no more.”—Cowper,


(@)


4, The ashes of the heifer had to be
personally applied to be efficacious. The
unclean person must be sprinkled with
“the water of separation ” on the third
day and on the seventh day for his cleans-
ing. Without this, the cleansing element
was of no avail to him. So Christ must
be accepted by faith, or His sacrificial
life and death will profit us nothing.

Conclusion,

We are all defiled by sin: let us seek
by faith to be cleansed by “ the precious
blood of Christ.”


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) In Jesus Christ there was no sin. He
was “holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from
sinners,” His humanity was without stain or
flaw, pure and perfect as on the day when
“Gcd saw everything He had made, and
behold, it was very good.” In Him there
were no rebellious insurgences of appetite and
passion, no disorderly conflict between the
lower nature and the higher, but the flesh was
in absolute subjection to the spirit, and His
whole mind and heart in entire and strictest
harmony with the mind and heart of God. So
that there He stood, the very “ beauty of holi-
ness,” the living human image of God; the
perfect embodiment of the Divine ideal of hu-
manity ; of all mankind the only genuine Man.
The Manon whom all eyes and hearts were to
rest and fasten.—J. H, Smith, M.A.

(6) As the Son of Man, he took our place
under the law, and stood representatively in
our stead, that He might satisfy the law in
our behalf; that he might render it perfect
obedience, and offer Himself a public substi-
tutionary victim to its offended majesty, re-
deeming us from its curse by “ being wade
eurse for us. ”He thus “suffered for us,” “the
yust for the unjust,” suffered for us, not


a4a2


merely beneficially, as a nursing-mother may
suffer for ber child, or a soldier for his
country’s good, but substitutionally and penally,
in our place and stead. His person was sub-
atituted for our persons, His sufferings for our
sufferings, He was wounded for our trans-
gressions; he was bruised for our iniquities ;
the chastisement of our peace was upon him,
and by his stripes we are healed. The Lord
laid on him the iniquity of us all.” Hoe, the
sinless, consented to be treated as a sinner,
that we sinners might be treated as sinless,
In this great, this public capacity, then, He,
the Man, officially suffered, and officially died.
There on the cross He hung, spotlessly pure
and perfect, agonising under the imputation
of the world’s guilt, the sinless substitute for
man’s sinful race, the substitutionary Man, the
representative sinner! There He hung, a
voluntary victim to the violated majesty of
the law, and in Him mankind representatively
died. “For we thus judge,” says St. Paul,
“that if one died for all, then all died.” —Ibid.

(¢) “ We have some little difficulty,” said a
scientific lecturer, “ with the iron dyes; but
the most troublesome of all are Turkey red
rags, You seo I have dipped erm my


CHAP, XIX,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,





solution, ite red is paler, but it is still strong.
If I steep it long enough to efface the colour
entirely, the fibre will be destroyed ; it will
be useless for our manufacture. How, then,
are we to dispose of our red rags? We leave
their indelible dye as it is, and make them
into blotting paper. Perhaps you wonder why
your writing-pad is red. Kow you know the
reason.”

Whata striking illustration of the power of
“the precious blood of Ohbrist” to ehange and
cleanse is furnished by the above explanation,
The Spirit of God led the prophet Isaiah to
write, not “though your sins be as blue as
the sky, or as green as theo olive leaf, or as
black as night.” He chose the very colour
whieh modern science, with all its appliances,
finds to be indestructible. “Though your sins
be as scarlet, they shall be as snow, though
they be red like crimson, they shall be as
wool.”——Sunday Teacher's Treasury.

(d) I have found it an interesting thing to
stand on the edge of anoble rolling river, and
to think, that although it has been flowing on
for six thousand years, watering the fields, and
slaking the thirst of a hundred generations,
it shows no sign of waste or want. And when
I have watched the rise of the sun as he shot
above the crest of the mountain, or, in a sky
draped with golden curtains, sprang up from
his ooean-bed, I have wondered to think that
he has melted the snows of so many winters,
and renewed the verdure of so many springs,
and planted the flowers of so many summers,
and ripened the golden harvest of so many
autumns, and yet shines as brilliantly as ever;
his eye not dim, nor his natural strength
abated, nor his natural floods of light less full,
for centuries of boundless profusion, Yet
what are these but images of the fulness that
isin Christ? Let that feed your hopes, and
cheer your hearts, and brighten your faith, and
send you away this day happy and rejoicing!
For when judgment flames have licked up that
flowing stream, and the light of that glorious
sun shall be quenched in darkness, or veiled in
the smoke of a burning world, the fulness of
Christ shall flow on throughout eternity, in


Tar Rep
( Perses


The particular point to which the red
heifer referred, concer.ing Christ and
His work, is just this—the provision
which is made in Christ Jesus for the
daily sins and failings of believers. In
order to bring out our point olearly,
we shall remark—

I, That even the true Israelite, the
true believer in Christ, is the subject
of daily defilement.

356


. Saviour !


pay bliss of the redeemed.— Thomas Guthrie,


Have we outlived the efficacy of the blood
of Christ, and is the tale of His Oross a sound
from which all the music has gone for ever?
We need the sun to-day as we have ever needed
it ; the wind is still the breath of health to our
dying bodies; still we find in the earth the
bread without which we cannot live; these are
our friends of whom we never tire; can it be
that the only thing of which we are weary is
God’s answer to our souls’ deepest need? Shall
we keep everything but the blood of Ohrist?
Shall the Cross go, and the sun bo left?
Verily as the sun withdrow at sight of that
Cross and for the moment fled away, he would
shine never more were that sacred tree hewn
down by furious man, The blood of Christ,
it is the fountain of immortality! The blood
of Obrist, it makes the soul’s summer warm
and beauteous! The blood of Ohrist, it binds
all heaven, with its many mansions and
throngs without number, in holy and indis-
soluble security! My soul, seek no other
stream in which to drown thy leprosy! My
lips, seek no other song with which to charge
your music! My hands, seek no other task
with which toprove yourenergy! I would be
swallowed up in Christ, I would be nailed to
His Orosa. I would be baptized with His bap-
tism, I would quail under the agony of His
pain that I might triumph with Him im the
glory of His resurrection, Omy Jesus! My
Thioe heart did burst for me, and
all its sacred blood flowed for the cleansing of
my sin, Ineeditall Ineed it every day. I
need it more and more, O search ont the in-
most recesses of my poor wild heart, and let
Thy blood remove every stain of evil.


“ Ber since by faith I saw the stream
Thy flowing wounds supply,
Redeeming love has been my theme,
And shall be till I die.”


Mighty Saviour! repeat all Thy miracles
by taking away the guilt and torment of my
infinite sin.—Joseph Parker, DD.


Harare.
2, 3.)


We who have believed in Christ are
free from sin before the Divine judg-
ment seat. But in the matter of sanc-
tification we are not, as yet, delivered
from evil.

Some of our defilement arises from
the fact that we do actually come tnto
contact with sin, here imaged in the cor-
ruption of death (verse 11). Weactu-
ally touch that dead thing, sin, by overt


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY NUMBERS.


CHAP, XIX,





acts of transgression. We are in close
connection with sin, because sin is in
ourselves. Hence we need to be con-
stantly cleansed.

Moreover, we get defilement from
companionship with einners (ver. 14),
The Great Physician could walk the
lazar house of this world untainted by
contagion, but this is not possible with
us. It may be absolutely necessary
for you in your calling, and more es-
pecially in your desire to bless others,
to mingle with the ungodly, but you
might as well attempt to carry fire in
your bosom and not be burnt, or handle
pitch and not be blackened therewith,
as to dwell in the tents of Kedar with-
out receiving uncleanness. Hence we
need daily cleansing, &.

One reason why we are so constantly
defiled is our want of watchfulness (ver.
15). Youand I ought to cover up our
hearts from the contamination of sin.
I believe that a man might go into the
most sinful places under heaven with-
out receiving defilement, if he exercised
a sufficient degree of watchfulness ;
but it is because we do not watch that
the poisoned arrow wounds us.

Sin is go desperately evil, that the
very slightest sin dcfiles us. He who
touched a bone was unclean (ver. 16).
Sin issuch an immeasurably vile and
pestilent a thing, that the slightest
iniquity makes the Christian foul—a
thought, an imagination, the glancing
of an eye. We have heard of some
perfumes of which it is said, that a
thousandth part of a grain would leave
a scent for ages in the place where it had
been. And certainly it is so with sin, &o,

Sin even when tt ts not seen, de

68, . + «+ @ man was defiled who
touched a grave. Oh, how many
graves there are of sin—things that
are fair to look upon, externally ad-
mirable, and internally abominable!
Many of our customs are but the
graves of sin, &o.

The Jew was in danger tm the open
fields (ver. 16). You may go where
you will, but you cannot escape from

‘sin, We are in daily danger of dofile-
ment,


Ii. That a purification has been
provided.

If st were not 80, how melancholy were
your case and mine. The unclean per-
son had no right to go up to the house
of the Lord, &o. You and I would have
no right to Christ, no adoption, no
justification, no sanctification, for the
unclean person had no right to any of
these. The ultimate result in the
Israelites’ case would have been death.
And certainly if you and I, though
believers, could live for a season without
being purified, carrying about with us
still the daily defilement of sin, ere
long it must end in spiritual death.

The Lord must have provided a daily
cleansing for our daily defilement, for
sf not, where were Hts wisdom, where Hts
love? He has provided for everything
else. But if this soul-destroying need
had not been provided for, a failure
would have occurred in a most impor-
tant point. The love, the wisdom of
God demands that there should be such
& purification supplied.

The work of our Lord Jesus Christ
assures us of this. There is a fountain
open for sin and for uncleanness, It is
inexhaustible. “If any man sin, we
have an advocate.” He is constantly
an intercessor.

The work of the Holy Spirit also meets
the case, for what is His business but
constantly to take of the things of
Christ and reveal them unto us; con-
stantly to quicken, to enlighten, and to
comfort 4

Facts show that there ts purification for
present guilt. The saints of old fell into
sin, but they did not remain there,
David. Peter. We have tried tt our-
selves, 8&0.

III. The red heifer sets forth, in a
most admirable manner, the daily
purification for daily sin.

It was a heifer. This red heifer stood
for all the house of Israel—for the
whole Church of God ; and the Church
is always looked upon in Scripture as
being the spouse—the bride—always
feminine. It wasa red heifer. Probably
the red was chosen from its bringing to
the mind of the Israelites rss of


CHAP. XIX,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,





blood, which was always associated with
atonement, and putting away of sin.
When we think of Christ we always
associate Him with the streaming gore,
when we are under a sense of sin.
It was a heifer without spot. Our Christ
had no spot of original sin, no blemish
of actual sin. This red heifer was one
whereon never came yoke. Perhaps this
sets forth how willingly Christ came to
die for us. “Lo, I come,” &. The
children of Israel provided it, What for?
That every man, and every woman, and
every child might say, ‘I have a share
in that heifer,” &c. Christ shed His
blood for all His people, and they have
aii a part and all an interest in Him.
There is yet to be observed what was
done with it. First, it was taken out of
tre camp. Christ suffered without the
camp. The red cow was stiin. A
dying Saviour that takes away our
sin. Eleazar dipped his finger in the
warm blood, and sprinkled it seven times
before the door of the tabernacle.
Seven is the number of perfection.
Jesus has perfectly presented His bloody
sacrifice. All this does not purify.
Atonement precedes purification. They
then took the body of the slain heifer
.... they consumed it utterly, &c.
This sets forth the pangs of the Saviour,
how God accounted Him unclean ; how
He was compelled to say, “My God,
My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me ?”
When the whole was fully burnt, or
while burning, the priest threw in cedar=
wood, hyssop, and scarlet. According to


Maimonides, the cedar-wood was taken
in logs and bound round with hyssop,
and thenafterwards the whole enveloped
in scarlet; so what was seen by the
people was the scarlet, which was at
once the embiem of sin and its punish-
ment—‘“ Though your sins be as scar-
let,” &c. Everything still continues of
the red colour, to set forth atonement
for sin. Inside this scarlet there is the
hyssop of faith, which gives efficacy to
the offering in each individual, and still
within this is the cedar-wood that sent
forth a sweet and fragrant smell, a per-
fect righteéusness giving acceptance to
the whole.

The pith of the matter lies in the last
act, with the remains of the red cow.
The cinders of the wood, the ashes of the
bones, and dung, and flesh of the heifer,
were all gathered together, and carried
away, and lad by in a clean place.
Does not this storing up suggest that
there isa store of merit in Christ Jesus #
There is a store of merit laid up that
daily defilement may be removed as
often as it comes.

The ashes were to be put with run-
ning water,—the sweet picture of the
Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit must
take of the things of Christ and reveal
them unto us.

It was applied by hyssop. Hyssop
is always a type of faith. “Purge me
with hyssop and I shall be clean.”

Here are ashes fur every day, cleans-
ing for every hour, for every moment.—
C. H. Spurgeon,


Rurnovus NEGiEce.


(Verse


“The man that shall be unclean,
and shall not purify himself, that soul
shall be cut off from among the con-
gregation.”

The text suggests the following ob-
servations :—

I. Man is polluted by sin.

“We are all as an unclean thing,
and all our righteousnesses are as filthy
rags.” “If we say that we have no
sin we deceive ourselves, and the truth


358


20.)


is not m us.” And, as Origen said,
“ Every sin sets a blot upon the soul.”

II God has provided a cleansing
element for man's sin.

“There is a fountain opened for sin
and for uncleanness.” ‘The blood of
Jesus Christ His Son cleanseth from
all sin.”

IIL To be efficacious this cleansing
element must be applied to man.

The unclean person had to “ purify


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XIX.


rrr rrr reece see


himself” by being sprinkled with “the
water of separation.” There was no
cleansing without the sprinkling. If
we would be clean we must repent of
the sin which defiles us, confess the sin
to the great Cleanser, and pray to Him
for pardon and purity. But especially,
we must believe in the cleansing
efficacy of the blood of Christ. “ Puri-
fying their hearts by faith.” “The
heart,” says Dr. Dykes, “which sets
out with a hunger after righteousness ;
which finds that, to be worth having,
righteousness must be from the heart
outwards; which strives against in-
ward defilement, and, under such a
sense of sin as makes it a gentle censor
of other men, carries each fresh stain
to the blood of sprinkling at the
mercy seat: that heart does by effort
and degrees attain to purity.”

IV. Man may neglect to avail him.
self of this cleansing element.

This neglect may arise from—

1. Self-righteousness. There are
those who do not feel their need of the
cleansing of the blood of Christ. (a)

2. Unbelief. Under deep conviction
of sin, man sometimes feels that the
defilement of his heart is so deep as
to defy the efficacy of “the precious
blood of Christ :” he does not believe
that it has power to cleanse to the
uttermost,

3. Procrastination. Some purpose


to seek to be cleansed from sin at some
future time ; they defer the great duty
until they “have a convenient season.”

Such persons often “resolve and re
resolve, and die the same.” How great
is the folly! and how tremendous the
peril of this neglect !

V. Neglecting to avail himself of
this cleansing element, man excludes
himself from the highest and richest
privileges.

“The man that shall be unclean,
and shall not purify himself, that soul
shall be cut off from among the con-
gregation.” The man who is guilty of
this great neglect excludes himself—

1. From the Church on earth. Its
privileges are for those only who are
“purifying their hearts by faith,” and
“washing their robes and making them
white in the blood of the Lamb.”

2. From the blessedness of heaven.
No impurity can enter heaven. The
redeemed there constitute “a glorious
Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or
any such thing ; but holy and without
blemish.” Only “the pure in heart
shall see God.” ‘“ Holiness, without
which no man shall see the Lord”
(comp. Psa. xxiv. 3,4; Rev. i. 5; vii.
14; xxi. 27). (6)

Let us not be guilty of this ruinous
neglect ; but let us by faith hasten to
the fountain of the Saviour’s blood,
and there wash and be clean.


ILLUSTRATIONS,


(a) But we cannot realise the blood until we
have realised the sin. Where there is no convic-
tion of sin—conviction amounting to the very
anguish of the lost in hell—there can be no
felt need of so extreme a remedy as is offered
by the outpouring of the blood of Christ. A
self-palliating iniquity may be cleansed by
water. The light dust which bespots the outer
garments mey be removed by gentle means,
When a man feels that he has not sinned deeply,
he is in no mood to receive what he considers
the tragic appeals of the gospel; they exceed
the caso; they destroy themselves by exaggera-
tion ; they speak with self-defeating violence.
But let another kind of action be set up in the
heart; let the man be brought to talk thus
with himself—“I have sinned until my very
goul is thrust down into hell; my sins have
elouded out the mercy of God, so that I seo it
wo longer; I have wounded the Almighty, I


have cut myself off from the fountain of life,
I have blown out every light that was meant to
help me upward, I am undone, lost, damned,”
and then he needs no painted cross, no typical
sacrament, no ceremonial attitude, no priestly
enchantment, he can be met by nothing but the
sacrificial blood, the personal blood, the living
blood, the precious blood of Ohrist.—Joseph
Parker, D.D.

(6) If a man without religion (supposing it
possible) were admitted into heaven, doubtless
he would sustain a great disappointment, Be-
fore, indeed, he fancied that he could be happy
there; but when he arrived there he could find
no discourse but that which he had shunned
on earth ; no pursuits but those he bad disliked
or despised; nothing which bound him to aught
else in the universe, that made him feel at
jwome; nothing which he could enter into and
sest upon, He would perceive arty to be aa


CHAP. Xx. HOMILETIC





isolated being, cut away by Supreme Power
from those objects which were still entwined
about his heart, Nay, he would bo in the pre-
sence of that Supreme Power whom he never
on earth could bring himself steadily to think
upon, and whom now he regarded only as the
destroyer of all that was precious and dear to
him, Ah! he could not bear the face of the
Living God ; the Holy God would be no object of
joy tohim, ‘Let us alone! what have we to
do with Thee? ” is the sole thought and desire
of unclean souls, even while they acknowledge
His majesty. None but the holy can look upon
the Holy One: without holiness no man can
endure to see the Lord,

Holiness, or inward separation from the
world, is necessary to our admission into
heaven, because heavon is not heaven, is not a
place of happiness, except to the holy, There
are bodily indispositions which affect the taste,
80 that the sweetest flavours become ungrate-
ful to the palate ; and indispositions which im-
pair the sight, tinging the fair face of nature
with some sickly hue. In like manner there
is @ moral malady which disorders the inward
sight and taste, and no man labouring under
itis in a condition to enjoy what Scripture
calls “ the fulness of joy in God’s presence, and
pleasures at His right hand for evermore.”

Nay, I will venture to say more than this—it
is fearful, but itis right to say it—that if we
wished te imagine a punishment for an un-
holy, reprobate soul, we perhaps could not
fancy a greater than to summon it to heaven,
Heaven would be hell to an irreligious man,
We know how unhappy we are apt to feel at
present, when alone in the midst of strangers,
or of men of different tastes and habits to our-
selves. How miserable, for example, would
it be to have to live in a foreign land, among
® people whose faces we never saw before, and
whose language we could not learn. And this
is but a faint illustration of the loneliness of a
man of earthly dispositions and tastes thrown
into the society of saints and angels. How
forlorn would he wander through the courts
of heaven! He would find no one like him-
self, he would see in every direction the marks
of God’s holiness, and these would make him
shudder. He would feel himself always in
His presence. He could no longer turn his
thoughts another way, as he does now, when
conscience reproaches him, He would know
that the eternal eye was ever upon him; and
that eye of holiness, which is joy and life to


COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





holy creatures, would seom to him an eye of
wrath and punishment, God cannot change
His nature, Holy He must ever be, But
while He is holy no unholy soul can be happy
in heaven. Fire does not inflame iron, but it
inflames straw, It would ecase to be fire if it
didnot, And so heaven itself would be fire to
those who would fain eseape across the great
gulf from the torments of hell. The fingor of
Lasgarus would but increase their thirst. The
very “heaven that is over their heads” will
be “ brass” to them.—J, H. Newman, D.D.

Have we a hope that “ when He shall ap-
pear we shall be like Him, for we shall sce
Him as He is?” Then must “every man
that hath this hope in Him purify himself,
even as Ho is pure.” For in at the gates of
that Oity—so unlike the cities of this world—
“there shall in no wise enter anything that
defileth,” That Oity’s streets are of gold that
is pure; the river which waters it is a pure
river ; and the fine linon in which its sainted
citizens do walk is clean and white, Even
the elder Ohurch could answer its own ques-
tion,


“Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord P
Or who shall stand in His holy place?”
by saying,
“He that hath eleam hands and a pure
heart,”


Sin-stained and evil-hearted men as we are, it
is here, and now, that this purification must
be wrought. What need have we to have often
upon our lips the prayer,

*©O God, make clean our hearts within ns!”
Yet let us not be dismayed. Some little purity
of heart he must have began to possess who
ever looked at all into the face of Jesus Obrist
as the image of His Father’s grace and
truth. Now, therefore, let us continue to gaze
on Him, with whatever openness of eye we
have to see His glory; for it is the pure-
heartedness of Jesus which maketh the dis-
ciple’s heart pure ; and we all, if “ with open
face” we do but “ behold as in s glass the glory
of the Lord,” shall be “changed into the same
image, from glory to glory, even as by the
Spirit of the Lord.” So may God change ua
like the pure-hearted Son, and bring us one
day where with all His servants we shall ‘“‘ see
His face” in the endless beatific vision of the
Oclestial City—J. O, Dykes, M.A., DD,


CHAPTER XX,


Onrrican anp Exrianatory Norm,


We now enter upon the. narrative of
the third and last stage of the journey
of Israel from Sinai to the Promised
Land; this narrative is given in this

360


and the following chapter. This part
of the journey commenced at Kadesh,
was continued round the land of Edom
(chap. xxi, 4), and ended at the heights


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP, XX.


SSS A pS concn


of Pisgah, in the country, or fields of
Moab (chap. xxi. 20), near the Dead
Sea and the Jordan. The events of
the Journey seem to be arranged
“rather in a classified order than in
one that is strictly chronological.”
Thus the attack upon Israel by the
Canaanitish king of Arad (chap. xxi.
1-3) was made during the march
from Kadesh to Mount Hor. Chrono-
logically Keil and Del. would place the
brief narrative between the first and
second clause of ver. 22 of chap. xx.

_ Verse 1. The whole congregation.
Probably during the time of their penal
wanderings, nearly thirty-eight years,
“the congregation” was to some ex-
tent broken up and scattered abroad in
the wilderness of Paran, so as to facili-
tate the pasturage of the flocks and
herds. Now “the whole congregation”
again assembles in the same locality
where the sentence of the wandering
had been passed upon them.

The desert of Zin (see notes on
chaps. xii. 16 ; xiii. 21).

In the first month, of the fortieth
year from the Exodus (comp. ver.
22-28 with chap. xxxiii. 38).

Kadesh (see notes on chap. xiii. 26).

Verse 3. When our brethren died be-
fore the Lord. It is uncertain to what
deaths they refer. Knobel supposes
that the reference is to Korah and his
company. Keil and Del. say that “‘ the
reference is to those who had died one
by one during the thirty-seven years.”

Verse 6. They fell upon ther faces
(comp. chaps. xiv. 5; xvi. 4).

The glory of the Lord appeared unto
them (comp. chaps. xiv. 10; xvi. 19).

Verse 8. Take the rod. “Not the
budding rod of xvii. 7, but that with
which the miracles in Egypt had been
wrought, and which had been used on
@ similar occasion at Rephidim, Exod.
xvii. 5, sqq.”—Speaker’s Comm.

The rock. “The word always used
for ‘the rock’ of Kadesh, in describing
the second supply of water, is ‘sela’ or
‘elif,’ in contradistinction to the usual
word ‘ tsur’—‘ rock,’ which is no less in-
variably applied to ‘therock’ of Horeb—
the scene of the first supply. It may


be difficult to determine the relative
meaning of the two words, But it is
almost certain that of the two, ‘sela,'
like our word ‘e/¢f,’ is the grander and
more abrupt feature.” — Stanley. Sinat
and Pal.

The rock before their eyes. ‘‘To the
first rock in front of them, and stand-
ing in their sight.” M. Nachkmanides,

Verse 9. Moses took the rod from before
the Lord. The rod seems to have been
laid up in the sanctuary, hence it is
said to be taken “from before the Lord.”

Verses 10,11. This miraculous supply
of water from the “cliff” is different
from that from the rock (Exod. xvii.
1-7). “The first happened in the
first year of the journey of the Israelites
out of Egypt; this, when their journey
was about to terminate, thirty-nine
years after their departure. The first
was an occasion to Moses of obeying
punctually the orders of God; this is
narrated a8 a sorrowful period, in
which this legislator lost sight of the
great motives which ought to have in-
duced him to believe what God had
spoken. The first happened in the de-
sert of Sin on the mountain of Horeb ;
this in the desert of Zin on the frontier
of Idumea.”—Saurin,

Verse 10. Hear now, ye rebels, d&a.
(comp. Psa. ovi. 33).

Versel2. Because ye believed Me not, &e.
“ What was the offence for which Moses
was excluded from the Promised Land?
It appears to have consisted in some or
all of the following particulars: 1. God
had commanded him (ver. 8) to take
the rod in his hand, and go and 8PEaK TO
THE ROOK, and tt should give forth water.
It seems Moses did not think speaking
would be sufficient, therefore he emote
the rock without any command so to
do. 2. He did this twice, which
certainly in this case indicated a
great perturbation of spirit, and want
of attention to the presence of God.
3. He permitted his spirit to be carried
away by a sense of the people’s disobe-
dience, and thus, being provoked, he
was led to speak unadusedly with his
lips: ‘ Hear now, ye REBELS’ (ver. 10), 4
He did not acknowledge we in the


AHOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





miracle which was about to be wrought,
but took the honour to himself and
Aaron: ‘ Must we fetch you water out of
this rock?’ Thusit plainly appears that
they did not properly believe in God and
did not honour Him in the sight of the
people ; for in their presence they seem
to express a doubt whether the thing
could be possibly done. As Aaron ap-
pears to have been consenting in the
above particulars, therefore he is also
excluded from the Promised Land.”—
A. Clarke, LL.D.

Verse 13. Meribah, ¢.e., strife. In chap.
xxvii. 14, it is spoken of as ‘“‘ Meribah
in Kadesh,” to distinguish it from Meri-
bah in Horeb (Exod. xvii. 7).

He was sanctified in them. He vindi-
cated His own sanctity by putting to
shame the unbelieving murmuring of
the people by the miraculous supply of
water, and by punishing Moses and
Aaron for their unbelief,

Verse 14. Thy brother Israel. The
Edomites were descendants of Esau,
the twin brother of Jacob or Israel.

Verse 16. Sent an angel. “Uf. Exod.
xiv. 19, The term is to be understood
as importing generally the supernatural
guidance under which Israel was.”—
Speaker's Comm. Knobel interprets it
as signifying the pillar of cloud and
fire. ‘In it was present ‘the angel of
God’ (Exod. xiv. 19), te, the Divine
presence, personally; in it appeared
‘the glory of Jehovah’ (Exod. xvi. 10;
xl 34; chap. xvi. 42). It was an
elementary appearance, made use of by
Him who appointed and rules the ele-
ments, to siguify to His people His
immediate presence and guardianship.”
--Aljord on Exod, xiii. 21.

Kadesh, a city, t.e., Kadesh-barnea
(chap. xxxii. 8). It is probable that
Barnea was the older or original name
of the town, and that it was called
Kadesh because of the events which
took place there, ard are recorded in
chaps. xiii. 26—xiv., or of those which
are recorded in this chapter (vers. 7-13),
and that in those instances in which we
find the name Kadesh in earlier por-
tions of Scripture history it is applied
proleptically, or by anticipation. “ The

362


nearest approximation which can be
given to a site for the city of Kadesh,
may be probably attained by drawiug a
circle from the pass Hs-Sufa, at the
radius of about a day’s journey; its
south-western quadrant would intersect
the wilderness of Paran, or £t-T%h,
which is there overhung by the super-
imposed plateau of the mountain of the
Amorites; while its south-eastern one
will cross what has been designated as
the wilderness of Zin. This seems to
satisfy all the conditions of the passages
of Genesis, Numbers, and Deuteronomy,
which refer to it. The nearest site in
harmony with this view which has yet
been suggested (Robinson, ii, 175), is
undoubtedly the Ain el- Weibeh.” —Bib-
lical Dict.

Verse 17. Let us pass through thy
country. The entrance to Canaan from
the South was very difficult by reason
of the intervening mountains. which
were lofty and steep. Moses, therefore,
proposed to enter it from the east,
across the Jordan. “In order to gain
the banks of the Jordan by the shortest
route they had to march nearly due
east from Kadesh, and pass through the
heart of the Edomitish mountains,
These are lofty and precipitous, tra-
versed by two or three narrow defiles,
of which one (the Wady Ghuweir) only
is practicable for an army. Hence the
necessity of the request, v. 17,"—
Speaker's Comm. <Atn el-Weibeh “ig
nearly opposite the Wady Ghuweir, the
great opening into the steep eastern
wall of the Arabah, and, therefore, the
most probable ‘ highway’ by which to
‘ pass through the border’ of Edom.”—
Biblical Dict.

The King’s high way. Heb. “ the
King’s way,” t.¢., “ the public high road,
which was probably made at the cost
of the state, and kept up for the king
and his armies to travel upon, and is
synonymous with the ‘sultan’s road’
(Derd es Sultan) or ‘ emperor's road,’ as
the open, broad, old military roads are
still called in the East.”—Keil and Del.

Verse 19. Z will only, without, &c.
Heb. “lit. ‘tt ts nothing at all ; I will
go through with my feet :’ te, we want


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





no great thing ; we will only make use
of the hig road.” —Jbid.

Verse 20. And Edom came out against
him. “ The Israelites without awaiting
at Kadesh the return of their ambas-
sadors, commenced their eastward
march, At the tidings of their approach
the Edomites mustered their forces to
oppose them; and on crossing the
Arabah they found their ascent through
the mountains barred. The notice of
this is inserted here to complete the
narrative ; but in order of time it comes
after the march of v. 22.”—Speaker’s
Comm.

Verse 22. Mount Hor. Heb. lit.


“Hor the mountain.” 7 Hor, “is an
old form for “J,” Har.—Fuerst. So


that the meaning of the name is simply
“the mountain of mountains.” ‘It is
one of the very few spots connected
with the wanderings of the Israelites
which admits of no reasonable doubt.
The proofs of the identity of Jebel
Hartn, as itis now called, with Mount
Hor, are—(1) The situation ‘by the
coast of the land of Edom,’ where it is
emphatically ‘the mountain’ (Hor)
Num. xx. 23. (2) The statement of
Josephus (Ant, LV. iv. 7), that Aaron’s


CHAP. XX,





death occurred on a high mountain en-
closing Petra. (3) The modern name
and traditional sanotity of the mountain
as connected with Aaron’s tomb. The
mountain is marked far and near by its
double top, which rises like a huge
castellated building from a lower base,
and on one of these is the Mahometan
chapel erected out of the remains of
some earlier and more sumptuous
building over the supposed grave.”—
Stanley. Stnat and Pal.

“It is almost unnecessary to state
that it is situated on the eastern side
of the great valley of the Arabdah, the
highest and most conspicuous of the
whole range of the sandstone mountains
of Edom, having close beneath it on its
eastern side—though strange to say the
two are not visible to each other—the
mysterious city of Petra. . Its
height, according to the latest measure-
ment, is 4800 feet (Eng.) above the
Mediterranean, that is to say, about
1700 feet above the town of Petra,
4000 above the level of the Arabah, and
more than 6000 above the Dead Sea.” —
Biblical Dict.

Verse 26. Strip Aaron of his gar-
ments (comp. Lev. viii. 7-9).


Tos Deatu or Miriam.
(Verse 1.)


Two preliminary points are suggested
Ly the assembling of “the whole con-
gregation in the desert of Zin”:

First; The loss that sin inflicts upon
a people. After nearly thirty-eight
years the entire nation is congregated
in the place where the sentence of penal
wandering had been passed upon them.
For all these years the sin of the re-
bellious people arrested their national
history. Sin, whether in the individual
or the nation, checks progress, and in-
flicts loss and injury.

Second: The control of God over human
history. When the time fixed in the
Divine purposes for the re-assembling
of the people arrives, they again gather
themselves together. The hand of the


Lord is on the affairs of men, directing,
restraining, overruling them for good.
““ His counsel shall stand, and He will
do all His pleasure.”

The death of Miriam suggests the
following observations—

I, Death terminates the most pro-
tracted life.

Assuming that Miriam was 10 or 12
years old when Moses was born (and
her conduct as watcher over her infant
brother [Exod. iii. 4-8] indicates that
she was of fully that age), she must
have been at the time of her death 130
years old. Hers was a long life; but
death closed it. He whose life-pilgrim-
age is longest, reaches the end of his
journey at last. “ Yea, pt he live


CHAP, XX,





a thousand years twice told: do not: all
go to one place?” (a)

II. Death terminates the most
eventful life.

Very eventful had been the life of
Miriam.

1. The girl watching over the life of
her infant brother (Exod. iii 4-8).
When we refleot upon the destiny
marked out for her brother by God,
how important was her duty at that
time !

2. The experienced woman sharing in
the interest and action of the stirring
events which led to the great emancipation
from Egypt. It appears to us a moral
certainty that those events awakened
her deep interest and aroused her to
earnest effort.

3. The prophetess leading the exultant
songs and dances of a triumphant people
(Exod. xv. 20, 21).

4, The envious woman aspiring after
equality with, and speaking against her
greater brother (chap. xii. 1, 2). She
was of a noble nature, yet she was
capable of meanness, detraction, &o.
Here is the blot upon her otherwise
fair reputation.

5. The guilty woman smitten with
leprosy because of the sin (chap, xii
9,10). Her distinguished position and
gifts could not avert from her the just
punishment of her sin.

6. The leprous woman healed tn
answer to the prayer of the brother whom
she had spoken against (chap. xii. 13-
15). The most stirring and eventful
life is closed by death, as well as the
quiet and monotonous one,

iII, Death terminates the most dis-
tinguished life.

1. Miriam was distinguished by her
gtfts. Prophetic gifts are ascribed to
her. ‘ Miriam, the prophetess,” is her
acknowledged title (Exod. xv. 20).
“The prophetic power showed itself in
her under the same form as that which
it assumed in the days of Samuel and
David — poetry, accompanied with musio
and processions” (comp. Exod. xv.
20, 21; Judg. v.; 1 Sam. x. 5). Death
spares not even the most richly gifted
of our race. (5)

364





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


2. Miriam was distingutshed by her
position. A very high position is
given to her in the Sacred Scriptures
In Micah vi. 4, she is spoken of as one
of the three deliverers of the enslaved
people: “I sent before thee Moses,
Aaron, and Miriam.” “How grand was
her position is implied in the cry of
anguish which goes up from both her
brothers” when she was smitten with
leprosy. “Alas, my lord! ... Let
her not be as one dead,” &c. (chap.
xiii. 11-13), “And it is not less evi-
dent in the silent grief of the nation.
‘The people journeyed not till Miriam
was broughtinagain.’” It is manifest
also in the national mourning on ac-
count of her death; for, according to
Josephus (Ant. IV. iv. 6), “they
mourned for her thirty days.” Death
brings down persons of the most exalted
rank, and lays them low as those of the
meanest station (comp. Job. iii, 13-
19). (c)

IV. Death, by reason of sin, some-
times terminates life earlier than it
otherwise would have done.

Miriam was not of the faithful few
who entered the Promised Land. She
sinned in murmuring and speaking
against Moses; and, therefore, she
must die and find a lonely grave in the
desert of Zin. How many lives are cut
short in our day by violation of sani-
tary laws, by gluttony, and by drunken-
ness !

V. Death sometimes terminates life
with suggestions of a life beyond.

It was so in the case of Miriam, Can
we think that the gifts with which she
was so richly endowed, and the treasures
of experience which in her long and
eventful life she had gathered, were all
lost at death? This would be in utter
opposition to the analogy of the Divine
arrangements in the universe. In nature
we can trace no sign of waste; the
most scrupulous economy may be ob-
served in all the provinces of the
material realm. Can we imagine that,
under the rule of the same Divine
Being, there exists in the spiritual realm
such waste as would be involved in
the extinction of those who are gifted


;


j


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XX


a ee mentees annsennenee


In mind, ripe in experience, and holy in
character? The Israelites did not leave
Miriam in the desert of Zin: her body
only remained there; her spirit, her-
self, passed swiftly to the great and
glorious fellowship of the good “ beyond
the vail.” (d)

“The dead are like the stars by day,

Withdrawn from mortal eye;


But not extinot, they hold their way
In glory through the sky.


Spirits from bondage thus set free
Vanish amidst immensity,

Where human thought, like human sight
Fails to pursue their trackless flight,”


Conclusion.


Since death is inevitable, it is the
duty and interest of every one so to
live that it shall be the door of admis-
sion into endless and blessed life. (e)


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) All forms recipient of life die sometime.
Bome few may be privileged to survive the
rest, even for thousands of years, as happens
with certain trees, but the same death which
in regard to the children of men, while it sure
prises many, skips not one, at last overpowers
the most tenacious, “Oome like shadows, 80
depart,” is the law of the entire material crea-
tion,—in fact, as great a law as that it lives,
»... Birth, growth, and arriving at matu-
rity, as completely imply decay and death as
the source of a river implies the termination
of it, or as spring and summer imply corn-
fields and reaping. Hence, whatever the vigour


_ and the powers of repair that may pertain to


,
¥


knew his


any given structure, whatever resistance it
may offer to the shocks of Ages, Time, sooner
or later, dissolves it ;—careful, however, to
renew whatever it takes away, and to convert,
invariably, every end into a new beginning,
There ia not a grave in the whole circuit of
nature that is not at the same moment a
sradle.—L. H. Grindon,

(6) Take up the learned man's skull, and
what is the differenve between that and
the skull of the merest pauper that scarcely
letters? Brown, impalpable


_ powder, they both crumble down into the


same elements. To die in a respectable posi-
tion, what is the use of it? What area few
more plumes on the hearse, or a longer line of
mourning coaches? Will these ease the
miseries of Tophet? Ah! friends, you have
to die. Why not make ready for the inevita-
ble? Oh! if men were wise, they would see
that all earth’s joys are just like the bubbles


_ whichourchildren blow with soap; they glitter


and they shine, and then they are gone, and
there ia not even a wreck left behind.—C. H.


_ Spurgeon.


(c) Death comes equally to us all, and makes
na all equal when it comes, The ashes of an


- oak in a chimney are no epitaph of that, to tell


me how high, or how large that was; it tells
me not what flocks it sheltered while it
stood, nor what men it hurt when it fell.
The dust of great persons’ graves is speech-


less too; it says nothing, it distinguishes no-


thing. As soon the dust of a wretch whom
thou woulde:+ not, as of a prince whom thou


douldest not lock upon, will troubie thine eyes


if the wind blow it thither; and when a whirl-
wind hath blown the dust of the churchyard
into the church, and the man sweeps out the
dust of the church into the churchyard, who
will undertake to sift those dusts again, and to
pronounce, ‘This is the patrician, this is ¢he
noble flour, and this the yeoman, this the
plebeian bran ?”—Dr. J. Donne,

(d) We notice frequently over cemetery
gates, as an emblematic dovice, a torch turned
over, ready to be quenched, Ah! my brethren,
it is not so, the torch of our life burns the
better, and blazes the brighter for the change
of death, The breaking of the pitcher which
now surrounds the lamp and conceals the glory
will permit our inner life to reveal its lofty
nature, and ere long even the pitcher shall be
so remodelled as to become an aid to that
light; its present breaking is but preparatory
to its future refashioning. It is a blessed
thought that the part of as which must most
sadly feel the mortal stroke is secured beyond
all fear from permanent destruction. We know
that this very body, though it moulders into
dust, shall live again; these weeping eyes
shall have all tears wiped from them ; these
hands which grasp to-day the sword of conflict
shall wave the palm-branch of triamph.— C, H.
Spurgeon,

“ Because I live, ye shall live also.” That
is the end of trouble, Now sorrow is crowned
with hope! Now the gate is thrown open!
Now the angel sits upon the stone! Now the
emergent Chriat walks forth, light and glorious
as the sun in the heavens! Now the lost is
found! Now all the stars hang like goms,
and jewels, and treasures for us! Now, since
Christ says that out of all these experiences
He shall bring forth life, even as his own life
was brought forth out of the tomb, what is
there that we need trouble ourselves about ?—
H. W. Beecher.

(¢) We shall all die! Do not let us post-
pone the intimation of our need of the Son of
God until we are so faint that we can only
receive him at the side of our death-bed, Do
let us be more decent, more courteous, more
civil, We shall all dio} That is a fact that
men have nover been able to reasok out of
human history. If they could come to me and
say, * We will guarantee you shall never die,


365


CHAP, XX,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


NUMBERS.


a _dd a EEEEEEEEEEEIERREEEENEISEEE NRE IEEE


you shall always be as you are—young, and
strong, and active, and prosperous,” then I
might incline an ear to their reasonings more
deferentially than I am disposed to do at
present. But when they are talking to me
against religion and against the deeper life,
against faith and spiritual love and service of
the unseen, what do I behold? Oh, this:
Over their shoulder a grim, ghastly spectre
alled Death !—Joseph Parker, DD.

Be ready, mivister, see to it that thy church
be in good order, for the grave shall soon be
digged for thee; be ready, parent, see that
your children are brought up in the fear of


God, for they must soon be orphans ; be ready,
men of business, you that are busy in the
world, see that your affairs are correct, seé
that you serve God with all your heart, for
the days of your terrestrial service will soon
be ended, and you will be called to give
account for the deeds done in the body,
whether they be good or whether they be
evil. O may we all prepare for the tribunal
of the great King with a care which shall be
rewarded with the commendation, “ Well
done, good and faithful servant,"—C, H,
Spurgeon,


{az Privations oF Man aND THE Resources or Gop,


(Verses 2-11.)


I. There are privations in the
pilgrimage of human life.

“And there was no water for the
congregation.” Man is a dependent
creature. Every human being has to
endure privation in some form or
another. Even the wealthiest of men
find that there are some desirable
things which wealth cannot purchase.
But in the case before us the Israelites
were suffering from want, not of the
luxuries or comforts of life, but of one
of its great necessities: there was a
great lack of water. In our pilgrimage
we are often without things which we
have regarded as essential to our life.
One man thinks that without health
his life would be worthless ; yet he has
to submit to its loss for a time. To
another man prosperity seems essential ;
to another, friendship, er some one
friend or relative ; yet of these they are
sometimes deprived. Life, in our view,
has many privations. This character-
istic of our pilgrimage is for wise and
gracious ends. Privation should re-
mind us that we are pilgrims—incite
us to confide in God—and discipline
our spirits into patience and power.

II. The privations in the pilgrim-
age of life sometimes develop the evil
tendencies of human nature.

“And they gathered themselves
together against Moses and against
Aaron. And the people shode with
Moves,” &c. (vers. 2-5), Here privation
is made the occasion of an outrageous

366


rebellion. The conduct of the people
was—

1. Unreasonable. Why should they
blame Moses and Aaron? Why chide
Moses? He wasnot responsible for the
lack of water. And as their leader, he
was acting under Divine direction. It
was neither reasonable nor fair to assail
Moses and Aaron as they did.

2. Cruel. Moses and Aaron are of
sorrowful heart because of the death of
their distinguished sister; they need
sympathy and consolation from the
people; but instead thereof, they are
unjustly and bitterly assailed. The
feelings of our common humanity
should have effectually restrained the
people from treating their bereaved and
sorrowing leaders after this fashion.

3. Ungrateful. The many and great
mercies which God had bestowed upon
them seem to be all and utterly lost
sight of in their present trial. Not one
word of thankfulness, but many words of
complaint do they give utterance to. (a)

4. Degraded. ‘“ Wherefore have ye
made us to come up out of Egypt, to
bring us unto this evil place? It is no
place of seed, or of figs,” &c. How un-
speakably mournful is the degradation
of manhood when human beings esti-
mate “ figs” more highly than freedom !
They prefer slavery with figs and vines
and pomegranates than liberty without
them. Such a preference indicates
their lack of true manhood, and the
serfdom of tbeir spirits. (6)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


CHAP. XX,


——_————oOoOoOoooooe OO


5. Audaciously wicked. How awful
is the impiety to which they gave
expression in their insolent interroga-
tions! To wish that they had died by
the stroke of God’s judgment (ver. 3) ;
to falsely impute the wickedest design
to their true-hearted and God-appointed
leader (ver. 4) ; to resent the emancipa-
tion which the Lord so graciously and
gloriously wrought for them (ver. 5)—
how atrociously wicked is all this!

The trials of life never leave us as
they find us. Unless they, by the
grace of God, are the occasion of bless-
ing to us, they will lead, as in the case
of these rebellious Israelites, to deteriora-
tion of character by the development of
its evil attributes. They will lead
either to increased patience and
acquiescence in the will of God, or to
increased fretfuluess and _ rebellion
against His will, &c (c)

III. The privations in the pilgrim-
age of life, and the evils which are
sometimes occasioned by them, impel
the good to seek help of God.

“And Moses and Aaron went from
the presence of the assembly unto the
door of the tabernacle of the congrega-
tion, and they fell upon their faces.”
In their trial they betook themselves to
God in prayer. Their action in this is
very suggestive. It implies—

1. Consciousness of need. They felt
their inability to deal with the dis-
affected and rebellious people; they
sought the direction of Heaven, &.

2. Faith in the sufficiency of the Divine
help. The promptitude with which they
resorted to the tabernacle, and cast
themselves down in prayer to God, in-
dicates their confidence in Him as their
Helper. They believed in His wisdom
for their guidance, &c.

3. Faith in the efficacy of prayer to
obtain the Divine help. Moses and
Aaron had proved convincingly the
power of prayer on several occasions.
* Ask, and it shall be given you,” &ec.

4, Faith in the efficacy of unspoken
prayer. There is no record of any
words addressed by them to God. The
probatility is, that their feelings and
desires were too deep and strong to


be expressed in words. There may be
true and effective prayer without speech,
The holiest and profoundest longings of
our souls cannot be expressed. In this
respect they resemble the prayers of the
Divine Spirit who “maketh interces-
sion for us with groanings which cannot
be uttered.” Here, then, at the throne
of Divine grace, is the refuge of the
godly soul in time of trial. This refuge is
(1) ever-accessible; (2) all-sufficient, &.

IV. The privations in the pilgrim-
age of life are sometimes removed in
answer to the prayer of the good.

“ And the glory of the Lord appeared
unto them, and the Lord spake unto
Moses, saying, Take the rod,” &o.
(vers. 6-11). Thus in answer to the
prayer of Moses and Aaron, the priva-
tion of the people was removed by this
copious supply of water. Concerning
this supply of water, notice—

1, It was Divine, In a special sense
it was the gift of God. Before it was
given His “glory appeared;” He di-
rected His servant what to do to obtain
it ; He bestowed it.

2. It was miraculous, Speaking toa
cliff, or smiting it with a rod, were not
natural means for obtaining water. But
this water was supernaturally given.
The miracle was manifest and indisput-


able. It was wrought in the presence
of the assembled people. Spiritual
blessings transcend nature. Redemp-


tion is supernatural in its origin, super-
natural in its great Agent, co.

3. It was wnmerited. This murmur-
ing, rebellious congregation did not
deserve any benefit at the hand of God.
He blessed them because He is “rich
in mercy.” Mankind did not merit
redemption. ‘God commendeth His
love toward us, in that, while we were
yet sinners, Christ died for us.” How
great are our demerits! yet God blesses
us with the treasures of His grace, &o.

4, It was abundant. “The water
came out abundantly, and the congre-
gation drank, and their beasts.” How
abundant are spiritual blessings! God
“abundantly pardons”; He “ makes
all grace abound,” do, (1 Cor. ix. 8,


sa 367


CHAP, XX.





5. It was free. The water, without
any charge or any restriction, was avail-
able to all. An emblem of the blessings
of salvation. “ Ho, every one that
ehirsteth,” &o. (Isa. lv. 1). “ Whoso-
ever will, let him take the water of
life freely.” (e)

6. It was bestowed in answer to prayer.
Moses and Aaron sought His help in
their extremity, and He stilled the re-
bellious people by removing the priva-
tion from which they suffered. And in
all the privations of the pilgrimage of
our life, if we seek Him in prayer He
will either remove the privation, or give
us grace to endure it patiently ; He
will either lighten our burden or in-
orease our strength. His resources are
adequate to all the necessities of our
pilgrimage. He is ever ready to com-
municate freely of these resources to
all who seek Him,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





“Am I thirsting? He will guide me
Where refreshing waters flow;
Faint or feeble, He'll provide me
Grace for every want I know.”
—VNonsell,


Conclusion.

1. Guard against the sin of which
Israel was guilty. In time of trial, do
not murmur ; be patient, &c.

2. Believe in und make use of the efft-
cacy of prayer. ‘Call upon Me in the
day of trouble, and I will deliver thee,”
&o,

3. Huercise constant trust in God.
“He hath said, I will never leave thee,
nor forsake thee. So that we may
boldly say, The Lord is my helper, and
I will not fear what man shall do unto
me.”


“ Then, my soul, since God doth love thee,
Faint not, droop not, do not fear;
Though His heaven is high above thee,
He Himself is ever near,”


ILLUSTRATIONS.


@) But we must eease to wonder at them,
and learn to confess our own corruption of
heart, and proneness to yield and fall down
in time of temptation, unless we be stayed up
by the mighty hand of God. For albeit He
be most gracious and merciful unto us,
hedgeth us round about with many blessings,
and compasseth us with riches of grace on
every side, yet we forget them all if any one
cross do any way lie upon us, If the Lord
touch us with sickness, as with His little
finger ; with losses, with crosses, with poverty,
or any misery, such is our impatience, that
we slways dwell upon the meditation of that
want, we look upon it with our eyes, we
handle it with our hands, we toss it in our
minds, and never remember the multitude of
His mercies, the peace of a good conscience,
the loving countenance of the Lord, the seal
of our adoption, the assurance of our salva-
tion, the sweet taste of His love shed in our
hearts by the Holy Ghost ; so that one trouble
doth more daunt us and strike us to the heart
than many blessings can comfort and refresh
us But God, taking away outward blessings,
giveth spiritual to His children, and doth
sweeten the bitterness of the cross with in-
ward consolation, and doth recompense it
with heavenly grace, whoreby we gain more
in the spirit than we lose in the flesh_— W.
Attersoll,

I remember in our Baptist martyrology the
roory of one of the Baptists of Holland
escaping from his persecutors. A river was
frozen over, and the good man crossed it
safely, but his enemy was of greater bulk,

868


and the ice gave way ander him, The Bap-
tist, like a child of God as he was, ¢urned
round and rescued his persecutor just as he
was sinking beneath the ice to a certain
death. And what did the wretch do? As
soon as ever he was safely on the shore he
seized the man who had saved his life, and
dragged him off to the prison from which he
was only taken to be put to death! We
wonder at such inhumanity ; we are indignant
at such base returns—but the returns which
the ungodly make to God are baser far. I
wonder myself as I talk to you—I wonder
that I speak so calmly on so terribly humbling
& theme; and, remembering our past lives,
and our long ingratitude to God, I marvel
that we do not turn this place into one vast
Bochim, or place of weeping, and mingle our
tears in a flood, with expressions of deep
shame and self-abhorrence for our dealings
towards God.—C. H. Spurgeon.

(5) There are others who seek how much
they can call their own, by whatever means;
of how much benefit they can hold a monopoly;
from how large a place in God's universe they
can ksep other men off, and how much envy
they can rouse in rivals and neighbours,
These have never mastered their baser and
greedier instincts, and so far have nevor
known the Divine joy of being blessed for
their benefactions, and have never tasted of
the peace that passeth understanding, Very
often God punishes us by letting us have
what we seek....

To the seekers of mere material and selfish
comfort, one serious consideration is presented


—— at


_ The noblest element has vanished.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XX,





by the progress of history. That kind of
search is sinking, Every new day that breaks
into the sky degrades it; both because new
lights are stationed abont it, in ovr educational
and industrial wakefulness, to show its shame,
and because the practical tendencies of the
time force upon materialism a more and more
hard and sottish character. In more imagi-
‘Bative periods, romance threw about idolatry
at least the graces of fancy, and made it
poetical, Now it is either shrewd or stolid.
It is the idolatry of the arithmetic, the stock
list, and the palate; not of fable and heroism,
It is bare
gluttony. If you are going to worship the
animal, then return to the inventions of
Egyptian and Grecian genius—‘‘the fair
humanities of old religion.” Give us back at
least the simplicity of fetishism with its sen-
suality. Rebuild the Pantheon. Relight the


_ fires on Pagan altars, Repeople the woods
with dryads, and the water with nymphs,


Anything rather than the gross surfeit of


_ appetite, and the clinking creed of dollars!
_ And if you cannot do that, take it as a sober


hint that God’s providence does not mean to
have maiterialists in the world at all. Seek
something worthier of your humanity.—F, D,
Huntington, D.D.

(c) Many men are distressing themselves,


_ when they think of their trials, by imagining


that they have done something wrong, or God
never could have sent such afflictions to
them personally, or to their household. That
is a mistake, There are trials that are simply
tests—not punishments; trials of faith and
patience—not rods sent to scourge men be-
cause they have been doing some particular
evil thing. God’s people are tried. “ Whom
the Lord loveth He chasteneth.” The honour
is not in the trial; it is in the spirit in which
the trialis borne, Take the trial impatiently,
with murmuring against God, and we shall be
the worse for our trial], the poorer for our
suffering, Take the trial as a veiled angel
sent by our Fathor to say things to us which
no other messenger could so suitably convey,
then even the rod shall be precious to us, and
the herald’s utterances of God shall have
music in them that shall comfort, and revive,
and cheer the heart.— Joseph Parker, D.D.
(d) Stand still awhile, and contemplate the
abundant mercy of our blessed God! A river
deep and broad is before you. Track it to its
fountain head, see is welling up in the cove-


nant of grace, in the eternal purposes of in-
finite wisdom, The secret source is no small
spring, no mere bubbling fount; it is a very
Geyser, leaping aloft in fulness of power; the
springs of the sea are not comparable there-
with. Not even an angel could fathom the
springs of eternal love, or measure the depths
of infinite grace, Follow now the stream;
mark it in all ite course. See how it widens
and deepens, how at the cross’ foot it expands
into a measureless river! Mark how the
filthy come and wash, see how each polluted
one comes up milk-white from the washing!
Note how the dead are brought to be bathed
in this sacred stream, and mark how they live
the moment they touch its wave. Mark how
the sick are laid upon the bank, and if but the
spray of the river falls upon them, they are
made whole! See how on either bank rich
verdure clothes the land! Wheresoever this
stream cometh all is life and happiness, Ob-
serve along the margin the many trees whose
leaves never withor, and whose fruits in
season are always brought to maturity ; these
all draw their life from this flood, and drink
from this river of God, which is full of water.
Fail not with gladsome eye to note the thou-
sand barques of fairest sail, which scud along
the mighty river with colours flying, each
vessel laden with joy. Behold how happily
they are borne along by the current of mercy
to the ocean of infinite felicity! Now we reach
the mighty main of mercy, dare you attempt
with wings of faith to fly over that glassy sea?
No shore gives boundary to that great deep,
no voice proclaims its length and breadth, but
from its lowest deeps, and all along its un-
ruffied bosom, I hear a@ voice which saith,
“ Herein is love.”—C. H. Spurgeon

(e) Freely, that may be lavishly, ungrudg-
ingly, with fulness and overflow, yet without
upbraiding. Or, freely may mean without
price or tax, without money as the air is
given, without price as the sunlight is poured
forth, So “freely given to us of God.” Why
this is most God-like wholly. No good thing
doth he withhold from them that walk up-
rightly, ‘‘ He that spared not His own Son,
but delivered Him up for us all, how shall He
not with Him also freely give us all things,”
—ALL things,—ALL things! “Not as the
world giveth, giveI unto you.” God “ giveth
to all men liberally, and upbraideth not.”
—Joseph Parker, D.D.


Tue Suv or Moss.
(Verse 10.)


Introduction—
The facts recorded,
I. What there was sinful in Moses.
1. There was disobedience to the
Divine command.
SB


2. There was immoderate heat and
passion.

3. There was unbelief.

4, It was all publicly done, and se
the more dishonouring to ne ;


CHAP. AX.





If. Whet we may learn from this
tragical story.

1 Whata holy and jealous God He
ts w:th whom we have to do.

2. The Lord’s children need not
think it strange if they get abundance
to exercise that grace in which they
most excel.

3. Let us not be surprised to see or
hear the saints failing even in the
exercise of that grace wherein they
most excel.

4, Never think yourselves secure
from falling till ye be at the end of
your race,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS





ee a


5. What need we have to guard
constantly our unruly passions, and
put a bridle on our lips.

6. Though God pardons the iniquity
of His servants, yet He will take
vengeance on their inventions (Psa.
XCIX AO):

7. If God punishes His children thus
for falling into the snare, how shall
they escape who lay the snare for
them 3

8. Observe the ingenuousness of the
penmen of the Holy Scripture—Mosea
records his own fault.—Z. Boston.


Tue Rook at Kapssa, aN Emsiew ov CHrist,


(Verse 11, and 1 Cor. x. 4, last clause.)


Jehovah is frequently spoken of by
the Sacred Writers as a Rock (Deut.
axxii. 4, 15, 31; 1 Sam. ii. 2; 2 Sam.
<x1b03 y Paarxvii, 2); 2xxvilis ds xext
2; xlii. 9; e al.). And St. Paul, re-
ferring to the rock at Horeb, and pro-
bably to this one at Kadesh also, says,
That Rock was Christ’—t.e., a type
of Christ. hes rock ss an emblem of
Christ—

I. In its characteristics,

1. Permanence. How firm and
stable are the rocks! Generations of
men come and go; but the grand old
cliffs remain. Of all earthly things
they are the most abiding. “The Son
abideth for ever.” “Christ abideth
for ever.” “He ever liveth to make
intercession.” “I am alive for ever-
more.” Jesus Christ is the ‘sure foun-
dation” (Isa. xxviii. 16 ; 1 Cor. iii, 115
drat. Oy 0). Ue)

2. Unchangeableness, Geologists tell
us of changes even in the rocks; but
apparently and to the ordinary ob-
server they are immutable. They are
the best symbols on the earth of the
unchangeable. How unchangeable is
our Lord and Saviour! “ Jesus Christ
the same yesterday, and to-day, and
for ever.”

IL, In the water which flowed from
it,

370


Christianity and its blessings are.
frequently compared to pure water
in the Bible (comp. Isa.lv. 1; John iv,
14; vii. 37, 38; Rev. xxi. 6; xxii. 17).
There are several points of analogy
between this water and Gospel bless-
ings. Both are—

l. Necessary. Water is essential to
life. Spiritual life is impossible apart
from Christ (1 John v. 12). (6)

2. Pure. This water was from a
cliff, not from a pond: it had been
filtered in the hills, and streamed forth
pure and bright to the thirsty mul-
titude. The blessings of Christianity
are both pure and purifying.

3. Refreshing. Mark how water re-
freshes the parched earth; how it
revives the fading, drooping plant or
flower ; how it re-animates the pilgrim
exhausted by thirst. “A Man shall
be as rivers of water in a dry place.”
(Comp. Isa, xxxv. 6, 7; xli. 18; xliv.
3). (ce)

4. Abundant, (On this and the fol-
lowing points see on verses 2-11). (d)

5. Free. (e)

6. Supernatural,

7. Divine.

Application.

“ Ho, every one that thirsteth, coms

ye to the waters,” d&o.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,





CHAP. XX.





ILLUSTRATIONS,


(a) Here is simple existence, with no note
of beginning or end, Our Lord says not,
“Before Abraham was, I was,” but “I am.”
He claims pre-existence indeed, but He does
not merely claim pre-existence; He unveils a
consciousness of Kternal Being. He speaks
as one on Whom time has no effect, and for
Whom it has no meaning, He is the I AMof
ancient Israel; He knows no past, as He
knows no future ; He is unbeginning, unend-
ing Being ; He is the eternal “ Now,”—Canon
Liddon.

(6) Yonder shipwrecked man has con-
structed a raft, and far out on the wild ex-
panse of pitiless waters he has floated wearily
day after day, sighing for a friendly sail or
for sight of land; what would he not give for
a little water, for water has become the essen-
tial of his life; his tongue is like a firebrand,
and his mouth is as an oven, and he himself all
dried and parched, sighs and cries to heaven,
hoping that perhaps # merciful shower may
drop refreshment upon Him, Now, Jesus
Christ is the water of life, and the bread of
life, to such as live unto God, Itis absolutely
necessary for the continuance of their spiritual
life that they should live upon Him; and as
they do live upon Him, their thirstis quenched,
their hunger is removed, and their spirit re-
joices with a “joy unspeakable and full of
glory.” Life and the food that sustaineth life
are among the most precious things man can
possess, and these are for your souls stored up
in Jesus.—C. H. Spurgeon.

(c) Water typifies the Gospel by its refresh-
isent. How different you feel after you get a
glass of cool water, or after you have plunged
into the bath! On a hot summer day there is
nothing that so soon brings you back from @
bad temper or a disturbed spirit, and puts you
into a happy frame of mind and body ; 2s cold
water. Blessed be God for water! I love to
hear it fall in the shower and dash in the cas-
cade, and to see it rush from the ice-pitcher
into the clear glass, Thank God for water!
Clear water! bright water! beautiful water!
But I have to tell you there is a better refresh-
ment even than that. There was a time
when you were hounded of convictions. Sinai
thundered. The wrath of God cried, “Fly!”
Justice cried, “Fly!” Your own fears cried,
“Fly!” Mercy said, “Come! Come!” and
you plunged like a hart into the waterbrooks,
and out of that flood your soul came up cool,
and clean, and radiant; and you looked around
and said, “Come and hear, all ye that fear
God, and I will tell you what He hath done for
my soul.” There camo a time of perplexity
in your heart. You lost your property. The
gold eagles took wings and flow away. Death,
like a black hawk, swooped upon the family
_ brood, and the children were gone. You mea~
sured your life from groan to groan, from loss
to loss, from tear to tear. You said from your


distressed spirit, “Oh} that I had wings like
882


a dove, for then would I fiy away and be at
rest,” From the depths of your fevered soul
you called out, “ Has God forgotten to be gra-
cious? Is His mercy clean gone for ever?
Hath He in anger shut up His tender mercies 2?”
As when you have been walking in a thick
wood on a hot summer day you heard the
dash of fountains, and your spirit was cheered ;
80, while you wore listening for the answer,
the promise of God dropped cool and fresh and
sparkling from the Throne: “ There isa river
the streams whereof shall make glad the city
of God.” You rejoiced at the thought of the
fountain, Your fevered soul thrilled with the
cool touch, and you cried, “ Bureka! Eureka!
I have found it. Water! cold water! bright
water! everlasting water! bursting from the
Throne !"—T, De Witt Talmage, D.D.

(d) Water typifies the Gospel because of
its abundance, When we pour the water
from the pitcher into the glass we have to be
careful or the glass will overflow, and we stop
when the water has come to the rim. But
when God, in summer, pours out His showers,
He keeps pouring on, and pouring on, until
the grass-blades ery, “Enough!” and the
flowers, “Enough!” and the trees, ‘Enough! ”
but God keeps pouring on and pouring on
until the fields are soaked, and the rivers
overflow, and the cisterns are all filled, and
the great reservoirs are supplied, and there
is water to turn the wheel, water to slake the
thirst of the city, water to cleanse the air,
water to wash the hemisphere. Abundance {
And so with this glorious Gospel. Hnough
for one; enough for all, Thousands have
come to this fountain, and have drank to the
satisfaction of their souls, Other thousands
will come; and yet the fountain will not be
exhausted,

Just after the battle of Antietam, with some
of the other members of the Christian Oommis-
sion, I went down to belp look after the wounded ;
and on the afternoon of a very hot day I
came to @ pump of water. I saw a soldier,
with musket, guarding the pump, I put out
my cup, and he filled it about a quarter full
with water, I said, “Why do you not fill my
cup?” He replied, ‘ Water is scarce! Here
is a great army, and we do not know where
to get water after this is gone; and I have
orders to give no more than that.” What a
poor supply for a thirsty man on & hot day!
But, glory be to God! that in this Gospel
fountain there is water enough for all the
armies of the earth, and for all the armies of
heaven. You cannot drink itdry. I stand
this evening offering this Gospel to all who
are here, with just as much confidence that
there is enough for thom as though there were
only two or three persons presont,—Ibi

(e) Water typifies the Gospel by its freeness.
On this hot Sabbath, after the cows break
through the alders into the meadow to drink,
how much do they pay for 0 they


CHAP. XX,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


NUMBERS.


a


drink? The humming-bird drinks from the
wine glass of the honeysuckle. How much is
it a glass? There is a tax on the city water,
but no tax upon the great rivers that roll in
perpetual volume to the sea, How much will
the world pay for all the showers that this
summer refreshed the cornfields? Nothing,
It is free, and so is this glorious gospel. It is
free in its pardon, hope, and salvation, to all
who will accept it. Here is a man who says,
‘“‘T will pay for it, or I will not have it, Iam


an independent man ; and I will give so mach
to have my soul redeemed. I will endow a
college; or I will establish a school ; or I will
build a church, and in that way purchase my
salvation!” Or he says, “I will do some
grand, good works; and God, I know, will
accept them,” God says, “ Away with your
good works as a purchase for salvation! Take ~
this Gospel for nothing, or never take it, It
is free.” “ Without money and without price ~
is this Gospel fountain.— bid.


Tun Sins oF Hoty Magn anpD THEIR PUNISHMENT,


(Verses 12, 13.)


The sin of Moses and Aaron seems
to have included —

First: Want of faith, “ And the
Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron, Be-
cause ye believed Me not.” “It seems
to have been,” says Dean Stanley, “a
feeling of distrust. ‘Can we bring
water out of the cliff?’ (Num. xx. 10;
LXX. pi éédfoper, ‘surely we cannot’)”
The smiting of the cliff twice does not
indicate the calmness of faith, but the
presence of doubt rather, “as if the
promise of God ‘ would not have been
fulfilled without all the smiting on his
part.’” There was not, we believe,
positive unbelief or distrust of the
Divine word ; but, on the other hand,
there was not the full assurance of faith
which they should have manifested.

Second: Jrritation of spirit. The
impatience of Moses is manifest in his
speech,—“ Hear now, ye rebels ;” and
in his action,—‘“ He smote the rock
twice.” Worn out by the repeated and
aggravating perversities of the people,
the man of God breaks down, and for a
moment his long patience is overborne
by petulance. (Comp. Psa. cvi. 32, 33).
a

Third: Departure from Divine direc-
tions, (1) They fell short of the Divine
orders in not speaking to the cliff.
“Speak ye unto the cliff before their
eyes,” said the Lord ; but they did not
do so. (2) They went beyond the
Divine directions in speaking to the
people, and smiting the rock. The
directions of God never exceed His re-
quirements. If His commands are par-
ticular and in detail, He requires that

872


our obedience also shall be particular
and in detail.

Fourth: Assumption of power. The
question, “ Must we fetch you water
out of this rock?” does not give honour
to God. It is such as they might have
asked if by their own unaided efforts
they were about to obtain water for the
people.

Fifth: The publicity of the whole,
“Ye believed Me not, to sanctify Me in
the eyes of the children of Israel.” It
was an aggravation of their offence that
it was committed in the presence of the
assembled congregation. They occupied
an eminent position ; they were the re-
presentatives of Jehovah to the people,
the eyes of the people were fixed upon
them ; they should therefore have been
more careful to honour God before the
people. On a former occasion Moses
had been guilty of unbelief towards
God (chap. xi. 22, 23), and God rebuked
him for his sin. That however was in
private ; while this was in public, and
accordingly meets with severer punish-
ment froin the Lord.

The text leads us to consider—

I. The liability of the good to sin.

Moses was one of the holiest and
noblest men that ever lived, yet here he
sins against God. “In him there was
arare combination of intellectual and
moral excellences. In no man did the
force of principle reach a higher ascen-
dancy, andin no man can we discover a
truer majesty of character. It stands
out in bold and impressive relief. His
was a noble heart; one purer or truer
never beat within a human bosom,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XX.


sn praesent nee =


Noble by nature, he was nobler still by
the height and force of his virtue.” But
he was not infallible ; while he remained
in this world he was exposed to temp-
tation, and liable to fall into sin. And
under the strain of the provocation of
these perverse and rebellious people, he
did, alas! fall into sin. Let the great
and good be warned. You are safe only
as you exercise constant watchfulness,
humility, and trust in God. (5)

IL, The danger of good men failing
in those excellences which most dis-
tinguish them.

Moses was pre-eminent for meekness
(chap. xii. 3); but here his meekness
fails, and he is petulant and stern.
Abraham was celebrated for his faith in
God (Rom. iv. 11; Gal. iii. 9); yet
upon two occasions his faith failed for
a time (Gen. xii, 12; xx. 2, 11-13).
Elijah was one of the most fearless and
heroic of men; yet he fled from the
threatened vengeance of Jezebel in a
very panic of alarm, and remained for
some time in a state of deep dejection
(1 Kings xix. 1-4, 10, 14). Peter was
unquestionably courageous; yet the
charges of a maid-servant reduced him
for a time to an utter coward (Luke
xxii, 55-60). Guard well the strong
points of your character ; for there the
greatest danger often is. This seems
paradoxical ; nevertheless it is true.
The points of our character which we
know are weak we watch and fortify ;
in our strong points we feel so secure
that we deem it unnecessary to exercise
vigilance concerning them; and this
sense of security leads us sometimes to
fail in those strong points—in those
virtues which are most fully ours. (c)

III. The impartiality of the ad-
ministration of the Divine govern-
ment,

Moses and Aaron were both greatly
honoured of God—Moses especially so ;
yet God punishes them for sin, as well
as others. ‘‘ Because ye believed not
Me, to sanctify Me in the eyes of the
children of Israel, therefore ye shall
not bring this congregation into the
land whica I gave them.” Surely, this
was no slight punishment. After all


their brilliant and fondly-cherished hopes
of possessing the “ good land,” after all
they had done and borne as leaders of
the rebellious people, the honour of
leading them into the land shall not be
theirs ; they shall not even enter there-
in. “ Thou wast a God that forgavest
them, and Thou tookest vengeance of
their inventions.” If a saint of God
violate His laws, he must bear the
penalties which he has incurred. The
dark crimes which stained the spirit
and life of the man after God’s own
heart never ceased totrouble him in after
days. ‘“‘ Whoso breaketh an hedge, a
serpent shall bite him.” (d)

IV. The great guilt of those who by
their wickedness occasion sin in the
good.

If Moses and Aaron be “thus punished
that sin by other men’s occasions, how
much more shall they be punished that
are the occasions, or give the occasions !
Moses and Aaron had never thus of-
fended had the people not murmured ;
and many a sin should be daily uncom-
mitted did not some allure, tempt, and
provoke, or by some means give occa-
sion thereof.” —Babington.

“Woe to that man by whom the
offence cometh.” He who not only sins
himself, but by temptation or otherwise
occasions sin in others, shall be ‘‘beaten
with many stripes.”

V. The means which God uses to
deter men from sin.

“This is the water of Meribah ; be-
cause the children of Israel strove with
the Lord, and he was sanctified in
them.” The name was changed from
Kadesh-barnea to Meribah-kadesh as a
memorial of the sin of the pecple, and
of Moses and Aaron, that others might
take warning and shun sin. Many are
the means which God uges to keep man
from sin; memorials of human sins and
Divine judgments, expostulations with
the sinn:r, warnings against sin, en-
couragements and aids to obedience, are
all so employed. By the voice of
history, by the Law from Sinai, by the
Gospel of His Son, by the Cross of
Jesus Christ, by the influences of His
Spirit, God is ever crying to the sinner,


CHAP. XX.





“Oh! do not this abominable thing that
I hate.”

Application,

Let Christians guard against tempta-
tion ; let them cultivate a watchful and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





prayerful spirit. ‘“ Watch and pray,
that ye enter not into temptation.”
“Let him that thinketh he standeth,
take heed lest he fall.” Be sober, be
vigilant,” &. (é)


ILLUSTRATIUNS.


(a) If anger arises in thy breast, instantly
seal'up thy lips, and let it not go forth; for
like fire when it wants vent, it will suppress
itself. It is good in a fever to have a tender
end smooth tongue; but is better that it be in
anger; for if it be rough and distempered,
there it is an ill sign, but here it is an ill
cause, Angry passion is a fire, and angry
words are like breath to fan them together;
they are like steel and flint, sending out fire
by mutual collision.—Jeremy Taylor,

(6) Humanity has its weaker side, and
when assailed by temptation and the force of
evil, is liable to yield, and thus to be overcome,
No degree of moral excellence or of spiritual
attainment places us beyond the possibility of
declension, Imperfection and error attach to
us so long as we are in the flesh, and through
the weakness and the waywardness of our
nature, our highest joys may be marred and
limited, If our will could be brought into
perfect harmony with the will of God—if we
were at all times to move and act in strict
conformity with the Revelation of His in-
finite mind—if there were no contrariety be-
tween our inclination and His revealed in-
timations, deep, and full, and inexpressible
would be our joy. It is when our will comes
into opposition to His will—it is when we
deviate and depart from that which Ue has
prescribed, that our conduct becomes a o*urce
of disquietude; and the consciousness vhat
we have preferred our own line of action
the Divinely-prescribed method not only in-
troduces a great disturbing element into our
nature, but robs us of purer joy and profounder
peace.— R, Ferguson, LL.D.

Human nature has never been perfect in all
its qualities, energies, and services; the per-
fection of human nature can be wrought out
only by long-continued and severe probation.
In choosing instruments for the representation
of His will and the execution of His purposes,
God has always chosen men who were best
fitted on the whole for such ministry, though
in some particulars they have disastrously
and pitifully failed,

Oonsider, knowing human nature as we do,
how beneficial a thing it was to the great men
themselves to be shown now and again that
they were imperfect, and that they wore only
great and strong as they were good, as they
were true to God. To be an illustrious leader,
to have power and authority amongst men,
always to be in high places, and to be abso-
lutely without a fault of disposition, temper,
or desire, is enough to tempt any man to think


874


that he is more than a man; and even to be
without actual social fault, that can be pointed
out and blamed, is not unlikely to give a man
@ false notion of the real state of his own
nature. We may learn quite as much from
our failures as from our successes, I have
seen more truly what I am by my faults than
by my graces, and never have I prayed with
so glowing a fervour as when I have seen that
there is but a step between me and death and
ta T have nearly taken it—Joseph Parker,
DD,

(c) Abraham, the great man and prophet of
the Lord, shows his littleness by giving way
to a cowardly fear that strangely divided his
heart with the noblest faith found in the
ancient world. His fear in one direction waa
simply ridiculous and pitiful; when he came
amongst a powerful people he was always
afraid that they would kill him in order to got
possession of his wife. On the face of it the
thing would seem to be incredible: here is 2
man who left his kindred and his father’s
house, who braved the hardships of the wil-
derness, who arose and pursued kings and
slew them, and delivered the prey from the
hand of the mighty, tottering like a weak old
coward when he thinks that he may be killed.
He made a mean figure before Pharaoh, and
he makes a meaner still before Abimelech,
In one sense I am glad that Abraham made
such 4 fool of himself ; for had he been with-
out flaw or blemish, perfect and invincible in
faith, and complete in the sanctification of his
character, he would have awed me by his
supernatural respectability, and I should never
have thought of him as an example or a pat-
tern.—Jbid,

(2) The punishment of sin is impartial,
There is a form of self-deception common te
us all, and especially in youth, by which we
admit the general law, but try to shirk its
personal, its individual, application. It is the
old, old story of Eden over and over again in
the case of every one of us—the serpent creep-
ing up to us, all glitter and fascination—all
dulcet whisper and sinuous lies, and saying to
us, “See how fair the fruit iss how much to
be desired! Be as God, knowing good and evil.
Thou shalt not surely die,” And so the boy
and the yonth—aye, and in his folly the grown
man too, believes that it shall not be so with
him; that he will repent; that he is the darl-
ing of Providence; that he is the favourite of
heaven—he the one who shall sin and shall not
suffer. If others handle pitch they shall be
defiled. If others take fire into their bosom


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; NUMBERS.


—


CHAP. XX.





they shall be burnt; but God will indulge him,
And the very spirits of evil laugh at each one
going as an ox to the slaughter, when they
dupe him into the fancy that, out of special
regard for him, that adamantine chain of moral
gravitation. more lasting and binding than
that by which the stars are held in their
spheres, will be snapped; that sin, for him
only, will change its nature, and at his ap-
proach the Gehenna of punishment be trans-
formed into a garden of delight. Is it so, my
brethren? Has there ever been any human
being yet, since time began, however noble,
however beautiful, however gifted, however
bright with genius or radiant with fascination,
who has sinned with impunity? Ah,no! God is
no respecter of persons. Fire burns and water
drowns, whether the sufferer be a worthless vil-
lain or whether it be a fair and gentle child.
And go the moral law works, whether the sin-


ner be a David or a Judas, whether he be a
publican or a priest,—F’. W. Farrar, D.D.
(e) A child would generally stand on its
feet in a gust of wind if he knew it was com-
ing ; but when the wind happens to come
round as corner furiously, he may be taken off
his feet, Mind you are well ballasted by
prayer every morning before your vessel puts
out to sea, or carrying the quantity of sail you
do, you may be blown out upon the waves to
your perpetual shipwreck. Watch constantly
against those things which are thought to be
no temptations. The most poisonous serpents
are found where the sweetest flowers grow, and
when Cleopatra would have an asp to poison
herself, it was brought in a basket of fair
flowers, Beware of arrows shot from a golden
bow, or by @ woman’s hand. “ Watch and
pray, that ye enter not into temptation.”— |
C. H. Spurgeon.


Sis oy tHe Caiup or Gop.


(Verse 12.)


The text gives us the reason why
Moses and Aaron were kept from going
into the land of Canaan, and it suggests
to us some lessons about Sin inthe child
of God. God’s people sin. Not a sin-
less character in the Bible, but Christ.
No Perfectionism on earth taught there.
Sin in the child of God is—

I. Very painful to God.

There is a tone of intense grief in the
text. God hates sinin all; but most
of allin His own children. Our own
child falling into sin, and a mere ac-
quaintance doing so—how differently
we should feel in the one case from
what we should in the other! Nothing
hurts God more than sin in His own
children.

II. Most inexcusable.

Speaking strictly, no sin can be ex-
cused. Sin isa crime, not a misfortune ;
so there can be no sufficient excuse for
it. This is emphatically true of the
child of God: he has a higher know-
ledge of duty ; he has experienced the
evil of sin, and felt its sting; he has a
new principle—the Divine life within
him struggling against sin ; he has God
to help him—a God who is ever acces-
sible, &c. God speaks in the text as if
Moses and Aaron had nothing whatever
to palliate their conduct.


7


ITI. Most disastrous in its results.

God’s name is dishonoured—brought
into disrepute. The text shows that
God entrusts His character to the keep-
ing of His people. We have to sanctify
Him before men ; and in the proportion
in which we sin we fail to do so. We
are the world’s Bible; they learn of
God through us; they too often estimate
Him from our life. No one can tell the
injury which is done by inconsistent
professors of religion! The weak stumble;
the wicked are encouraged in their
sins ; the worldly have false impressions
of God and His religion. It is an
awful thing for a Christian to sin.

IV. Very certain of punishment.

“ Be sure your sin will find you out :”
this is true of the child of God. His
sin will give him pain. None of us
shall sin with impunity. Moses was the
friend of God (Exod. xxxiii. 11), yet God
could not pass by his sin. God’s love
to us does not blind Him to our faults.
There is no weakness in Him towards
His children, as there is often in us in
our dealings with ours. He has ever
visited His people for their sin ; and
sometimes, as in the text, though He
may forgive, they have to suffer for the
sin as long as they remain upon earth.
The text tells us that sin is - ge and


CHAP. XX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


NUMBERS.





bitter thing in the child of God. Let
this incident—
1. Make God's people more watchful.
2. Lead others to ponder their ways ;
for if God visits His own children for


sin, a fortiori, He will not let the wicked
escape.

3. Let none forget thatGod can forgive
sin—all sin—through Jesus Christ.—
Dand Lloyd.


A Reasonasts Request anp an UNGENEROUS ReFusal.


(Verses 14-21.)


We have in this paragraph —

I. A reasonable request.

“We are in Kadesh, a city in the
uttermost of thy border: let us pass,”
‘ &. This request was—

1, Reasonatle in itself. They desired
to enter Canaan from the east, crossing
the Jordan ; and their direct road to
the east of the Jordan was through the
land of Edom. If they are not per-
mitted to travel by that way, they
must take a very circuitous route (chap.
xxi, 4). They asked simply for per-
mission to travel “by the king’s way,”
and promised neither to depart from
that way into the fields or vineyards,
nor to make use of the wells of water
without payment for the same, Their
request was —

2. Urged by forcible reasons. (1) By
the relationship existing between them.
“Thus saith thy brother Israel.” The
Israelites and the Edomites were des-
cendants of the twin brothers, Jacob
and Esau. The Israelites desire a re-
newal of the ancient kindnesses of their
ancestors (Gen. xxxiii, 1-15). Brother-
hood should promote kindness, increase
mutual helpfulness, &. (a) (2) By
the sufferings which the Israelites had
endured. “Thou knowest all the
travel that hath befallen us: how our
fathers went down into Egypt, and we
have dwelt in Egypt a long time; and
the Egyptians vexed us and our fathers.”
The sufferings they had borne at the
hand of strangers should have induced
their kinsfolk to succour and help
them. (8) By the mercies which God
had shown to Israel. ‘ And when we


cried unto the Lord, He heard our |


voice, and sent an Angel, and hath
brought us forth out of Egypt,” &e.
$76


The blessings which God had bestowed
upon them should have been viewed-—
(i.) As an indication that it was His will
that others should aid them. His will
is binding, &o. (ii.) As an example to
encourage others toaid them. (iii.) As
an indication of His favour towards
them, which suggested that it was to
the interest of others to aid them. It
is perilous to resist those whom God
defends; it is prudent to further their
designs, &. (4) Because Israel would
guarantee Edom against any loss. “ We
will not pass through the fields, or
through the vineyards, neither will we
drink of the water of the wells,” &.
(verse 17). ‘‘ We will go by the high-
way: and if I and my cattle drink of
thy water, then I will pay for it,” &.
(verse 19). To nomad chiefs, rich in
flocks and herds, wells of water are a
most precious and important properry.
Kalisch: “The possession of a wels in
arid regions not unfrequently causes
strife and warfare between whole trives,
and the protection cf dis wells is a
prominent object of solicitude to an
Arab sheikh.” (6) But the Israelites
promise to respect these rights of pro-
perty ; and to cause the Edomites no
loss or damage. Thus the arguments
by which they enforce their request
are conspicuously fair and reasonable.

II. An ungenerous resfual,

‘And Edom said unto him, Thou
shalt not pass by me, lest I come out
against thee with the sword. .. . And
he said, Thou shalt not go through,”
&c. (vers. 20, 21). This refusal of the
Edomites probably arose from —

1, Fear that uf they complied with
the request of the Israelites the rexult
might be injurious to them. They did


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


CHAP, XX.


SS tsar


not believe the promises made by the
Israelites; and they feared “what so
great an army once got in might do;
they are not usually so easily removed.”
The fear was not unnatural, &e.

2. Envy at the growing power of
Israel, The Edomites knew of their
deliverance from Egypt; of their
victory over the Amalekites (Exod.
xvii. 8-13); of their immense number ;
and of their pretensions in respect to
Canaan (Exod. xv. 14-17); and they
were envious of their increasing
strength.

3. Remembrance of the ancient injury
tnflicted by Jacob upon Esau. “ Esau
hated Jacob because of the blessing,
and now the hatred revived, when the
blessing was ready to be inherited.”
“A brother offended is harder to be
woo than a strong city; and their
contentions are like the bars of a
castle.” The nearer the relationship
between the offender and the offended,


the wider is the breach and the more
difficult is the reconciliation. The
memory of an injury such as that
which Jacob inflicted upon Esau it is
perhaps impossible to wipe out; it is
handed down from generation to gene-
ration, &c. The recollection of that
injury imparted resoluteness and seve-
rity to the refusal of Edom to grant
the request of Israel.

Conclusion.

1. Learn that no alienation ts so wide
and bitter as that between brethren or
other near relations. (c)

2. Where such alienation ewists, let
us seek to bring about reconciliation—a
complete healing of the breach. (d)

3. Cultiwate brotherly kindness.

4. Respect the rights of others even
when the assertion of those rights is
carried to an extreme. “Thus Edom
refused to give Israel passage through
his border; wherefore Israel turned
away from him.”


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) Two days after the terrible battle of
Chickamanga, I was passing over the battle-
field. In a thick clump of bushes, on the side
of 9 ravine, I saw a young man seated beside
a tree with his arm bandaged, Seeing that
his arm was badly wounded, I asked why he
had not gone to the hospital in the rear. He
replied, pointing to a corpse that lay near by,
“That is my brother; and Iam determined
never to leave him until he is buried.” Ihad
the dead man buried, and the wounded
brother taken care oi.—Memphis Advocate,
quoted in Dict. of Iilust,

(6) The special necessity of a supply of
water in a hot climate has always involved
among the Eastern nations questions of pro-
perty of the highestimportance, and sometimes
given rise to serious contention, To give a
name to a well denoted a right of property,
and to stop or destroy one once dug was a
military expedient, a mark of conquest or an
encroachment on territorial right claimed or
existing in its neighbourhood. Thus the well
Beersheba was opened, and its possession
attested with special formality by Abraham
(Gen. xxi, 30, 81). In the hope of expelling
Isaac from their neighbourhood, the Philistines
stopped up the wells which had been dug in
Abraham’s time and called by his name, an
encroachment which was stoutly resisted by
the followers of Isaac (Gen, xxvi. 15-33 ; see also
2 Kings iii. 19 ; 2 Chron, xxvi. 10), The Kuran
notices abandoned wells as signe of desertion


(Sar. xxii,), To acquire wells which they had
not themselves dug, was one of the marks of
favour foretold to the Hebrews on their en-
trance into Canaan (Deut, vi. 11), To possess
one is noticed as a mark of independence
(Prov. v. 15), and to abstain from the use of
wells belonging to others, a disclaimer of in-
terference with their property (Num, xx. 17,
19; xxi. 22). Similar rights of possession,
actual and hereditary, exist among the Arabs
of the present day, Wells, Burckhardt says,
in the interior of the desert, are exclusive pro-
perty, either of a whole tribe, or of individuals
whose ancestors dug the wells, If the well be
the property of atribe, the tents are pitched near
it, whenever rain water becomes scarce in the
desert ; and no other Arabs are then permitted
to water their camels, But if the well belongs
to an individual, he receives presents from all
strange tribes who pass or encamp at the well,
and refresh their camels with the water of
it. The property of such a well is never
alienated; and the Arabs say that the pos-
sessor is sure to bo fortunate, as all who drink
of the water bestow on him their benedictions
(comp, Num. xxi, 17, 18; Judg. i. 15).— 2. W.
Phillott, M.A., in Bibl, Dict.

(c) We see by Jamontable experience, that
every toy and trifle maketh debate, not only
between dearest friends, but between nearest
kinsfolk, that they can never be reconciled,


And as no band knitteth faster, and bindeth


closer than this, while love and ee lastothas


CHAP, XX,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


80 no contention is so bitter, no hatred so
deadly, as that of brethren and others that are
near in blood, when the knot is broken and
dissolyed, Tho tender glass when it is once
broken, will never be set together again, No
water proveth so exceeding cold as that which
was once heated exceeding hot; so no hatred
proveth like to the hatred of brethren, which
are often found merciless one toward another,
and such as can never be appeased ; a8 we
see in the malice of Cain toward Abel, This
it is that Solomon pointeth out in Prov. xviii.
19: “A brother offended is harder to win
than a strong city, and their contentions are
as a bar of a castle.” For as they loved most
artirely and dearly before, so when once they
grow enemies, they hate one another most ex-
tremely, whose hearts are as stony walls that
cannot be pierced, and as bars of iron that
eannot be broken. Now as the Prophet
teacheth, that it is a “good and comely
thing for brethren to dwell together in unity ;”
so it is @ noisome and unnatural thing to be-
held greatest envy and most mortal malice,
where the greatest and nearest bands of
kindred should knit together.— W. Aittersoll.

(d) A day of reconciliation! A family
made one, Brethren coming together again
after long separation. It is a beautiful picture.
Why should it not be completed, when it needs
completion, in our own day amongst ourselves?
Ministers sometimes have misunderstandings,
and say unkind things about one another, and
exile one another from love and confidence for
years, Is there never to bea day of reconcilia-
tion and Christian forgetfulness of wrong,
even when positive wrong has been done ?
Families and households often getawry. The
younger brother differs from his eldest bro-


ther; sisters fall ont, One wants more than
belongs to him; another is knocked to the
wall because he is weak; and there comes in-
to the heart bitterness and alienation; and
often brothers and sisters never have a kind
word to say about one another. Is it always
to be so? Don’t merely make it up, don’t
patch it up, don’t cover it up; goright down
to the base. You will never be made one,
until you meet at the Cross, and hear Him
say, “He that doeth the will of My Father
which is in heaven, the same is my mother,
and sister, and brother.” It is in Christ’s
sorrow that we are to forget our woes, in
Cbrist’s sacrifice that we find the answer to our
sin, in Christ’s union with the Father that we
are to find all true and lasting reconciliation.
But who is to begin? That isthe wonderful
question that is often asked us. Who is to
begin? One would imagine that there were
some very nice people about who only wanted
somebody to tell them who was to begin,
They want to be reconciled, only they don’t
know who is to begin. Ican tell you. You
are! Thatis exactly how it iss But I am
the eldest,—yes, and therefore ought to begin,
But I am the youngest, Then why should
the youngest be an obstinate, pig-headed child ?
Who are you that you should not goand throw
yourself down at your brother’s feet and say,
“ T have done you wrong, pardon me’? Who
isto begin? You! Which? Both! When?
Now! Qh! beware of the morality which
says, “I am looking for the opportunity, and
if things should so get together—” Sir!
death may be upon you before you get to the
end of your long melancholy process of self-
laudation and anti-Christian logic,—Joseph
Parker, D.D,


Toe DeatH or AARON,


(Verses 22-29.)


Let us notice—

I. The death of Aaron.

Concerning the death of this dis-
tinguished man there are three things
which we may profitably consider.
(a) He died—

1. As a consequence of sin. His death
was not the result of disease, or of the
exhaustion of the vitality of his body.
It is true that he was an aged man;
* Aaron was an hundred and twenty and
three years old when he died in Mount
Hor ;” yet he died not by reason of old
age and its infirmities ; his death was
not in the ordinary course of nature ;
but was a direct cuusequence of sin.
“Aaron shall be gathered unto his
people ; As he shall not enter into the

878


land which I have given unto the
children of Israel, because ye rebelled
against My Word at the water of
Meribah.” He is distinctly called ‘“ the
saint of the Lord” (Psa. evi. 16); yet
now he must die because of his sin,
without entering the Promised Land,
without even beholding it. God is
rigidly impartial in His dealings with
His creatures. ‘There is no respect
of persons with God.” If His people
sin, they must suffer for their sin.

2. By the appointment of God. There
was nothing accidental in the death of
Aaron; everything connected with it
was arranged by the Lord. He de-
termined the time of his death. “Is
there not an appointed time to man


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





upon earth?” ‘“ His days are de-
termined, the number of his months
are with Thee, Thou hast appointed his
bounds that he cannot pass.” “All
the days of my appointed time will I
wait till my change come.” “Thou
changest his countenance, and send-
est him away.” “Thou turnest
man to destruction ; and sayest, Return,
ye children of men.” ‘My times are
in Thy hand.” The Lord determined
the place of his death. “Take Aaron
and Eleazar, his son, and bring them up
unto Mount Hor;....and Aaron
shall die there.” The circumstances of
his death were also arranged by the
Lord. ‘ Take Aaron and Eleazar, his
son, and bring them up unto Mount
Hor ; andstrip Aaron of his garments,”
&c. Nothing is left to accident, or
chance, or human chvice; all was
Divinely appointed. Our Lord hath
“the keys of Hades and of death.” His
people cannot die prematurely or acci-
dentally. All who seek to live in
harmony with His will, all who are
moving in the line of His purposes,
pass hence in accordance with His ar-
rangements. (5)

3. The death of Aaron was his tntro-
duction to life and to congenial society.
“ Aaron shall be gathered unto his
people.” ‘‘ Aaron, though he dies for
his transgression, is not put to death
as a malefactor, by a plague, or fire
from heaven, but dies with ease and in
honour. He is not ‘cut off from his
people,’ as the expression usually is
concerning those that die by the hand
of Divine justice, but he is ‘gathered
to his people,’ as one that died in the
arms of Divine grace.” The expression
“gathered unto his people” sugyests
two ideas:—(1) Death is the way to
life. The expression under considera-
tion cannot be a mere poetical phrase
for death; for in many places it is
specified over and above the fact of
death (see Gen. xxv. 8, 17; xxxv. 29;
xlix. 33; ver. 26; Deut. xxxii. 50).
Nor can the expression relate to burial;
for in this sense it would not be true
of Aaron, nor yet of Abraham, to whom
it was also applied, nor yet of Moses,


CHAP, XX,


a


Besides which the fact of burial is in
many places speci‘ied over and above
the being “gathered unto his people”
(see Gen. xv. 15; xxv. 8,9; xxxv. 29; 1
Kings ii. 10; xi. 43, &c.), “The only as-
signable sense, therefore, is,” as Dean
Alford says, “that of reference toa state
of further personal existence beyond
death ; and the expression thus forms a
remarkable testimory to the Old Testa-
ment belief in a future state.’ When
Aaron died he did not cease to be; but
rather entered upon a larger, intenser,
fuller life. When his lifeless body lay
upon Mount Hor, his living spirit
passed to the great assembly of the
good in the presence of God. At death
the body ‘‘returns to the earth as it
was, and the spirit returns unto God
who gave it.” (2) Death is the way to
congenial social life. ‘Gathered unto
his people.” Aaron at death passed
neither into isolation nor into the un-
congenial society of strangers or aliens ;
but to his own people, to persons of
kindred sympathies and purposes and
interests. After death men go to their
own place, and to their own company.
The good pass swiftly to their ‘‘ Father's
house,” and to the great multitude
who are gathered there. O, death is
not terrible tothe good! Itis the way
by which they pass to the holy and
blessed fellowship of glorified saints, the
way to our permanent and joyous home,
the way to the presence of our God,
“So shall we ever be with the Lord.”


Cc

Mt The appointment of Aaron's
successor,

“Strip Aaron of his garments, and °
put them upon Eleazar his son... .
And Moses stripped Aaron of his gar-
ments, and put them upon Eleazar his
son.” The sacred high-priestly vest-
ments were taken off Aaron before his
death, that they might not be defiled
by contact with the dead. By putting
them upon Eleazar, he was invested
with the office to which they belonged,
In this arrangement I discover-—

1. Kindness to Aaron, It assured
him—(1) That his office would be
filled ; that his work would ee carried


CHAP. XX,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,





on, &c. Interested in the religious
welfare of the people as he was, this
must have been cheering to him. (2
That this office would be filled by
his own son; that the high-priesthood
would continue in his own family. This
must have been a gratification to the
fatherly instincts of his nature,

2. A guarantee of the continuance of
the Church of God. Aaron dies; but
God has a successor at hand to take
Aaron’s place and to carry on his work.
Moses dies leaving his great work
incomplete, but Joshua, a brave and
noble man, is ready to take up the great
leader’s enterprize, and carry it onward
to a triumphant close. The whirlwind
carries the faithful and heroic Prophet
of Horeb, as on the wings of some swift
and strong angel, to his well-earned
rest; but Elisha, a worthy successor
even of so distinguished a servant of the
Lord, waits to catch the falling of his
master’s mantle and to prosecute his
master’s mission. And now, good and
faithful ministers are gathered to their
fathers ; but the Lord Christ ever lives,
and ever raises up worthy successors to
fill the vacant places. The continuance
nf the Church depends not upon the
services of even its most gifted and holy
ministers, but upon its Divine Head.
This is—(1) Humbling to our pride.
God can carry on His work without our
poor services, Our place will soon be
filled by another, and perhaps better
filled than it ever was by us. (2) En-
couraging to our faith, The work so
dear to us will be carried on when we
have passed away. Though the human
workers die, the Divine Master and
Supreme Worker ever lives, and ever
carries forward His cause towards its
final triumph.

III. The mourning because of
Aaron’s death.

“ And when all the congregation saw
that Aaron was dead, they mourned for
Aaron thirty days, even all the house of
Israel.” ‘This national mourning sug-
gests—

1. The worth of faithful ministers,
Aaron had rendered valuable services
to the Israelites; he had rendered essen-

3380


tial service in the work of their emanci-
pation from Egyptian bondage ; he had
entreated God again and again for them
in their rebellions; he had stood between
the more than fourteen thousand dead,
and the living, and by his intercession
stayed the progress of the dreadful
plague. But now he has gone: he will
serve them no more. Well may they
weep. ‘The loss of faithful ministers is
one of the greatest losses that can befall
society. They render the most valuable
services, they exercise the most salutary
and inspiring influence in society. (d)

2. The appreciation of blessings when
they are withdrawn from us, which were
not valued when they were ours. While
Aaron was with them the Israelites
“were often murmuring against him,
threatening indeed to kill him, wishing
that there was an end of him, speaking
against him, and in every way discourag-
ing him in his work. But when he was
dead they mourned for him ; they found
their loss when it was too late to value
him. This is but an example of human
nature. We very seldom value our
chiefest blessings until we are made to
feel their worth by the loss of them. It
has often happened in the case of the
Christian minister and congregation,
that he has been undervalued while he
was testifying God’s truth, and has been
much mourned for when taken away.”
(Comp. Ezek. xxxiii. 30-33),

“Like birds whose beauties languish, half-
conceal’d

Till mounted on the wing, their glossy

plumes

paenses, shine with azure, green, and

ald

foe blessings brighten as they take their

flight! "— Young,


Shakspeare also gives luminous ex-

pression to this truth -—
“Tt so falls out,

That what we have we prize not to the worth,
Whiles we evjoy it; but being lack’d and lost,
Why then we rack the value; then we find
The virtue that possession would not show us
Whiles it was ours,”

Let us appreciate the gifts of Heaven
while we have them, &o,

Tn conclusion, learn—

1, The universality of death. The


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS


CHAP, XX.





gifted, the great, the beautiful, the
holy, all die. We must die. Let ua
live that death shall be to us great
gain. (e)

2. The imperfection of the Aaronic


priesthood (see Heb. vii. 11, 18, 19,
23, 28; viil. 7; ix. 25; x. 1-4, 11).

3. The perfection of the Priesthood of
Christ (see Heb. vii. 22-28; viii 6;
ix. 23-28; x. 10-14).


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) Bohold then the three persons, Aaron,
Moses, and Hleazar, going up the mountain,
The first is distinguished by his priestly habit,
He is clad in the mitre, the ephod, the fine
linen, the Urim and the Thummim, and those
bells, which formerly when heard within the
holy of holies told of his life, now seem sound-
ing the signal for Death to meet him on the
summit, and their tinkle lessening up the
mountain strikes like a death-watch in the
ear of the people of the great congregation
assembled before their tents to trace the pro-
gress and to witness the event, not a murmur
or groan heard throughont thom all, but mil-
lions, it may be, weeping in silence. See with
what calm, majestic, uninterrupted and un-
reverted steps the three pursue their journey,
talking perhaps of that Promised Land which
one of them is never to see, which another is
to see from a mountain in Moab, and which
the third only is to enter, or talking of that
Better Country to which the first is so near.
Mark the eager look cast forward by Aaron
toward the top of the hill, as if he expected
the Angel of Death to be waiting for him there;
but when he gains the summit, lo! all is
empty and sternly silent, the victim is there
but no wood and no fire for the offering; one
mighty sacrificer has arrived, but the otber is
not yet come to keep the dread engagement,
Turn then ere he comes, and see from the
mount ten thousand times ten thousand torn,
ruptured, rent, serrated and savage hills
standing up as witnesses to the covenanted
meeting and catastrophe at hand; not a blade
of grass or drop of water in view, nothing but
a bare and blasted wilderness of sand and
stone, and thunder-split crag, as if a flood of
fire had crossed, and torn, and tortured it into
the similitude of hell; including the vast
valley of Arabab whica unites the Red and
the Dead Seas, both of which are visible, and
on its western side the great sandy desert,
surmounted in the extreme distance by the
Sinaitic range, Mark the last glance cast by
Aaron to the camp and the multitude far be-
low, 8 glance speaking of sorrow and of re-
morse too. since it is owing to his sin at
Meribah that he is dying so soon, and dying
so publicly, but speaking still more of submis-
sion, confidence, and bope in the mercy of
God. See the slow and solemn manner in
which the hand of Moses, although the younger
brother, tenderly, like a mother her babe at
eventide, strips Aaron of his garments, And
behold now the high priest clothed only with
his long grey hair, as is that ardent sun overs
bead witb his old beams, laying himself down


upon the hill, watching with en eye of love
and pride his son Hleazar, as Moses arrays
him with ephod, and linen, and breast-plate,
and mitre; and as the bright rays from the
Urim and Thummim flash for the last time
upon his dim and dying eye, blessing his noble
son whose ornament théy are benceforward to
be, and blessing the brother with whom he has
so long held sweet counsel and united in mare
vellous achievement; and then fixing his look
upward as if waiting for the advent and the
dart of his adversary, who comes not; but
instead there is heard a ‘still, small voice,”
saying, “QOome up hither,” and lo! a dead
body lies on the granite of Mount Hor, and a
living soul, suddenly clothed by the hands of
angels with robes that shall never be stripped
away, has joined the great assembly in the
heavens.—G. Gilfillan, M.A,

(6) We strive, oftentimes almost uncon-
sciously perhaps, to re-arrango or re-ordain
particular circumstances, and even whole
scenes in our life and in the lives of others.
And with a still more importuvate and sorrow-
ful eagerness do we seek to have some power
in arranging for life’s close. We would not
dare to take the key of death in our own
hand, but we would touch it while it lies in
His. Not now, or not there, or not thus, we are
always saying,

“Nor Now,” we say, when the father is
called to leave the family of which he is the
whole stay. ‘ Lot him live, lot 2 few weeks
elapse, let his family be provided for, let his
work be done!” It %s done, is the answer,
His fatherloss children are provided for; I
have taught him to leave thom with Me. “ The
Father of the fatherless, the Husband of the
widow, is God in His holy habitation.”

% Not now,” we say, when the mother haa
heard the home-call, and with a calmness and
courage greater than those of-the soldior in —
battle, is rising above all her cares, and be-
coming a child again, at the threshold of the
heavenly home. ‘Qh, not now! Who will
check the way wardnoss, encourage tho virtues,
receive the confidences, soothe the little sor-
rows, and train the loves of those infant
hearts? Who will teach the evening prayer,
and listen to the Sabbath hymn? Who can
give a mother’s care, and feel a mother’s
love?” “I,” saith the Shepherd, “I will
gather the lambs with mine arm, and carry
them in Dy bosom, I will forget no prayer
of the dying mother’s heart. I will treasure
in My heart the yearnings of her life over her
children, and the unutterable compassions of
her dying hour; and when many years have


CHAP, XX,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,





sped, and she has been long in heaven, these
children will remember her in their holicst
and happiest moments, and by their walk and
their work will be proving that she did not
live in vain, that she ‘finished the work that
was given her to do,’ ”

Or, we say, “ Not there, oh, not there! away
on the sea—a thousand miles from land—let
him not die there, and be dropped into the
unfathomed grave, where the unstable waves
must be his only monument, and the winds
the sole mourners of the place! Or not in
some distant city or far-off land—strangers
around his bed, strangers closing his eyen,
and then carrying him to a stranger’a grave,
Let him come home and die amid tne whis-
perings and breathings of the old unquench-
able love.” ‘He zs going home,” is the an-
swer, “and going by the best and only way.
I can open the gate Beautiful in any part of
the earth or sea, I can set up the mystic
ladder, the top of which reaches to heaven, in
the loneliest island, at the furthest ends of
the earth, and your friends will flee to the
shelter of My presence all the more fully be-
cause yours is far away.”

Or, we say, “ Not thus, not through such
agonies of body, or faintings of spirit, or
sremblings of faith—not in unconsciousness—
not without dying testimonies. Let there be
outward as well as inward peace, Let men-
tion be made of Thy goodness, Let there by
foretellin gs and foreshadowings of the glory
to which, a8 we trust, they are going, Oh,
shed down the light, the fragrancy of heaven
upon their dying bed!” The answer is, ‘‘ They
are there, and you are so dull of sense that
you perceive them not, Your friend is filled
with the ‘ peace that passeth understanding,’
and safe in the everlasting arms.”

Thus, brethren, the téme, and the place, and
the cércumstances, are all arranged by the
wisdom and the will of Him who holds the
keys, and we could not, even if we had our
own will and way, make anything better than
it is in the perfect plan, Better! everything
would be worse—inconceivably worse if we
had the keys, Let us trust them, with a loyal
loving trust, with Him who graciously says
to us, “Fear not;” One who, in this as in
all other things, will treat us and give us
according to our faith.— Alex. Raleigh, D.D,

(c) Death is but a going home, A child is
away at school, and tie vacation is near at
band ; and you may be sure that the father
and mother long to see the child more than
the child wants to see father and mother. So,
accordirg to the good old custom, the father
takes the carriage, and wends his way to
the school, perhaps with, perhaps without,
intimations to the child of his coming. In
the midst of his tasks on the last day, the
child is suddenly greeted by the voice and
presence of his father; and no sooner are the
firat salutations exchanged than the father
saya, “Are your things ready? We go to-
morrow.” Wine is not so sparkling as the
joy in the child’s heart, He can neither eat,


382


nor sleep, nor play. The thought that his
father has come, and that he is going home
to see his mother, and brothers, and sisters
has quite intoxicated him, By such glorious
images as this God is pleasea to represent our
departure from the present life. The Lord
Jesus Christ shall come to onr poor old
weather-beaten school-house in this world,
and say to us, “Come home! you are
wanted,”

Heaven is not, then, a great bleak shore to
which you are driven by the storm, and where

ou are east arsong savageinhabitants. Heaven
18 @ blessed place of rest. It is your home,
You have friends there, the chiefest among
whom is He that loved you, that gave Him-
self for you, that has ever watched over you
during your earthly pilgrimage, and that
soon, very soon, will come for you, as already
He has for yours. They are gloricus there;
and in all their glory, if they could but speak
a word to us, would it be such a poor stum-
bling word as that which they spoke in the
hour of death? If they could speak to us
from the eternal world, what hope and conso-
lation would they give us!—H. W. Beecher,

(d) Death is, in every case, an event of
most momentous consequences, ... But the
death of a minister of the Gospel, in addition
to the consequences which affect his own
destiny, involves others which extend to his
flock. If he bas been faithful unto death, bis
decease is in mercy to himself, but it must at
the same time be in judgment to his church,
The testimony of a witness for God to an un-
believing generation is finished—a herald of
salvation is withdrawn—an ambassador of
Christ is recalled—a light of the world, which
has guided many, and might have guided
more, into the haven of cternal peace, is ex-
tinguished, It is not the death of a friend
merely, however valued, or « relative, how-
ever dear, whose affection soothed the sorrows
of time, and softened the rugged path of life ;
but it is the removal of one whose solicitude
watched for the soul, promoted its salvation,
and diffused, or aimed to diffuse, a beneficial
influence over its eternal existence, What
arithmetic can estimate the greatness of such
a calamity? Instead of that living voice
which, both by the eloquence of preaching,
and the still holier and more elevating
eloquence of prayer, often lifted the rapt
hearers to heaven, and matured them for its
glories, they have nothing now but the cold
and silent marble, which perpetuates, with
his honoured name, their own incalculable
loss.— J, Angell James,

(e) All must die. The fact is so old and
every day, that, like the sun, few people think
of it or look at it. Itis otherwise, indeed, with
those who see the solemn reality approach-
ing themselves, and who then, for the first
time, feel its strangeness, its importance, its
awfulness, and how little prepared they are
for it, They resemble one who has fallen
asleep on a railway, and, starting up, sees the
engine just upon bim, and has hardly time,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY NUMBERS.


CHAP, XX,


SSSR ~¥nY stot


by one wild cry, to commend himself to the
mercy of God, ere he is crushed into non-
existence. Something like this was the cry
of Hoffman, the German writer, who, when
after a thoughtless career he felt himself ap-
proaching his end, and was told to prepare for
death, turned his face away and said, “ And
must 1 at last begin to think about God?’
- Truly says his biographer, ‘ Sorrowfuller
words were never spoken by man.” Far from


us be it to say that these cries are never an-
swered—we believe that, when sincere, they
always are, But, alas! how foolish to delay
their utterance! how foolish to expect that
there shall always be time given to ntter
them! and how much wiser to close with
Christ’s offer of mercy now, and now, ere it
be too late, to begin to think seriously, 10v-
ingly, prayerfully, and hopofully of God !—


G, Gilfillan, M.A.


Tus Goop anp Farrarut Servant,
(Verses 23-29.)


I. The common destiny of man.

Aaron shall be gathered unto his
people.” At death the body is gathered
to the generations that are gone. One
generation is buried in the dust of an-
other, and future generations will be
entombed in our dust. When one
thinks of this, how worthless appear
all the mere secular distinctions of this
world! There are “kings and coun-
sellors of the earth,” &c. (Job. iii. 14,
15,19). Thither you and I are going.
But not as to a final resting place.
This Bible assures me that all that ever
have left us are living now—thinking,
active, conscious; and that the good
who are living are living in the con-
scious presence of Infinite Love—in
the heaven of the blest. “I heard a
voice from heaven saying unto me,
Write, Blessed are the dead,” &c. (Rev.
xiv. 13).

II. The rigorousness of moral law.

Aaron was to die. Why? Because
of a certain something which took place
at Meribah, Moses and Aaron were
both excluded from the Promised Land.
The law demands punishment for sin
even in a good man. Moral law seems
to be as immutable as God Himself.
Aaron went up into Mount Hor, and
there hedied. And his death proclaims
in thunder the fact that however dis-
tinguished a man may be for his ex-
cellencies, however high he may be in
the Church of God, his sin shall not go
unpunished.

III. The termination of life in the
midst of iabour.

The work entrusted to Moses and
Aaron was to conduct the children of
Israe! through the wilderness into the


Promised Land; and this work was
unfinished. We nearly all die with
our work unfinished. The farmer dies
when he has only half ploughed his
field ; the merchant dies, &c. We are
not surprised when an old tree, though
prolific in its day, dies, for it dies by
the law of decay ; nor are we astonished
that an unfruitful tree should be cut


‘ down, for it is a cumberer of the


ground ; but we are astonished that a
tree, with its branches full of sap, with
its boughs laden with fruit, with thou-
sands reposing under its shadow, should
be struck with a thunderbolt from
heaven. “Thy path,” O God, “is in
the great. waters,” &c.

TV. God’s agency in man’s dissolu-
tion.

Why did Aaron die? He was not
worn out withage. Not because there
was disease rankling in his system ; not
because there was any external violence
applied to him. Why, then, did he
die? The Great One determines that
he shall die, and he dies. This is al-
ways the philosophy of a man’s death,
Philosophy, the Bible, and reason all
say, ‘man dies because the Great One
has determined that he should die.” If
God has determined that the frailest or-
ganisation shall live for ever, that or-
ganisation will live for ever; and so
also, if He determines it, the most ro-
bust, the strong and vigorous, dies ina
moment (see Job vii. 1; xiv. 5, 29;
Psa. xc. 3; Job i. 21).

V. The promptitude with which
Providence supplies the places of the
dead.

Aaron must die, but there is Eleazar
standing by his side ready toe? into


OHAP, XX,





his place. This is the order of Provi-
dence. A merchant dies, and another
man stands by his side ready to carry
on his business. A lawyer dies, &o.
A statesman dies, &c. A minister leaves
a pulpit, his voice becomes silent in
death, and the people mourn; but God
has another minister standing by ready
to step into the place of the departed,
and to carry on his work. Oh, how this
encourages my faith in the progress of
Divine truth in this world! ....

But it is certainly humbling to our
pride. My friend, the world can do
without thee. Thou art but a blade in
the field; the landscape will bloom
without thee.

VI. The trial of human friendships.

Moses and Eleazar were very closely
related to Aaron. Moses was more than
a brother to Aaron. There was a
spiritual kindredship between them,
There were mental affinities and spiri-
tual affections. They were devoted to
the same great purpose, they had the
same plan, they were the children of
the same God; and here is their trial
—Aaron must die... .

Can it be that the great God of love,
who has made us to love, and who has
disposed us to give our affections to cer-
tain persons, should, by our love, make
us so often wretched? There is to bea
renewal of real spiritual friendship. The
separation which takes place in the
death of true Christian friends is more
in form than in reality. In truth we
become more really friends by the death
separation, Death cannot destroy our
loving memories of them. Death does
not kill—nay, it seems but to intensify


’ of all losses.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.








our affection, We are one—for ever
vae.

VII. The paiaful recognition by so-
ciety of its greatest losses.

The people “mourned for Aaron
thirty days.”

The two greatest blessings on this
earth are—the Bible and good men. I
need not tell you the value of the
Bible, for you know it. Glorious Book
for the intellect, for the imagination,
for the heart, for the world, for all
ages! Blessed be God for the Bible!
But next to the Bible, we value good
men. Good men are as fountains well-
ing up in the desert through which you
are passing ; they are lights in abound-
ing darkness ; they are salt which
counteracts our tendency to corruption,
But the Christian minister is the best
of all men, and his loss is the greatest
A man who not caly has
the spirit of the Bible in him, but who
has given his intellect, his genius, his
powers of mind to the study of the Word
of God, in order to present that Word
to all classes of men, dealing out a word
in season to each—a word of advice to
theenquiring, of counsel to the thought-
less, of caution to the young, of com-
fort and help to the poor and suffering
—I know of no man who is rendering
such a service to society and to hu-
manity as he. Such a man was Aaron.
He was more; he was an orator. God
says, “ My servant Aaron can speak
well.” But he dies. His eloquent
tongue is silent in death; and they
wept thirty days.—David Thomas,
D.D, Abridged from “The Christian
World,” March 28th, 1861.


Tae Removat oF a Devoted SsRVANT oF Gop.
(Verses 25-29.)


In this death there were—

I. The express appointment and
atrangement of God,

The departure of God’s servants is
never accidental or unforeseen.

II, The last attentions and minis-
trations of pious friendship.

Such ministrations and attentions
are a privilege to—

384


1. Those about to depart.

2. Those who for a season are to sur
vive.

III. The tokens of Divine favour.

Tn one respect Aaron’s death was a
sign of Divine displeasure, but this
displeasure was only purtial. He was
allowed to go to the place of his death
in his robes of office.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XX,





III The pledge of perpetuity to
the Divine cause,

A successor was immediately, autho-
ritatively, and unquestionably secured
to the office that Aaron held.


_V. The prospect of immortal hap-
piness.
Mount Hor was near enough to per-
mit a vision of Canaan.—J, Parsons.
From “ The Biblical Museum,”


Tae Sorrows or BEREAVEMEN®,


(Verse 29.)


What an impressive scene is this!
a whole nation bowed down by one
common grief. The many thousands
of Israel are mourning the death of
one of the most noble and useful of
men.

We too shall soon “be gathered
unto our people.” Like waves which
chase each other to the shore, or like
clouds which on the heels of each other
fast travel o’er the face of the blue
heavens, are we treading in the wake
of “the great departed,” and soon
shall arrive at the solemn bourne of
our pilgrimage.


“Time is fleeting,
And our hearts, though stout and brave,
Still, like moffled drums, are beating
Funeral marches to the grave.”


—Longfellow.


The tears of this vast congregation
are sadly suggestive. Let us look into
the reasons of the mourning of this
nation.

I. A great and good man had been
removed from their midst.

“ Aaron was dead.”

1. He was a holy man. The lustre
of his life is clouded by a few imperfec-
tions and sins; but he was unquestion-
ably agood man. “ Aaron, the saint of
the Lord” (Psa. evi. 16).

2. He was an eloquent man. “ Aaron
the Levite—I know that he can speak
well” (Exod. iv. 14). This great gift
he had used in the highest service. It
had been employed in obtaining the
deliverance of the Israelites from Egyp-
tian bondage; in speaking unto them
words of reproof, counsel, instruction,
and exhortation ; and in speaking unto
God on their behalf.

00


3. He filled a position of the highest
honour and of the greatest importance.

Under God he was the religious head
of this nation. To him was granted to
approach nearer to the Most High than
any man of that age, except Moses.
More than once his intercessions had
averted the Divine anger from the
guilty people. But at the summons of
God he has left them for ever. “ Aaron
was dead.” (a)

II, A great and good man had been
removed while toiling for their wel-
fare.

Aaron was not a useless member of


‘this great congregation; he had not


become unfit for service ; he was fulfil-
ling the important functions of his
sacred office. Yet God called him away,
and his “ purposes were broken off.”
And still men are called away by God
in the midst of service and usefulness,
The statesman, the minister, the author,
the physician, the parent, are sometimes
thus summoned hence. To us there is
much mystery in this. We cannot ex-
plain it; but we can reverently bow
before it. ‘ Even so, Father ; for so it
seemeth good in Thy sight.” (6)

III. A great and good man had been
removed when apparently his services
could hardly be spared.

To our poor mind it seems that Israel
could not afford to lose Aaron. We
think that they needed his experience
to counsel them, his faith to plead with
God for them, his brave spirit to en-
courage them and to assist in leading
them to the Promised Land. But God
is independent of even the most distin-
guished and useful men. When such
men are removed, here is our encourage-
ment—God ever lives and re Christ

5


CHAP. XX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. NUMBERS.


eee ——eennnsnee


ever lives and works ; and “ He shall
not fail nor be discouraged, till he have
set judgment in the earth.” (c)

IV. A great and good man had been
removed, and in his removal many had
parted with a true and loving friend.

In that sorrowing nation, I have no
doubt, there were not a few who had
found in Aaron a kindred spirit, and
rejoiced in the friendship of his affec-
tionate heart. Aud more than this,
Moses was his brother, and Eleazar and
Ithamar were his sons. But the brother,
the sons, the friends of Aaron, must all
take their leave of him for ever in this
world. The death of a true friend is
one of the sorest sorrows that our hearts
are called upon to suffer; and wrings
from us the bitterest tears.

Conclusion.

1, Prize the friends and the great and


good men whom God sends amongst us
while they are yet with us. Israel did
not feel the worth of Aaron until he was
taken from them. Let us avoid their
error, &c.

2. Be thankful for Christianity. I+
takes the sting and the bitterness from
death. It reveals a blessed immortality,
and bestows the title to it. (d)

3. Remember that we too must pass away
from this world. “It is appointed unto
men once to die.” “Here have we no
continuing city.”

4. Live as“ strangers and pilgrims on
the earth.” Our home is not here; our
rest is not here. ‘“ Our citizenship is in
heaven.” ‘Lay not up for yourselves
treasures upon earth,” &c. (Matt. vi.
19-21). “Set your affections on things
above, not on things on the earth.” So
death will be great gain,


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(@) The world can have no greater or richer
boon conferred on it than the gift of a great
man, The history of the world is but the
history of its great men. God carries on
society by such, They are the hinges on which
lt has turned, They measure whole ages for
themselves. They are the mountain summits
in the great path of human progress—the most
towering landmarks of the past, and the hopes
of the future, Such, too, are the princes in
Isracl—great men who are not the property
xf a denomination but of the Church, with a
sreadth and richness of intellect, with a noble-
aess of character, and a devotion to great
principles that cannot be confined to the range
of one sect, whose movements stir the whole
Church of God, and whose departure leaves
a mighty gap. We admire and honour such
men wherever we find them, We thank God
for every great, noble-hearted, and honest
servant of Ohrist. In proportion as the ser-
vico rendered by such persons is real and
valuable, do we learn to think highly of them,
to depend on them, and to feel as if we knew
not how their loss is to be supplied.—John
Riddell,

(6) If we believe in God, in a God of order
and wisdom, and especially if we believe in
Jesus, the infinite support of our life, we dare
not doubt for one moment, that when a
great or good man dies, his whole ap-
pointed work on earth was done, that
Providence had no more for him to
do, that all he had to do for the world, or for
bis family, was completed avd summed up.
Now a worthy and beloved parent does not
cease his influence when he dies ; he rules


386


his children still, in many cases with mightier
power than by his living voice. Well may we
feel that he bas left such memories and im-
pressious of his views and principles written
on their hearts, and now hallowed to perpetual
remembrance by the sanctifying power of
death, that he, though dead, shall guide them
by their very relation to him, Their very
love to him indeed must make them mourn ;
but still, no loss is irreparable 3 no human loss
is absolute, —Jbid,

(c) Let all this carry up our love, and
trust, and loyalty, to Jesus alone, It is the
visible mark of inferiority of all others, that
they die. However great, they are limited in
their greatness, They have had but a certain
work to do, a limited power to pat forth,
They could not serve the continuous wants
of the world—they do their little work or
their great work, and then they are removed,
Their longer continuance might turn out a
hindrance, It is the unapproachable distinc-
tion of Jesus, that He remains for ever the
Prince of Peace, the grand Head of the nation,
to whom all earthly princes are subject.
He is “the same yesterday, to-day,
and for ever,” Over him death hath
no power; the taint of corruption cannot
infect Him. No voice shall bewail His failure,
no nation weop His funeral, no ery of a pierced
world tell that its hope and star is gone. He
liveth and reigneth for ever. He is our re-
fuge still in times of trouble. Friends die and
great mon disappear from the stage ; but the
Saviour remains with sympathy to dry up all
our tears, with power to sustain under the loss
of earthly supports, As the hearts we cling


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP, XX,





to become still, then He opens all His heart to
us, end in contact with it our own heart grows
still and calm, and learns that, in taking from
us the earthly prop, He was but drawing us
searer Himself.—Lbid.

(d) Life and immortality have been brought
clearly to light in the Gospel—in Him who
hath Himself risen “the firstfruits of them
that sleep.” And hence the Obristian alone
looks with cheerful hopefulness in death,
Others may face it with steadfastness or calm
—he alone lies down to sleep in hope. Not only
without fear, but in joy he enters the dark
valley, and friends lay him in the narrow prison-
house, ‘‘ dust to dust, in the hope of a joyful
resurrection.” “ For this corruptible must put
on incorruption,” &. (1 Cor. xv. 53-57).

It is this fact of Resurrection which leads
the apostle to say that we who remain alive
should not sorrow for our dead ones,
“even as others which have no hope” (1
Thess. iv. 18). Why, indeed, should we
thus sorrow, who believe that as “Jesus
died and rose again, even so them also who
sleep in Jesus will God bring with Him?” They
who had no such faith, might well weep as
they buried their Dead out of sight, and knew
not whether they should evermore see the Jight
of life. But why should we hopelessly weep
for those who are resting with the Lord—who
have gone before to be for ever with llim?
Why, indeed, but for the faintness of our hearts
and the weakness of our flesh? Let us sorrow


rather for ourselves, that our sight is so dim
and our faith so dull—that we are so litile
able to look beyond things which are “seen
and temporal”? to those which are “ unseen and
eternal.”” The Living, rather than the Dead,
may have a claim upon our sorrowful regard.
For the Dead have gone beyond our anxiety,
They have entered into their rest. They are
asleep in Jesus; while the Living, who are
around us, and with us, may be wandering far
from Him, may be wounding Him by their
sins, may be “crucifying Him afresh and
putting Him to an open shame.” It is as if
we were to weep for the child resting in its
father’s bosom, sheltered in a happy home,
rather than for the child who has gone astray
in darkness, and cannot find its homeward
way. It is as if we were to sorrow for the
mariner who has found a safe harbour, and
rests in peace, rather than for the storm-
tossed sailor in the open main, around whom
the billows may be heaving high, and over
whom the sky may be darkening to his doom.
No, brethren, let us not sorrow for those who
are with God, safe in a Father’s house, shel-
tered in the haven of eternal rest, But let
us be anxious and careful for the living, that
we may help them, and guide them by God’s
blessing in a right way; and for ourselves,
that we may “ know the things which belong
unto our peace, before they are hid from our
eyes.” —Principal Tulloch, D.D.


CHAPTER XXL


CriticaL anpD Expianatory Norrs,


Verse 1. King Arad the Canaanite.
Rather, “the Canaanite King of arad.”
Arad was a royal city of the Canaan-
ites (Josh. xii. 14), and was situated on
a hill called Zell Arad, twenty Roman
miles south of Hebron. Of the city
nothing remains save some ruins.

Which dwelt in the south. Heb. “in
the Negeb.” See on chap. xiii. 17.

By the way of the spies. DDN
Ws an expression of uncertain mean-


ing. Fuerst says that Atharim is the
plural of Athar, a place, district ; and
is the “ proper name of a place in the
south of Palestine.” So also the LXX.,
A. Clarke, Horsley, Patrick. ‘‘ But
the Cha/dee, Samar, and Syr. render it
with much greater probability as an
appellative noun formed from WA
with 8 prosthet., and synonymous with
g02


OI. the spies (chap. xiv. 6). The
way of the spies was the way through
the desert of Zin, which the Israelitish
spies had previously taken to Canaan
(chap. xiii. 21). The territory of the
King of Arad extended to the southern
frontier of Canaan, to the desert of
Zin, through which the Israelites went
from Kadesh to Mount Hor.”—Kesl and
Del.

Verse 3. Hormah. Margin: “utter
destruction” (see on chap. xiv. 45).
“The seeming inconsistency between
Num. xxi. 3, and Judg. i 17, may be
relieved by supposing that the vow
made at the former period was fulfilled
at the latter, and the name (the root
of which DUI constantly occurs in the


sense of, to devote to destruction, or
utterly to destroy) given by Mia


CHAP, XXI.


HOMILETIC: COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


en ec al


tion."—Dr. H. Hayman, in Bible Dict.
The Canaanites seem to have resumed
possession after the departure of the
Israelites, and to have restored the
ancient name. It was not until the
time of the Judges that the vow, which
Moses and the Israelites made at this
time, was completely executed.

Verse 4. And they journeyed from
Mount Hor, dc. The Edomites having
refused them a passage through their
land, they were compelled to turn their
steps towards the Red Sea, and go
round the land of Edom. Their way
was down the Arabah until they drew
near to Akabah (Ezion-Geber, Deut.
ii. 8), then “ they turned up one of the
Wadys on the left, and so made their
way by the back of the mountain of
Seir to the land of Moab on the east
of the Dead Sea.”

The soul of the people was much
discouraged because of the way. Tra-
velling in the Arabah was likely to
produce discouragement. Mr. Grove
thus writes of it: “The surface is
dreary and desolate in the extreme.
‘A more frightful desert,’ says Dr.
Robinson, ‘it had hardly been our
lot to behold . . . . loose gravel
and stones everywhere furrowed with
the beds of torrents... . blocks of
porphyry brought down by the torrents
among which the camels picked their
way with great difficulty.... a
lone shrub of the ghfidah the almost
only trace of vegetation,’ This was
at the ascent from the Wady el-Jeib
to the floor of the great valley itself.
Further south, near Ain el-Weibeh, it
is a rolling gravelly desert. with round
naked hills of considerable elevation.
At Wady Ghurundel it is ‘an expanse
of shifting sands, broken by innumera-
ble undulations and low hills,’ and
‘countersected by a hundred water-
courses’. ... Nor is the heat less
terrible than the desolation, and all
travellers, almost without exception,
bear testimony to the difficulties of
journeying in a region where the
sirocco appears to blow almost without
intermission.” —Bibl, Dict.

Verse 5. This light bread; ¢.¢., the

388


manna. According to Fuerst, the ad-
jective in the Heb. when applied to
food, conveys the idea of contemptible,
starving.

Verse 6. Fiery serpents. Heb., lit.,
burning snakes. The adjective does not
point to the bright colour of the snakes,
but to the inflammatory effect of their
bite. Venomous reptiles of various kinds
abound in the neighbourhood (comp.
Deut. viii. 15). The burning snake
must not be identified with the “ fiery
flying serpent” of Isa. xiv. 29; xxx. 6.

Verse 8. Make thee a fiery serpent;
#.¢., @ serpent of a similar appearance
to those which had bitten the people.
This similarity of aspect was an es-
sential element of the symbolism.

Upon a pole. Heb., a standard or
ensign.

Verse 10. Oboth. In chap. xxxii,
41-43, two other stations are mentioned
in this part of their journey before
Oboth. From Hor they went to Zalmo-
nah, from Zalmonah to Punon, and
from Punon to Oboth. The exact site
of those places is not very certain.
Zalmonah was probably in the Wady
Ithm, “a low gap in the hills, which
turns the eastern range of the Arabah,
and through which the Israelites must
have passed on their way to Moab. It
is still one of the regular roads to
Petra, and in ancient times seems to
have been the main approach from
Elath or Akaba, as it is the only road
from the south which enters Petra
through the Sik.”—Stanley. Sin. and
Pal. Entering the WAady Ithm, “the
route of the Israelites took a sharp
turn, and ran thenceforward in a north-
easterly direction.” Punon or Phinon,
according to Eusebius and Jerome,
“was situated between Petra and Zoar.”
This locality suits the requirements of
the history. “Oboth was north of
Punon, east of the northern part of
Edom, and is pretty certainly the same
as the present pilgrim halting-place
el-Ahsa.”—Speaker’s Comm. But really
the exact site cannot be determined.

Verse 11. Jje-abarim, in the wilder-
ness which is before Moab, &o. Margin:
“Heaps of Abarim.” The name is


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


NUMBERS.  OHAP. XXL





generally interpreted as signifying,
“the heaps, or ruins, of the further
regions.” Keil and Del.: “ruins of
the crossings over.” “ Ije-abarim,” says
_ Mr. Grove, “ was on the S.E. boundary
of the territory of Moab; not on the
pasture-downs of the Mishor, the
modern Belka, but in the midbar, the
waste uncultivated ‘ wilderness’ on its
skirts. No identification of its situa-
tion has been attempted, nor has the
name been found lingering in the
locality, which, however, has yet to be
explored. If there is any connexion
between the Ije-Abarim and the Har-
Abarim, the mountain-range opposite
Jericho, then Abarim is doubtless a
general appellation for the whole of the
highland east of the Dead Sea.”— vl.
Dict.

Verse 12. Valley of Zared. More
correctly : “the brook of Zered.” Dr.
Hayman says, this is “a brook or val-
ley running into the Dead Sea near its
S.E. corner, which Dr. Robinson with
some probability suggests as identical
with the Wady el Ahsy. It lay between
Moab and Edom, and is the limit of
the proper term of the Israelites’ wan-
dering (Deut. ii, 14)."—Bibl. Dict.
Keil and Del., however, suggest that
“the Wady el Ahsy must already have
been crossed when they came to the
border of Moab (verse 11). In all pro
bability it was the Wady Kerek, in the
upper part of its course, not far from
Katrane, on the pilgrim road.”

Verse 13. The other side of Arnon,
&o. Arnon, the present Wady el Mojeb,
is a torrent which rises in the moun-
tains of Arabia, flows through the wil-
derness, and falls into the Dead Sea.
It “formed the boundary between
Moab and the Amorites, on the north
of Moab, and afterwards between Moab
and Israel (Reuben). From Judges xi.
18, it would seem to have been also
the east border of Moab.”—Bibl. Dict.
The Israelites could not have crossed
the Mojeb itself—so dreadfully wild
and so deep a valley.” The encamp-
ment of Israel must have been in the
upper part of the Arnon and on its
south side ; apparently opposite to Kede-


we


moth (Deut. ii. 24, 26) ; and here they
effected their passage across.

Verse 14. The book of the wars of
Jehovah. “This was probably,” says
Dean Perowne, “a collection of ballads
and sonys composed on different occa-
sions by the watch-fires of the camp,
and for the most part, though not
perhaps exclusively, in commemoration
of the victories of the Israelites over
their enemies. The title shows us that
these were written by men imbued with
a deep sense of religion, and who were
therefore foremost to acknowledge that
not their own prowess, but Jehovah’s
Right Hand, had given them the vic-
tory when they went forth to battle.
Hence it was called, not ‘The Book of
the Wars of Israel,’ but ‘The Book of the
Wars of Jehovah.’ Possibly this is the
book referred to in Exod. xvii. 14, es-
pecially as we read (ver. 16), that when
Moses built the altar which he called
Jehovah-Nissi (Jehovah is my banner),
he exclaimed ‘ Jehovah will have war
with Amalek from generation to genera-
tion.’ This expression may have given
the name to the book.

“The fragment quoted from this
collection is difficult, because the allu-
sions in it are obscure ... .
‘Wherefore it is said in the Book of
the Wars of Jehovah,


*¢Vaheb in Suphah and the torrent-beds ;
Arnon and the slope of the torrent-beds
Which turneth to where Ar lieth,

And which leaneth upon the border of
Moab.’ "—Bubl, Dict,


Verse 15. The dwelling of Ar, &e.
“ Ar was on the bank of the Arnon,
lower down the stream than where the
Israelites crossed. And near the spot
where the upper Arnon (Seil Saideh)
receives the tributary Nahaliel (ver.
19), there rises, in the midst of the
meadow-land between the two torrents,
a hill covered with what are doubtless
the ruins of the ancient city. A neigh-
bouring aqueduct testifies to its former
importance. The peculiarity of the
site points to it as ‘the city that ts in
the midst of the river’ (Josh. xiii. 9,
16; cf. Deut. ii. 36). It a been,


OHAP, XXI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





perhaps, heretofore the chief city of the
Moabites ; it now marked the limit of
their territory; and it was hither
accordingly that the king of Moab went
to welcome Balaam (xxii. 36). It was
respected by the Israelites (Deut. ii.
9, 29), as being still a frontier city of
Moab, although it lay on the northern
bank of what was elsewhere the
boundary stream; but it had not
escaped the ravages of the Amorites in
the recent war (ver. 28).”—Speaker’s
Comm.

This Ar is not to be identified with
Rabbath-Moab, which is still called
Rabbah, in the midst of the land of
Moab, about midway between Kerek
and Wady Mojeb.

Verse 16. Beer; ¢.c., a well; and
is probably the same as Beer-elim, the
‘well of heroes” (Isa xv. 8).

Verses 17, 18, Then Israel sang thes
song, Spring up, O well, &c. Perowne
translates :


“Spring up, O well! sing ye to it :
Well, which the princes dug,
Which the nobles of the people bored
With the eceptre-of-office, with their staves.”


Mattanah, the name of the next
halting-place, signifies a gift. The site
has not been identified with certainty.

Verse 19. Nahaliel ; s.¢., “torrent of
God.” Probably corresponded with the
Wady Encheileh, ‘‘ which runs into the
Mojeb, the ancient Arnon, a short dis-
tance to the east of the place at which
the road between Rabbah and Aroer
crosses the ravine of the latter river.”
The name Lncheileh is the same as
Nahaliel with a slight alteration in its
form.

Bamoth is a shorter form of Bamoth-
Baal, ¢.¢., the high placea of Baal (chap.
xxii. 41; Josh. xiii. 17). In the next
verse it is spoken of as “ Bamoth in the
ravine.” According to Josh. xiii. 17 it
was near to Dibon-Gad and Beth-Baal-
Meon.

Verse 20. The country of Moab.
The margin is more correct, “ the
field of Moab.” The expression in this
place denotes a portion of the table-
land having Rabbath-Ammon on the

890


north, and the Arnon on the south. It
corresponds with “all the plain from
Medeba to Dibon.... and all the
plain by Medeba” (Josh. xiii. 9, 16).

The top of Pisgah. Margin: Or “the
hill.” Heb.: “The top, or head, of
the Pisgah.” ‘“ ‘The Pisgah,’” says
Mr. Grove, “ must have been a moun-
tain range or district, the same as, or
a part of, that called the mountains of
Abarim (comp. Deut. xxxii. 49, with
xxxiv. 1). It lay on the east of Jordan,
contiguous to the field of Moab, and
immediately opposite Jericho. The
field of Zophim was situated on it, and
its highest point or summit—its ‘ head’
—was the Mount Nebo. If it was a
proper name we can only conjecture
that it denoted the whole or part of the
range of the highlands on the east of
the lower Jordan.”— Bibl Dict.

Which looketh toward Jeshimon. Mar-
gin: ‘Towards the wilderness.” Keil
and Del. : “‘ looks across the face of ths
desert.’ Jeshimon, the desert, is the
plain of Ghor-el-Belka, 1.¢., the valley
of desolation on the north-eastern
border of the Dead Sea.”

Verse 21. Amorites, t.e., mountain-
eers. One of the chief nations of the
Canaanites (Gen. x. 15, 16).

Verse 22. Comp. chap. xx. 17.

Verse 23. Jahaz. “ From the terms
of the narrative in Num. xxi and
Deut. ii.,” says Mr. Grove, “ we should
expect that Jahaz was in the extreme
south part of the territory of Sihon,
but yet north of the river Arnon (see
Deut. ii. 24, 36; and the words in 31,
‘begin to possess’), and in exactly this
position a site named Jazaza is men-
tioned by Schwarz (227), though by
him only. But this does not agree
with the statements of Eusebius, who
says it was existing in his day between
Medeba and Anos, by which he
probably intends Dibon, which would
place Jahaz considerably too far to the
north. Like many others relating to
the places east of the Dead Sea, this
question must await further research.”
— Bibl. Dict.

Verse 24. Unto Jabbok, now called
Wady Zerka, a stream which intersects


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP, XXkI.





the mountain range of Gilead, as it
was afterwards called (comp. Josh.
xii. 2, 5), and falls into the Jordan
about 45 miles north of the Arnon.

For the border of the children of Am-
mon was strong. This was the reason
why Sihon had not carried his con-
quests further and taken the territory
of the Ammonites. The reason why
the Israelites did not enter the land of
the Ammonites is given in Deut. ii. 19.

Verse 25. Heshbon. This city was
situated 20 miles due east of the Jordan
at the point where it falls into the
Dead Sea. The city is now in ruins,
which are situated on a low hill, and
are more than a mile in circumference.
Its modern name is Heshbdn.

All the villages thereof. Heb., as in
margin: “the daughters,” te, the
smaller.towns, which are enumerated
in ohap. xxxii. 34-38; and Josh. xiii.
15-28. Heshbon, as we see from the
next verse, being the capital of Sihon,
king of the Amorites.

Verse 26, All his land. “ Evidently
that to the north of the Arnon alone
is intended.” —Speaker’s Comm.

Verses 27-30. Dean Perowne speaks
of this as “a song of victory composed
after a defeat of the Moabites and the
occupation of their territory. Itisina
taunting, mocking strain ; and is com-
monly considered to have been written
by some Jsraelitish bard on the occu-
pation of the Amorite territory. Yet
the manner in which it is introduced
would rather lead to the belief that we
have here the translation of an old
Amorite ballad. . ... Then follows a
little scrap of Amorite history: ‘ For
Heshbon is the city of Sihon, king of
the Amorites, and he had waged war
with the former king of Moab, and had
taken from him all his land as far as
the Arnon. Wherefore the ballad-


singers (D’>un27t) 8ay —


“ «Come ye to Heshbon,

Let the city of Sihon be built and established !
For fire went from Heshbon,

A flame out of the stronghold 7p)

of Sihon,

Which devoured Ar of Moab,

The lords of the high places of Arnon,

Woe to thee, Moab!


Thou art undone, O people of Chemosh |
He (#.¢., Chemosh thy god) hath given up his
sous as fugitives,
And his daughters into captivity,
To Sihon, king of the Amorites,
Then we cast them down; Heshbon perished
even unto Dibon,
And we laid (it) waste unto Nophah, which
(reacheth) unto Medeba.’


If the song is of Hebrew origin, then
the former part of it is a biting taunt,
‘Come, ye Amorites, into your city of
Heshbon, and build it up again. Ye
boasted that ye had -burnt it with fire,
and driven out its Moabite inhabitants ;
but now we are come in our turn and
have burnt Heshbon, and driven you
out as ye once burnt it and drove out
its Moabite possessors.’” —Bzbl. Dict.

Another interpretation is given in
the Speaker’s Comm.: “In the first six
lines (vers. 27, 28) the poet imagines
for the Amorites a song of exultation
for their victories over Moab, and for
the consequent glories of Heshbon,
their own capital. In the next three
lines (ver. 29), he him: >If joins in this
strain; which now becomes one of half-
real, half-ironical compassion for the
Moabites, whom their idol, Chemosh,
was unable to save. But in the last
two lines (ver. 30), a startling change
takes place ; and the new and decisive
triumph of the poet’s own countrymen
is abruptly introduced ; and the boast-
ings of the Amorites fade utterly away.”

Verse 29. Chemosh, i.e., the national
deity of the Moabites (Jer. xlviii. 7,
13, 46), and of the Ammonites (Judg.
xi. 24),

Verse 30. Diubon, afterwards called
Dibon-Gad, “lay four miles north of
the Arnon; and its extensive ruins
still bear the name Dhibin. It was
here that the Moabite stone was dis-
covered by the Rev. T. Klein in 1868.”
—Speaker’s Comm.

Nophah “is unknown, unless it be
Arneibah, 10 miles to the eastward of
Medeba.”—Tbid.

Medeba is now called Madeba, and is
situated upon the top of a hiil, about
4 miles S.E. of Heshbon.

Verse 32. Jaazer or Jazer is pro-
bably to be identified with Se of


CHAP, XXI,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





es Szir, about 9 miles west of Rabbath-
Ammon, and about 12 miles north of
Heshbon.

Verse 33. Bashan. “ The limits of
Bashan are very strictly defined. It
extended from the border of Gilead on
the south to Mount Hermon on the
north (Deut. iii, 3, 10, 14; Josh. xii.
5; 1. Chron. v. 23), and from the
Arabah or Jordan valley on the west to
Salchah (Sulthad) and the borders of
the Geshurites, and the Maacathites on
the east (Josh. xii..3-5 ; Deut. iii. 10).”
—fibl. Dect.

Edret. “Now Edhra’éh, vulgarly
Der’a ; situate on a branch of the Jar-


muk. This river is not mentioned in
Scripture, but formed the boundary
between Gilead and Bashan. The
identification of Edrei rests on the
frontier position of the site, on the
modern name, and on the testimony of
Eusebius; but it is only recently
that the explorations of Wetzstein
(‘ Reisebericht,’ pp. 47, 8) have dis-
closed the facts that the original city
was subterranean, and that its streets
may still be seen running in all direc-
tions beneath the present inhabited
town, which is built on the ground
above.”’—Speaker’s Comm.


Tse Benerit or Reverses.


(Verses 1-3.)


These verses snegest :—

I. That reverses are sometimes
encountered in the path of duty.

“And when the Canaanite king of
Arad, which dwelt in the south, heard
tell that Israel came by the way of the
spies; then he fought against Israel
and took some of them prisoners.” An
illustration of the opposition and the
reverses with which we often meet in
the way of duty. With our present
characters and in our present circum-
stances duty is not always easy. In an
evil world to tread the path of truth
and right must always involve more or
less of difficulty and trial. In follow-
ing the Divine direction we are sure to
meet with some “Canaanite king of
Arad” and hisallies, This is true of—

1. The individual Christian life.
We have Canaanites in ourselves, in our
carnal appetites and passions, &c.
These resist the progress of the soul in
holiness. Worthy spiritual attain-
ments or achievements are never made
without earnest effort and severe
struggle,

2. Christian enterprise. Workers
in the cause of Jesus Christ amongst
men have to contend against opposi-
tion, and sometimes, like Israel at this
time, sustain temporary repulse and

392


loss. This is true of Sunday-school
teachers, tract distributors, muimisters
of the Gospel, and Christian mission-
aries to the heathen both at home and
abroad.

II, Reverses encountered in the
path of duty arouse the true-hearted
to more vigorous effort.

“ And Israel vowed a vow unto the
Lord, and said, If Thou wilt indeed
deliver this people into my hand, then
I will utterly destroy their cities,”
Repulse and loss stirred them up to
take resolute measures to obtain a com-
plete victory. That which utterly
appals the cowardly, acts as a challenge
to the courageous. Where the one
cowers in dismay, the other rises into
the exertion of conquering strength.
To the true-hearted, reverses are a
trumpet-call to renewed and more de-
termined effort. In this instance the
reverse led Israel to put forth :—

1. Larnest prayer for success. “ And
Israel vowed a vow unto the Lord,” &e.
It has been well said that “this spirit
would have been intolerable in the
people of ‘the ‘Lord, the Lord God,
merciful and gracious,’ had it not been
that Divine justice had resolved to ex-
tirpate the awfully filthy and idola-
trous nations of Canaan, to give their


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP, XXI,


eases


land to the Israelites among whom
His worship was preserved, and to
make them the executioners of righteous
wrath.” The idea of this vow, by
which they urged their prayer for vic-
tory, seems to be this, that if God
would grant their request they would
take to themselves no gain or glory
from the conquest, but give all the
honour to Him. True prayer is an
excellent preparation for work or for
warfare,

2. Vigorous effort to succeed. That
Israel made such an effort is very
clearly implied in the brief record.

To these two things united —wise and
determined effort, and earnest believing
prayer, all things are possible. ‘Is
there one whom difficulties dishearten—
who bends to the storm? He will do
little. is there one who will conquer 4
That kind of man never fails.” And
this especially when his will is “strong
in the Lord.” (a)

Iii. When reverses in the path of
duty thus arouse the true-hearted to
effort they contribute to their com-
plete triumph.


It was so in this case, “ And the


Lord hearkened to the voice of Israel,
and delivered up the Canaanites,” &c.

1. Harnest prayer was answered by
God. He inspired them with deter-
mination and courage, and so granted
their request. True prayer is always
beard and answered by Him.

2. Wise and resolute effort achieved
success. ‘They utterly destroyed them
and their cities.” Thus a slight re-
verse stirred them up to such efforts as
resulted in a complete triumph. (6)
Apply this to Christian life and work, (c)

Conclusion.

1. Warning to those who oppose any
true and good cause. ‘Refrain from
these men, and let them alone ; for if
this counsel or this work be of men, it
will come to nought: but if it be of
God, ye cannot overthrow it ; lest haply
ye be found even to fight against God.”

2. Encouragement to those who are
tosling in good but difficult enterprises.
Be not disheartened by difficulties. Let
reverses rouse you to more powerful
and persistent efforts, and they will
thus urge you onward to the achieve-
ment of more complete and splendid
conquests. (d)


' ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) It 18 not ease, but effort—not facility,
but difficulty—that makes men. ‘There is, per-
- haps, no station in life in which difficulties have
not to be encountered and overcome before any
decided measure of success can be achieved,
Those difficulties are, however, our best in-
structors, as our mistakes often form our best
experience. We learn wisdom from failure
more than from success we often discover
what will do by finding out what will not do;
and he who never made a mistuke never made
a discovery. Horue Tooke used to say of his
studies in intellectual philosophy, that he had
become all the better acquainted with the
country, through having had the goo! luck
sometimes to louse his way, Anda distinguished
investigator of physical science has left it on
record that whenever in the course of his
researches he encountered an apparently in-
sup rable obstacle, he generally found himself
on the brink of some novel discovery. The
very greatest things—great thoughts, dis-
‘coveries, inventions—have generally been
nurtured in hardship, often pondered over
in sorrow, and at es established with
difficulty —Samuel Smiles, ;

(6) It bas been said. and truly, that it is the


defeat that tries the general more than tha
victory. Washington lost far more battles
thau he gained ; but he succeeded in the end.
The Romans, in their most victorious cam-
paigns. almost invariably began with defeats.
Moreau used to be compared, by his companions,
to a drum, which nobody hears vf except it ve
beaten, Wellington’s military genius was
perfected by encounter with difficulties of,
apparently, the most overwhelming character,
but which only served to nerve his resolution,
and bring out more prominently his great
qualities as a man and a general. So the
skilful mariner obtuins his best experience
amidst storms and tempests, which train him
to self-reliance, courave, and the bighest dis-
cipline ; and we probabiy owe to rough seas
and wintry nights, the best training of our
race of British seamen, who are certainly not
surpassed by any in the world.

The battle of life, in by far the greater
number of cases, must necessarily be fought
up-hill; and to win it without a struggle
were perhaps to win it wituout honour.
there were no difficulties there would be no
guccess ; if there were nothing to struggle for,
there would be nothing to pe ee


CHAP. XXI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; NUMBERS,


a


Difficulties may intimidate the weak, but they
act only as a wholesome stimulus to men of
pluck and resolution. All experience of life,
indeed, serves to prove that the impediments
thrown in the way of human advancement
may, for the most part, be overcome by steady
good conduct, honest zeal, activity, perseve-
tance, and, above all, by a determined resolution
to surmount difficulties, and stand up manfully
against misfortune. When Columbus was
threatened by the mutineers amongst his crew,
he himself, hopeful and unsubdued, bore up
against all opposition. “Give me but three
days,” he said; and before the three days had
ser he trod the shores of the New World.
—Ibi

(e) Need any one be discouraged who has
begun to live a Christian life because so often
he has failed and fallen into hacksliding ?
Is a true pupil discouraged because so many of
his lessons are imperfect, because he has forced
holidays which have broken up the impetus of
study, if still the purpose to be a student
remains with him? Whatever may have been
the arguments of the past, let them be for-
gotten, Try again, There are thousands of
Christians who too soon grow discouraged,


saying, “I have proved that I was mistaken.
I have proved that the root of the matter was
notin me, There is no use; I have tried and
failed.” There is all the use in the world.
No man ever fails until death setiles the great
conflict, Because you have begun and lagged.
because you have begun and stumbled, because
you have begun and gone back a little way, do
not give up the whole contest.—H. W. Beecher.

(d) There is nothing but what you can make
a way through if you can find something harder
to bore with. Look at the Mont Cenis tunnel,
made through one of the hardest of known
rocks: with a sharp tool, edged with a diamond,
they have pierced the heart of the Alps, and
made a passage for the commerce of nations.
As St. Bernard says: “Is thy work hard ?
set a harder resolution against it, for there is
nothing so hard that it cannot be cut by some-
thing harder still.” May the Spirit of God
work in thee invincible resolution and uncon-
querable perseverance. Let not the iron break
the northern iron and the steel. Under per-
secutions and difficulties, let God's people
resolve on victory, and by faith they shall
have it, for according to our faith so shall it
be unto us.—C. H. Spurgeon,


A Deapiy Puacusz anp a Diving ANTIDOTE


(Verses 4-9.)


Let us notice—

I. The sin of the people.

They fall once more into the sin of
which they had so often been guilty in
former times — that of murmuring.
“The people spake against God and
against Moses,” &c, But let us con-
sider—

1. The occasion of their sin. (1) The
circuitous route by which they journeyed.
“They journeyed from Mount Hor by
the way of the Red Sea, to compass
the land of Edom.” Their direct way
would have been through the land of
Edom ; but the King of Edom opposed
this ; 80 they were compelled to travel
by this circuitous route, compassing the
land of Edom (see notes on chap.
xx. 14-21). (2) The trying country
over which they journeyed. “The low-
lying plain of Arabah on the whole is a
terrible desert, with a loose, sandy soil,
and drifts of granite and other stones,
where terrible sand-storms sometimes
arise from the neighbourhood of the
Red Sea.” ‘ And the soul of the people
was my discouraged because of the

4


way” (see Explanatory Notes on ver.
4). (3) The privations which they en-
countered on their journey. The Ara-
bah was not likely to furnish them with
much food; so they were almost or
altogether dependent upon the manna
with which they were supplied by God.
And it is very probable that there
would be a great scarcity of drinkable
water. Hence “the people spake
against God, and against Moses, Where-
fore have ye brought us up out of
Egypt to die in the wilderness ?” do.

2. The nature of their sin. (1) Mur-
muring. They “spake against God
and against Moses.” (a) (2) Unbelief.
How sinful was the want of faith
which they manifested in speaking of
dying in the wilderness, after all they
had experienced of the protection and
provision of God! (&) (3) Ingrati-
tude. The goodness of God in supply-
ing their wants is altogether disregarded
by them. They speak as though they
were utterly destitute: “ There is no
bread, neither is there any water.” (c)
(4) Contempt of Divine blessings.


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XXI1.


Se secs?


“And our soul loatheth this light
bread,”—“a word of excessive scorn ;
as if they had said, ‘ This innutritive,
unsubstantial, cheat-stumach stuff.’ ”—
4. Clark, Thus their rebellion was one
of great heinousness, involving several
sins,

If. The punishment of their sin.

“The Lord sent fiery serpents among
the people, and they bit the people;
and much people of Israel died.” The
punishment was,

1. Severe. The bite of the serpent
poisoned the body of its victim, causing
intense and burning pain, and resulting
in death. “Much people of Israel
died.”

2. Just. Their heinous sin called for
a severe punishment. “They had un-
justly complained for want of water
(ver. 5), to chastise them for which
God sends upon them this thirst, which
no water would quench. Those that
cry without cause have justly cause
given them to cryout. They distrust-
fully concluded that they must ‘ die in
the wilderness,’ and God took them at
their word, chose their delusions, and
brought their unbelieving fears upon
them; many of them did die.”—/.
Henry.

3. Divine. Their punishment was
from God. “The Lord sent fiery ser-
pents among the people.” In the
Arabah, venomous reptiles abound
(comp. Deut. viii. 15). “Yet we
never hear of their being bitten or
killed by them till now. From this
we infer that they had been marvel-
lously protected hitherto from this as
from other dangers of the way; but
the protection which they had ex-
perienced being now withdrawn, the
serpents—in this part of the desert
unusually numerous—had their poison-
ous Jaws unbound, and smote them at
their will.” — Kitto. (d)

III. The penitence of the people.

Let us mark how their penitence was
awakened, ani develped, and led to

their relief.
1, Theor puntshment led to their pent-
tence. ‘Therefore the people came to
Moses, and said we have sinned, for we


have spoken against the Lord, and
against thee.” ‘ When he slew them,
then they sought Him; and they re-
turned and inquired early after God.”
The penitence which is begotten of
punishment seldom leads to moral im-
provement. (e)

2. Ther penitence led them to appeal
to Moses for help. They said unto him,
“Pray unto the Lord for us, that he
take away the serpents from us.” This
request implies,—(1) Consciousness of
their moral unfitness to approach God
acceptably. (2) Faith in the efficacy of
intercessory prayer. (3) The persua-
sion that intercessory prayer to be effi-
cacious must be offered by the good.
Thus their request to Moses to “‘ pray
unto the Lord for” them was an unde-
signed and convincing testimony to the
excelience of his character and conduct.

3. In answer to their appeal Moses
entreated God on their behalf. “And
Moses prayed for the people” He
manifested in this the true magna-
nimity of a godly soul. He blesses them
who reviled him, and prays for them


who despitefully used him (comp,
Matt. v. 44). (9)

IV. The Divine antidote for the
deadly plague.


“And the Lord said unto Moses,
make thee a fiery serpent, and set it
upon a pole;” &ec. (vers. 8,9). That
this had a typical significance is placed
beyond dispute by the words of our
Lord to Nicodemus in John iii. 14, 15.
This application of the incident we
shall endeavour to make hereafter. At
present we confine our attention to four
facts concerning Heaven’s antidote for
the deadly bite of the serpents.

1. Jt was prescribed by God. Man
could not stay the dread ravages of
these serpents, Their bite was poison-
ous and deadly. And in answer to the
prayer of His servant, Jehovah inter-
posed for the salvation of the people.
He directed Moses what to do to arrest
the onward march of death. “ Jehovah
said unto Moses, make thee a fiery ser-
pent,” &. Human salvation from sin
is of Divine origin ; it is an outcome of
infinite wisdom and love. AR


CHAP. XXI,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


en  ———————————————————


2. It resembled the poisonous serpents.
“Make thee a fiery serpent,” &c. The
brazen serpent was made to resemble
the fiery serpents which had bitten
them, but it was without venom and
thoroughly harmless. The disease and
death came by the serpents, and the
healing and life were to come by
this serpent. So “God sent his own
Son in the likeness of the flesh
of sin, and for sin” (Rom. viii. 3).
“Since by man came death, by Man
came also the resurrection from the
dead” (comp. 2 Cor. v. 21; Heb.
vii. 26; 1 Pet. ii. 22-24),

3. Its efficacy was conditional. “It
shall come to pass, that everyone that
is bitten, when he looketh upon it, shall
live.” It was not the mere look that
saved. The look involved—(1) Faith
In the Divine promise that every one


who looked upon the brazen serpent
should live. If they questioned and
criticised the fitness of the remedy they
perished ; if they believed the promise
and looked to the serpent, they were
healed (h). (2) Obedience to the
Divine direction. How simple are
these conditions! How universally
available! He who looks in faith to
Jesus Christ shall be saved from sin.
Comp. Isa. xlv. 22 ; Johniii. 14, 15. (#)

4. Its efficacy was infallible. “It
came to pass, that if a serpent had
bitten any man,. when he beheld the
serpent of brass, he lived.” Whoever
complied with the Divine condition was
healed by the Divine power. Whoso-
ever looked lived. And whosoever
believeth in Jesus Christ shall not
perish, but have eternal life (John iii.
15, 16, 36).


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(@) For illustrations on Murmuring, see pp.
247, 267,

(6) For illustrations on Unbelie/, see p. 252.

(c) Por illustrations on Ingratitude, see pp.
247, 368.

(d) For illustrations on The Punishment of
Sin, see pp. 89, 225, 258, 812, 318, 374.

(. For an illustration on Penttence Begotten
of Punishment, see p. 269.

(7) For illustrations on The Power of
Prayer, see pp. 183, 225.

) The brave only know how to forgive—

it is the most refined and generous pitch of


. virtue that human nature can arrive at.


Cowards have done good and kind actions ;
cowards have even fought, nay, sometimes
conquered ; but a coward never forgave—it is
not his nature.— L. Sterne.

There are some persons that can forgive
others, but will never be friends with them
any more—an everlasting pique remaining ;
and they cannot but discover a great shyness,
shun them, baulk them, decline them, and
think ;and speak hardly of them on all oc-
casions. But the Divine nature in the re-
eaapie inclines a person to the renewal of

iendship ; they can easily fall in again, who
are regenerate, if there have been breaks, if
there have been strifes, if there have been
fallings out, they can presently fall in, because
they have been so taught by nature—by that
pature which is imparted to them in being born
of God.—John Howe,

For another illustration on the Forgiving
spirit, see p. 317.

(A) As a dim, dazzled eye, that looked on
the brazen oo in the wilderness, was of

39


more avail to a poor Israelite, when stung with
a fiery serpent, than any use that could possi-
bly be made of all his other members—little
could the swiftness of his feet, strength of his
body, nimbieness of hands, volubility of tongue,
qiickness of ear, or anything else have
availed, hed there not been an eye to have
looked on it—so, without faith, we lie dead in
trespasses and sins, and cannot but perish of the
mortal stings which Satan hath blistered us
withal; so that had we perfect repentance,
sound knowledge, and sincere love, not one of
them, nor all of them together, could possibly
cure us if there were not faith to apprehend
Christ for our satisfaction, and a propitia-
tion for all our sins. It is only our faith in
Christ—a true faith, though a weak, dim-
sighted faith—that looking up to the typified
serpent, Christ Jesus, can cure our wounded,
sin-sick souls, and make us here to live to God,
and hereafter in all happiness with Him.—
Paul Bayne,

Sight is the noblest sense ; it is quick—we
can look from earth to heaven in a momeut; it
is large—we can see the hemisphere of the
heavens at one view; it is sure and certain
(in hearing, we may be deceived), and, lastly, it
is the most affecting sense. Even so, faith is
the quickest, the largest, the most certain, the
most affecting grace: like an eagle in the
clouds, at one view it sees Christ in heaven,
and looks down upon the world; it looks
backwards and forwards ; it sees things past,
present, and tocome. Therefore this grace is
said (2 Cor. iv. 18) to behold things unseen
and eternal Richard Sibbs,

(#) God did not require of every Israslite,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; NUMBERS.


CHAP. XXi,





or of any of them that were stung by the fiery
serpents, that they should understand or be
able to discourse of the nature and qualities of
that brass of which the serpent upon the pole
was made, or by what art that serpent was
formed, or in what manner the sight of it did
operate in them for their cure; it was enough
that they did believe the institution and pre-
cept of God, and that their own cure was as-
sured by it: it was enough if they cast their
eyes upon it according to the direction. The
understandings of men are of several sizes and
elevations, one higher than another: if the
condition of this covenant had been a greatness
of knowledge, the most acute men had only
enjoyed the benefits of it. But it is “ faith,”
which is as easy to be performed by the
ignorant and simple, as by the strongest and


most towering mind; it is that which is
within the compass of every man’s understand-
ing. God did not require that every one
within the verge of the covenant should be
able to discourse of it to the reasons of men;
He required not that every man should be a
philosopher or an orator, but a believer. What
could be more easy than to lift up the eye to
the brazen serpent to be cured of a fiery sting ?
What could be more facile than a glance,
which is done without any pain, and in a
moment ? It is a condition may be performed
by the weakest as well as the strongest : could
those that were bitten in the most vital part
cast up their eyes, though at the last gasp,
they would arise to health by the expulsion
of the venom.— Charnocke,


On tHE DiscovracemEents oF Piovs Men.


(Verse 4.)


‘And the soul of the people was
much discouraged because of the way.”

The present life is a way; it is not
the end of our being: it is not our rest,
it is not our abode, but the place of
our pilgrimage, a passage to eternity.

I. Point out the discouragements
in the way.

‘1. The way ts circuitous. This is
suggested by the beginning of this
verse: “And they journeyed from
Mount Hor,” &c..... Thus, souls
that are brought to Jesus, in their first
ardour overlook trials, and think of
nothing but enjoyments ; they do not
anticipate the fightings and tears that
are the portion of God’s Israel. After
a time, through want of watchfulness
and care, the love of their espousals
begins to decline, the world regains a
degree of influence, the Spirit is grieved,
and they fear God has become their
enemy ; they seem to themselves to go
backward, and, indeed, are in danger of
doing so, if they neglect to watch and
pray; and much time is spent in
mourning, retracing and recovering the
ground that has been lost.

2. The way is through a wilderness.
Moses reminded Israel of this in Deut.
viii, 15, 16. A wilderness is distin-
guished by the absence of necessary
gustenance: there was no oorn, &.
Thus, this world is a state of great


privations; men are often literally
straitened with poverty, &. In a
spiritual sense, this world is also a
wilderness. It has no natural tendency
to nourish the spiritual life: though
spiritual blessings are enjoyed in it, the
Christian knows they are not the pro-
duce of the soil. Again: there is much
intricacy in the Christian’s pilgrimage.
There were no paths in the wilderness:
so the Christian often knows not how
to explore his path. Wemust “search
the Scriptures,” and ask the guidance of
the Spirit. “ If any man lack wisdom,
let him ask of God,” &c.

3. The way lies through ow hostile
country. The Israelites were obliged
to unite the courage of the military
with the assiduity of the pilgrim’s life ;
they had to fight as well as travel.
And so must we: during our pilgrimage
we must gird on “the whole armour
of God,” &c. There are three great
enemies—the flesh, the world, and the
devil: these are allied, and combine
their efforts for our destruction.

4. The false steps that are taken in
the pilgrimage are discouraging. There
are so many errors and iniquities for
which the Lord chastens His people,
though He pardons sin as to its eternal
consequences. These chasteuings of
the Lord often drink up or oppress the
spirit, and overwhelm the soul.


397


CHAP, KXI,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


ee eis eho ase ae an Seni


5. The total defection of men from the
path isa great discouragement to those
who still continue in the way. I do not
think that all that died in the wilderness
were cut off as rebels; indeed it could
vot be, for Moses and Aaron were of
the number: yet they were set forth
as types to warn us of the danger of
not entering into rest. Here was a
shadow of the greater loss of them that
“turn back to perdition” (comp. Gal.
iv. 9; 2 Pet. ii.21). Nothing weakens
the confidence of the Christian army
more than the failure of those who
appeared brave in the day of battle, and
conspicuous in the ranks,

6. The length of the way ts discowrag-
ing. The time occupied by the Israelites
from their entering to their leaving the
wilderness, was forty years. This was
a tedious journey: a type of the
journeys of the church militant. The
whole of human life, with all its toils
and cares, is comprehended in this
journey. Now, though human life is
short in itself, yet to our limited con-
ception it appears long; especially
when passed in suffering and pain.
We must hold out unto the end.

II. Direct you to some considera-
tions to remove your discouragements.

1. /t ts “a right way.” Infinite
Wisdom has ovdained it: and if you


Tas UNDESIGNED TESTIMONY OF THD


reach the end, you will be well repaid
for all your toil, and will admire the
whole of the pilgrimage; no serrow
will appear to have been too heavy ;
no path too gloomy. Our sufferings
are necessary to wean us from the
world and to deliver us from sin.

2. God is with His people in the way.
He was with Israel to guide and defend
them (comp. Matt. xxviii. 20). God is
in the world as the great upholder,
governor, and benefactor ; but He is in
the Church by His special grace, as a
vital principle, and ever-living friend,
to sustain, animate, and influence,

3. There ts no other way that leads te
heaven. You cannot reconcile the ser-
vice of sin and the world with the hope
of heavenand the enjoyment of everlast-
ing lifein that holy state, and in the
presence of the holy God. There is no
other way to heaven than the way to
which the Scriptures of truth direct

ou.
Go forward, then, Christian ; go for-
ward ; “ forgetting the things that are
behind, and reaching forth to those
that are before.”

If any of you have not yet entered
on this way, to such we would affec-
tionately say, “Come thou with us,
and we will do thee good,” &c.— Hobert
Hall, A.M.


UNGODLY TO THB PRECIOUSNESS AND


Power or Piety.


(Verse 7.)


Briefly narrate the facts and circum-
stances.

In their trouble the Israelites come
to Moses, confessing their sin, and
asking him to intercede for them
with God; and in this request of
the text we have an_ illustration
of—The striking testimony which the
ungodly often bear to the value and
tmportance of prety. It is ever true
that vice pays homage to virtue, and
that the goud ever command the respect
and the conscience of the evil. His
life sae theirs ; they feel that he


is a better and a nobler man than
they are. They may hate his religion ;
but they testify to its value in the
esteem in which their consciences hold
him. It was so here; the people had
been speaking against Moses, and yet
they come to him, and ask him to
pray for them. They witness to the
value of piety.

I. By showing that the wantof it is
weakness —

The wicked man often swaggers and
boasts; but he is an arrant coward in
trouble, A guilty “conscience doth


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


CHAP, XXL





make cowards of us all.” The people
here were in great danger, and they
were full of alarm. They felt that
they could not pray, and they were
afraid to die. They were pitiably weak.
because they were ungodly, &e.

II. By seeking help from him whor:
they knew to be ‘‘a man of God.”

They owned that Moses could help
them, though they could not help
themselves. They had spoken against
Moses, and had treated him badly ;
yet they expect him to forgive them
and’ to pray for them. Men of the
world expect God’s people to be better
than themselves. Is not this a grand
_ testimony to the value and importance
of piety ?

I{I. By confessing that Moses had
nothing to fear from God, while they
had everything to fear.

Theyask him to pray toGod for them;
they were in dread of God. By this
they own that piety is best to approach
God; and by seeking help from God
through Moses, they confess that their
past conduct was wrong. They con-
demned themselves.

IV. By acknowledging that Moses
could get from God what they could
not.

Their act testified to their belief that
Moses had power with God, and that
they had not. It is a grand thing for
man to have access to God ; for sinful,
weak man, to have power with the
Almighty! The wicked dreads God ;
the godly pleads witn Him as a child
with his fatner. God hears and an-
swers him; he has power with God.
The wicked feels this and seeks his
heip when he has been brought into
distress. There is no treasure for man
like piety. All feel this when, as in


the text, they are in trouble and in the
presence of death.

Thus by their request to Moses the
Israelites condemned their own life, and
bore striking, though unconscious, testi-
mony to the value of piety and the im-
portance of religion. This has been
the testimony of the ungodly in all
ages ;—e.g., Moses and Pharaoh; Samuel
and the people (1 Sam. xii. 19); Herod
and John the Baptist. And to-day the
ungodly bear strikiug testimony to the
value of piety:— —

l. By expecting Christians to be better
than themselves. They ought to be so;
but the point now is, that worldly men
expect them to be so. Why should
they be better, unless it be for their
piety ?

2. By seeking the help of Christians
when they are in trouble or in the presence
of death. It is religion that they think
of then. It is those whom they believe
to be God’s people that they send for
to help them. They send not for old
associates in sin; they feel that they
cannot help them. But they send for
the minister or for some other Christian
to pray with them. They thus testify
that piety is best for life, and best for
death, and best for all. “ For their rock
is not as our Rock, even our enemies
themselves being judges.”

Conclusion.

1. Let Christians live so as to command
the conscience of the Christless. Let their
life commend religion, &o.

2. Let the Christless be true to himself
by living up to his convictions, Sad for
one to live a life his conscience tells
him is wrong. “For if our heart con-
demn us, God is greater than our heart,
and knoweth all things.” David Lloyd.


A TrRRisLe CALAMITY AND AN Earnest PRayar,


(Verse 7.)


“Pray unto the Lord, that He tako
away the serpents from us.”

In the memorable conversation Christ
held with Nicodemus (John iii. 1-21),
He refers to the circumstance of the


Brazen Serpent erected by Moses as &
pointed illustration of His own death
—as illustrating the method of for-
giving sin. He also refrs to the
grace of the Spirit as ee


CHAP, XXI,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,





method of subduing sin. And the re-
collection of these important doctrines
will be of great service to us in the
contemplation of the important history
now Lefore us.

I A terrible calamity; the just
consequence of sin.

“The Lord sent fiery serpents,” &c.
They existed in that part of the wilder-
ness before, but were not permitted to
invade the camp. The restraint was
taken off now, and they were sent to
do the work of death amidst the guilty
thousands of the congregation. “ Fvery
serpents,” from their colour and aspect,
or from the intense heat of their sting, as
though thecurrent of blood were changed
into tides of fire in the sufferer’s veins,

Why sent? For Israel's sin. What
sin? Sin of murmuring; sin of un-
belief; sin of rebellion. Seven times
Israel murmured and mutinied against
Moses; and seven times were they
threatened or punished. A discontented
man will find or make something to
repine at everywhere. Sometimes the
way was too long ; then no water—or
it was bitter ; then n> bread—or it was
light bread, - Either way, ‘“‘ The people
spake against God, and against Moses.”

In Israel’s history we see ouvir own.
Human nature is not improved, as
some wines grow mellow with age, for
we find ourselves just as perverse and
rebellious as they were. If any change
it must be for the worse rather than the
better. Our sins are against greater
light and greater love ; not against the
Law only, but the Gospel too; not
against Moses, but Christ.

Learn, that sin brings sorrow. Sin
flatters like a serpent at the beginning,
but stings like one at last (comp. Prov.
xxiii, 32),

See the resemblance between sin and
tts punishment. The Israelites had
been like serpents to Moses and Aaron,
always ready to nip and sting; now
God sends serpents among them, ‘ Na-
dab and Abihu offered strange fire
before the Lord;” and they were
destroyed by fire. The Jews crucified
our Lord ; the Romans crucified them
in vast numbers. Many an undutiful


400


child has found his parent’s wrongs
avenged in his own offspriag.

The serpents in the camp were very
numerous ; not here and there one, but
in great numbers. Alas, how many
evils does sin produce in all the rela- |
tions and engagements of life! How
many serpents follow in the train of
sin! They follow you at home and
abroad, in the family and in the world.
in your lying down and rising up.

There is the serpent of remorse in
the conscience—a serpent very difficult
to untwine from the folds of the heart.
The serpent of discord in the family,
when a man’s vices follow him home,
and he finds the effects of his own mis-
conduct breaking up the peace of home
{comp. Prov. xi. 29). The serpent of
treachery among your friendships ; for
the world shakes from it those whom
it cannot trust. The serpent of dis-
grace and contempt, the consequences of
the vices of the character and the
violation of integrity and uprightness.
“What fruit had ye then in those
things?” &c. (Rom. vi. 21). Then
there is the serpent of endless agony
and despair in ‘‘ hell, where their worm
dieth not,” &c.

II. An earnest resolution and
prayer; the result of sanctified afilic.
tion.

** Pray unto the Lord, that He take
away the serpents from us.” Their suf-
ferings led to humiliation, repentance,
and prayer. They knew that none but
He who sent the affliction could take it
away, and, therefore, they did not ask
Moses to try what he could do by any
process of legislation or human device, |
but—“ Pray unto the Lord,” &c. Prayer
is your only remedy forthe serpent brood
of sin. “We have sinned, for,” &c.
Sanctified affliction leads to this, Ex-
amples: Job, Ephraim (Jer. xxxi. 18),
the prodigal (Luke xv. 14 sqq.).

Tit. A mysterious appointment, the
result of Divine grace.

“And Moses prayed for the people.
And the Lord said unto Moses, Make
thee a fiery serpent,” &c.


Si a mauel Thodey.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


GHAP. XXL


Tus Brazen Serpent a Type or Jxsus Curist,


(Verses 8, 9.)


“A type,” says Mr. Steward, “is a
fact precedent to some other greater
than itself, designed to prepare the way
for it, and to be a voucher for it, as pre-
ordained and brought to pass by the
_ Divine wisdom and power. It is the
shadow of a coming truth projected far
before it, showing its figure rather than
its substance, its image, not its proper-
ties.”

The words of our Lord in John
iii. 14, 15, are our warrant for regard-
ing the brazen serpent as a type of
Himself. In the serpent-bitten Israel-
ites we have an illustration of the con-
dition of sinful men, and in the brazen
serpent we have an illustration of the
remedy for the sad condition of sinful
men. We discover an analogy in :—

I. The malady.

1. In both cases it was communicated.
It was communicated to the Israelites
by the bite of the serpent. Sin was
imparted to man by “that old serpent,
which is the devil.” It is not native
to human nature, but a foul and ter-
rible importation.

2. In both it is painful. The bite
of the serpeat caused the most distress-
ing pain; the poison burned and tor-
mented the victims, So the venom of
sin rankles in human nature ; sin causes
discord, guilt, dread, anguish ; it is an
element of torment.

3. In both it is deadly. Great num-
bers of the Israelites died from its
effects. “Sin, when it is finished,
bringeth forth death.” “ The soul that
sinneth, it shall die.” ‘The wages of
sin is death.”

4. In both, human remedies are un-
availing. It is said that the effects of
the bite of the serpents were so rapid
that “ no remedy for the most virulent
poison could, had it even been at hand,
have been administered with sufficient
rapidity and efficiency to have saved
the people.” No human means can
arrest the deadly progress of the poison of
sin, impart spiritual life and health, &

DD


It must not be overlooked that the
malady and its consequences in the one
case were physical and temporal; iv
the other, spiritual and everlasting.
Death would end the one; it is power-
less to end the other.

II. The remedy,

In respect of this there is a twofold
analogy. é

1. The remedy in both cases was of
Divine origin. No man could have de-
vised a remedy for human sin and suf-
fering. No angel could have grappled
with the disease. In His sovereign
grace God originated the method of
human salvation.

2. There is an analogy as to the means
by which the remedy was effected. (1)
The serpent-bitten Israelites were
healed by means of a serpent of similar
appearance to those through whose bites
they were perishing, but entirely free
from venom. We are healed of sin and
saved from death, by “God sending
His Own Son in the likeness of the
flesh of sin, and for sin” (Rom. viii. 3),
yet Himself perfectly free from sin,
(2) The serpent without poison was
uplifted to overcome the dire effects of
the bite of the poisonous ones; so He
who was made “in the likeness of the
flesh of sin,” “yet without sin,” took
upon Him the curse of the world by
dying upon the cross, that He might
thereby destroy death and the curse.
* As Moses lifted up the rerpent in the
wilderness; even so must the Son of
Man be lifted up;” &o.

ITI. The appropriation,

The bitten Israelites had to look to
the Brazen Serpent, and looking they
were saved. The sinner has to believe
in Jesus Christ, and believing he is
saved. The look of the Israelites is a
remarkable illustration of faith. ‘ Look
unto Me, and be ye saved,” &o. This
method of appropriation—

1. Is simple and easy. Look, and be
saved, Believe, and live. The little
child, and the hoary abr the


CHAP. XX,





ignorant plebeian, and the educated
philosopher, can and do believe. We
are naturally credulous ; we often be-
lieve too readily. As all can believe,
the remedy is within the reach of ail.
Take heed lest the very simplicity of
the appropriation be made by you an
occasion of stumbling. (a)

2. Is unmeritorious. The dying Is-
raelite did not merit healing and life
by his look to the Brazen Serpent. Our
faith cannot merit salvation. Faith ex-
cludes the idea of merit. “It is of faith,
that it might be by grace.” We are
“justified freely by His grace through
the redemption that is in Christ Jesus.”

3. Is indispensable. If the bitten
Israelite refused to look to the Brazen
Serpent he speedily died, notwithstand-
ing the remedy. So faith is indispen-
sable to salvation (comp. John iii, 18,
26). (6)

IV. The result.

“It came to pass, that if a serpent


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





had bitten any man, when he beheld
the serpent of brass, he lived.” ‘ Whoe
soever believeth in Him shall not perish,
but have eternal life.” The serpent-
bitten Israelites, who looked to the
brazen serpent, were saved from physical
anguish and death; the sinner who
believes in Jesus Christ is saved from
spiritual anguish and eternal death.
The Israelite, saved for the time, would
die soon or late; but the believer in
Christ has everlasting and ever-glorious
life.

Conclusion.

This world is like the camp of Israel.
Sin is doing its terrible work. There
is but one method of deliverance. Be-
lieve, and be saved. This one method
is gloriously available to every one.
“ Whosoever believeth in Him,” &.
Hence, if any one perish, he perishes
by his own guilty neglect of the free
and glorious remedy,


ILLUSTRATIONS,


(a) By the term looking, we mean not an
examination of the proofs which establish the
truth of the Christian religion, although the
testimony borne in its favour has been con-
firmed by wonders and miracles, and divers
other effects of Divine power (Heb. ii. 4). We
mean not by the term /ooking, the study of the
Scriptures, although the word of prophecy,
which is most sure, bears testimony through-
out to Jesus, All this study is commendable
and necessary, and far be it from us to dis-
suade you from a study which is in the present
day too much neglected, and without which it
is to be feared many will never come to look
at Jesus Christ. But still all these labours to-
gether are not worth and cannot supersede
the look for which we plead, whereas this look
alone has often superseded them. No doubt
“faith cometh by hearing ;” in other words,
hearing is the origin of faith, its starting
point ; but it belongs to the eye to finish the
uncompleted wok of hearing. Where, in
your opinion, is there a man who has heard
much, and read much, but not looked ? a man
who has carefully examined the proofs of the
divinity of Christ,a man who has admitted
them, and yet not looked at Christ ? a man
whom these proofs have convinced, that is to
say vanquished, forced to believe, but whose
faith, wholly passive, though it receives and
hase to the truth, does not embrace it, and

ome united to it by a proper movement,
and to avin strange to say, the truth at ouce es

402


and ts not ? a man who, conducted by his studies
to the very foot of the cross, remains there with
downcast eyes, never raising them towards
the cross, nor towards Him whom it bears,
and whose adorable blood is running down
this accursed tree ? Others have not been
able to believe until they lifted their eyes and
looked at Christ. Those, I admit, have
believed but with a forced faith, on the ac-
count of the whole world, and not on their own
personal account ; with a faith which is to
them only a yoke and burden; a faith which
they support, but which does not support them
until, passing beyond this terminated labour,
this exhausted spring, they begin to look sim-
ply at Jesus. Are we rash in speaking of this
look as a condition of true faith, when Jesus
Christ Himself has said, “Every one which
seeth the Son, and believeth in Him” (i.e, every
one who, having seen the Son, hath believed in
Him), “hath everlasting life.” These words,
brethren, decidedly annex life to a look, not
indeed to every kind of look, but to an
attentive, earnest, prolonged look; a look
more simple than that of observation ; a look
which looks, and does nothing more; a lively,
unaffected, childlike look ; a look in which the
whole soul appears; a look of the heart and
not of the intellect ; one which does not seek
to decompound its object, but receives it into
the soul in all its entireness through the eye,
—Alex. Vinet, D.D.

(6) The look of faith is saving. You can-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XXI,





not turn a trustful eye to Him and not receive
fullest salvation. Did any wounded Israelite
look and not live? So no beholding sinner
dies. .. . . You never can have health, but
from the cross. The rich must look; for
riches cannot save. The poor musi look; for
poverty is no cloak for guilt. The learned
must look ; for learning can devise no other


help. The ignorant must look; for ignorance
is not heaven's key. None ever lived without
soul-sickness. None regains strength apart
from Christ. But His cross stands uplifted
high, even as the pole in Isracl’s camp. And
it is not a vain voice which cries, “ Look unto
Me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth.”
—H, Law, D.D.


Tus Brazen Serpent; on, Tos Terrors or Existence Facep w Fairs.


(Verses 8, 9.)


The story of the Brazen Serpent
actually took place, we cannot doubt,
as recorded by Moses. The notion of
a “myth,” which rationalistic inter-
preters might here suggest, is in this
case absolutely inadmissible. For in
the subsequent history, many hundreds
of years later, we read of King Heze-
kiah being moved to destroy it, and to
grind it to powder, because it had be-
come an object of idolatrous venera-
tion to the Israelites in his day. This
fact, however, is not in the least in-
consistent with its having been in-
tended by the Divine mind to be also
an embodied image or parable of spiri-
tual and eternal truths—as true now
in England in this nineteenth century
of our era, as in Israel thousands of
years ago.

This incident of the Brazen Serpent
is recorded in a part of the Sacred
Story which we are specially authorized
to consider as typical—I mean the
story of the journey of the Israelites
through the wilderness (see 1 Cor. x.
11). Itis therefore probable, at least,
that any event recorded in this part of
the Sacred History will repay study in
that view. And with regard to this
particular incident in that journey, it
should be noted that our Lord Himself,
in His conversation with Nicodemus,
selected it out of all history to stand
as a symbol of some of the highest
mysteries of redemption.

What then is the primary and
aimplest meaning of the incident? It
is a fundamental principle of all sound
interpretation of inspired sayings, that
all other and deeper lessons which they
may be intended or adapted to teach,

Db 2


must have their root-in, and take their
form and outline from, its primary and
original sense. Now it is, I think,
clear that the Brazen Serpent was pri-
marily intended simply to represent
and vividly picture to the suffering
Israelites those terrible and repulsive
instruments of God’s avenging justice
through which He was at that time in-
flicting suffering upon them for their
sins. In the course of their wanderings
they were brought into a region of
great suffering and want. Under the
pressure of their sufferings, they were
led tomurmur against Moses and Aaron;
they looked back with regret and long-
ing to the days when they “ sat by the
flesh-pots of Egypt.” The spiritual de-
gradation and misery of their life at
that time, and their condition as slaves
in a heathen land, were forgotten ; no-
thing but the fleshly comforts and ease
which they enjoyed there, compared
with their present sufferings, was re-
membered. Their high calling and
destiny as God’s chosen people was
overlooked or held cheap. This
spirit of mind, like that of him “ who
for one morsel of meat sold his
birthright,” and, caring for the pre-
sent, despised the greater future,
would, if it had become habitual, have
brought them to destruction and utter
alienation from God. A sharp remedy
was therefore needed, and was applied
by God’s judicial providence. Fiery
serpents were sent amongst them, from
whose bite many of them died. It was
in this state of things that Moses was
directed to make a Brazen Serpent—
that is, an actual image of the serpents
from which they were at as ee suf.


CHAP, XXI,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





fering ; and to set it up on a pole before
their eyes. And he was to teach them
that if they contemplated this image
in faith, they should be healed. How
can we doubt what was the primary
meaning of this? Surely it must have
been intended simply to teach the great
and pregnant truth, that if, when any
of the terrors of God set themselves in
array against us, we have the courage,
instead of turning away our eyes and
thoughts from them, to look deliberately
at them im faith ; to hold them up, as it
were, firmly between ourselves and
heaven, and to contemplate them as
God’s appointments, and therefore cer-
tainly good under the circumstances,
and if used aright; then the sting will
be taken from these afflictions, and they
will be turned into sources of spiritual
blessing. It was a call to face God's
terrible dispensation in faith and sub-
mission.

It is our duty and our wisdom to do
so. To do otherwise, to keep any dark
corner of our consciousness unlooked at,
is to lay up a store of fears and un-
certainties for our weaker moments,
and to allow the enemy to lay an
ambush against our peace. And even
if the terror be one that affects only
other men, not ourselves directly, yet
when we become aware of it our wisdom
and our duty is to face it, holding to
the hand of God. Not to do so is self-
ishness. To suffer in other men’s
suffering is to have the mind of Christ ;
and all that is not that is sin. And,
besides, unless we do dare to look all
terrors in the face, we can never feel
safe, even for ourselves. For if we
believe in injustice or cruelty in God
towards any ereature, how can we be


\


sure He will not be unjust to us toa
and to those we love 4

Job is a great example of such courage
in facing stern and mysterious facts in
God’s providence. . . . . This powerful
delineation of the terrible mysteries of
evil and of sorrow that met him, clearly
shows that he saw them in all their
extremest terror—that he felt them in
all their acuteness. And yet, neverthe-
less, he did, in the end, submit in
absolute resignation and meekness to
God. It was not, then, in blindness —
or darkness that he did so; but with
eyes wide open and a heart keenly sen-
sitive to all. Thus did he hold up his
Brazen Serpent to the light ; thus did
he at last learn in full sight of it to
acknowledge the Divine justice and
goodness. This alone is true faith.
Kasy it is in sunny times, while sailing
in sunny seas,.... to call God,
“Father,” and believe that He is a
Father. But the difficulty is to do so —
when all things seem against us, ox
when, though we ourselves are in
prosperity, we see others round us in
pain, in distress, in agony; to call God —
Father, as the Divine Man of Sorrows
did, while hanging ona cross of torture,
or from out of an agony of bloody
sweat ; when man is felt to be cruel
and unjust ; when the earth beneath
our feet trembles; when the midday
sky over our heads is darkened ; when
God Himself seems to have forsaken
us, and we cannot see the reason. To —
cry then too, “Abba, Father,” and
believe what we say, is true faith—the
only faith that fits the world as it is,
and will carry us through life with eyes
open.—Canon Lytielton, M.A. in “Good
Words,”


Ungventvun Stages in THe Pinermaas oy Lig


(Verses 10-15.)


These verses yield the following
homiletical observations :—

L That many scenes in the pilgrim.
age of life are quiet and uneventful,

From their encampment in the Ara-


bah, with its events of intense and pain-
ful interest, the Israelites proceed to
Oboth, or rather to Zalmonah, then to
Punon, and then to Oboth (chap. xxxiii,
41-43), then to Ije-aburim, &. At these —


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


places nothing occurs to detain the his-


torian, nothing which ealls for record ;


the life of the people was ordinary and
uneventful. So now, the greater por-
tion of the life of the great majority of
men is common-place, ordinary, and
prosaic, This is a wise and kind ar-
rangement of Providence, for—

l. We are not jitied to bear the strain
of continued and deep interest and excite-
ment. Our mental and our emotional
natures would both suffer by the undue
tension of such excitement. Both brain
and heart would soon succumb to the
strain. If the bow be always tightly
strung it will be injured, and perhaps
destroyed.

2. The healthiest minds find pleasure
and progress in quiet scenes and duties.
Craving for constant excitement is a
characteristic of a diseased mind. Rest-
lessness and love of change are indi-
cations of mental superticiality and
poverty. Active and healthy minds
find satisfaction and delight in the
ordinary scenes and duties of daily
life. (a)

IL. That in the quiet and unevent-
ful scenes of life we should follow
the Divine directions.

The Israelites did so at this time.
They were commanded (Deut. ii. 9) not
to contend with the Moabites in battle,
and for this reason they passed along
the eastern border of the land of Moab,
without entering into that land.

l. The teachings of the Bible and the
guidance of the Holy Spirit are given to
us for our whole life. The directions of
the former and the inspiration of the
latter, are for life’s ordinary seasons
as well as for its epochs and crises,
The plan of God covers our entire
life. His will is binding upon us at
all times, and in all places and circume
stan 368.

2. We can most effectually ulustrate
the principles and the power of godliness
in the ordinary and uneventful scenes of
life. The testimony of our life in such
seasons is—(1) More natural than in
exciting and critical seasons, On the
red-letter days of our life we are spe-
cially watchful and wise and diligent,


CHAP, XXI,





&o.—(2) More continuous. Seasons of
great interest and importance occur but
seldom in human lives; they are rare
exceptions ; as a rule, life is unevent-
ful, prosaic. And consequently the
testimony of our life in its ordinary
seasons is—(3) More influential than in
its few and exceptional seasons. Hence,
the necessity of following the Divine
directions at such times, and at all
times. (6)

Tlf. That many of the records of
the pilgrimage of life are transient.

In “ the book of the wars of Jehovah ”
many interesting records were probably
written. It was a book which was of a
religious spirit. The honour of their
victories it ascribed to Jehovah (see
Explanatory Notes on this verse), But
it is lost. Nouyht of it remains save
one or two brief quotations. ‘It was
not,” says Trapp, “any part of the
Canon,—for God hath provided, that
not one hair of that sacred head is
diminished,—but as the chronicles of
England, or some famous poem.” How
many human writings perish! Hven
good books do not always live. All
material things pass away; but the
spiritual abides. Books perish; but
truth is imperishable. The records
which exist only in books are doomed
to oblivion, but those which exist in
human hearts will live for ever. Books
are perishable; souls are immortal.
What is written “in fleshy tables
of the heart” can never be erased.
Let us, therefore, seek to communicate
truth unto men, and to inspire men
with the passion for the attainment of
truth.

IV. That present progress is pro-
moted by the recollection of God's
past doings.

We infer this from the use which
the Israelites made of “the book of
the wars of Jehovah.” The quotation
from this book is very obscure. Of the
first clause Dr. A. Clarke says, “ This
ciause is impenetrably obscure.” The
passage from the book is “a reference
rather than a quotation. Contem-
poraries who had ‘the Book of the
Wars of Jehovah’ at as aoe of


CHAP, XXL,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,





course supply the context.” But sup-
posing the book was what we take it
to have been, a collection of odes cele-
brating the glorious acts of Jehovah for
the Israelites; then we are warranted
in affirming that they took courage in
the present by the consideration of what
He had done for them in the past.


Former victories inspired them with
resolution and hope, (ec)

In our pilgrimage let us cultivate
this spirit. Let the light which shines
from the mercies already received cheer
our spirits as we advance to meet the
duties and difficulties, the burdens and
battles, that lie before us,


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) When we look back over a lengthened
series of years, we seldom find that remem-
brance clings fondly to moments in which the
mind has been most agitated, the passions most
active, but rather to the intervals in which
hour stole on honr with the same quiet tread.
The transitory fever of the senses it is only a
diseased imagination that ponders over and
recalls; the triumphs which flatter our self-


esteem look pale and obsolete from the distance.


of years, as arches of lath and plaster, thrown
up in haste for the march of a conqueror, seem
frail and tawdry when we see them in after
time, spanning the solid thoroughfares with
columns already mouldering, and stripped of
the banners and the garlands that had clad
them in the bravery of an hour.

However varied the course of our life, what-
soever the phases of pleasure and ambition
through which it has swept along, still, when
in memory we would revive the times that were
comparatively the happiest, those times would
be found to have been the calmest.

As the body for health needs regularity in
habits, and will even reconcile itself to habits
not in themselves best fitted for longevity, with
less injury to the system than might result
from abrupt changes to the training by which
athletes attain their vigour—so the mind for
health needs a certain clockwork of routine;
we like to look forward with a certain tranquil
sentiment of security ; when we pause from
the occupation of to-day, which custom has
made dear to us, there is a charm in the
mechanical confidence with which we think
that the same occupation will be renewed at
the same hour to-morrow. And thus mono-
tony itself is a cause and element of happiness
which, amidst the shifting tumults of the
world, we are apt toignore. Plutarch, indeed,
says truly that “the shoe takes the form of
the foot, not the foot the form of the shoe,”
meaning thereby that “man’s life is moulded
by the disposition of his soul.” But new shoes
chafe the feet, new customs the soul. The
stoutest pedestrian would flag on a long walk
if he put on new shoes at every second mile.

It is with a sentiment of misplaced pity,
perhaps of contempt still more irrational, that
the busy man, whose existence is loud and
noisy, views another who seems to him less to
live than to vegetate. The traveller, whirled
from sayii te capital, stops for a night’s

4


lodging at some convent rising lone amidst
untfrequented hills, He witnesses the discip-
line of the monastic life drilled into unvary-
ing forms, day and year portioned out,
according to inch scale, by the chimes of the
undeviating bell. He re-enters his carriage
with asense of relief; how dreary must be
the existence he leaves behind! Why dreary ?
Because so monotonous. Shallow reasoner!
it is the monotony that has reconciled the
monk to his cell. Even prisoners, after long
years, have grown attached to the sameness of
their prison, and have shrank back from the
noveliy of freedom when turned loose upon
the world. Not that these illustrations consti-
tute a plea for monastery or prison; they but
serve to show that monotony, even under
circumstances least favourable to the usual
elements of happiness, becomes a happiness in
itself, growing, as it were, unseen, out of the
undisturbed certainty of peculiar customs. As
the pleasure the ear finds in rhyme is said to
arise from its recurrence at measured periods
—trom the gratified expectation that at certain
intervals certain effects will be repeated—so
it is in life: the recurrence of things same or
similar, the content in the fulfilment of expec-
tations so familiar and so gentle that we are
scarcely conscious that they were formed, have
a@ harmony and a charm, and, where life is
enriched by no loftier genius, often make the
only difference between its poetry and its
prose.-— From ‘ Caxtontana,” by Lord Lytton.

(6) Day by day, hour by hour, the work
goes on—well or ill—to His praise or to His
shame, We must build. We are building,
We are very apt sometimes to thirk that we
have done nothing, and that that is the worst
of it, That is not the worst of it. The worst
of it is that we have done something very poor
or very ill. I come home at night, and
say, with sad relenting, as the shadows of
reflection deepen around me, “I have done
nothing at the great building to-day 1!” O yes,
but Ihave. I have been putting in “the wood,
the hay, the stubble,” where “the silver and
the gold aud the precious stones” should have
been. I have been piling up fuel for the last
fires in my own life. I cannot be a cipher
even for one day. I must bea man, N ay, I
must be a Christian man, faithful or unfaith-
ful. I must grow, and build, and work, and
live in some way. Oh, then, let me see that


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XXI.


a ee ee


I live for Christ, that I grow into His image,
and that I work a work in the moral construc-
tion of my own life which angels will crown
and God will bless !—A/ex. Kaleigh, DD.
(¢) ‘The way to enrich life is to keep a re-
tentive memory in ‘the heart. Look over a
period of twenry years, and see the all-cover-
ing and ever-shining mercy of God! How
many special providences have you observed ?
How many narrow escapes have you experi-
enced ? How many difficulties have you sur-
mounted ? How often have you found a pool


in unexpected places ? We should lay up some
memory of the NDivine triumphs which have
gladdened our lives, and fall back upon it for
inspiration and courage in the dark and cloudy
day. Go into your yesterdays to find God!
Search for Him in the paths along which you
have come, and if you dare, under the teach-
ing of your own memories, deny His goodness,
then betake yourselves to the infamous luxury
of distrust and reproach.—Joseph Parker,


A Sone oF tHe Pricrmace,


(Verses 16-20.)


Dean Perowne makes the following
remarks concerning this song which
Israel sang at Beer :—“The next isa
song which was sung on the digging of
a well at a spot where they were en-
camped, and which from this circum-
stance was called Beér, or ‘The Well’
It runs as follows :—


“*Spring up, O well ! sing ye to it;
Well, which the princes dug,
Which the nobles of the people bored
With the sceptre-of-office, with their
staves.’


This song, first sung at the digging of
the well, was afterwards no doubt com-
monly used by those who came to draw
water. The maidens of Israel chanted
it to one another, verse by verse, as
they toiled at the bucket, and thus
beguiled their labour. ‘ Spring up, O
well !’ was the burden or refrain of the
song, which would pass from one mouth
to another at each fresh coil of the
rope, till the full bucket reached the
well’s mouth. But the peculiar charm
of the song lies not only in its antiquity,
but in the characteristic touch which
so manifestly connects it with the life
of the time to which the narrative as-
signs it. The one point which is dwelt
upon is, that the leaders of the people
took their part in the work, that they
themselves helped to dig the well. In
the new generation who were about to
enter the Land of Promise, a strong
feeling of sympathy between the peo-
ple and their rulers had sprung up,


which augured well for the future, and
which left its stamp even on the ballads
and songs of the time. This little
carol is fresh and lusty with young
life; it sparkles like the water of the
well whose springing up first occasioned
it ; it is the expression on the part of
those who sung it, of lively confidence
in the sympathy and co-operation of
their leaders, which, manifested in this
one instance, might be relied upon in
all emergencies (Ewald, Gesch. ii. 264,
5)."— Bibl. Dict.

Three homiletic points are suggested
by the verses under consideration,

I. The needs of human pilgrimage.

The people at Beer wanted water.
They were receiving reminders of their
dependence almost constantly. It is sa
with the pilgrimages of human life to-
day. We pass from place to place, but
we never cease to be dependent
Notice—.

1. How indispensable are the things
which we need! The Israelites wanted
water, a thing which is absolutely es-
sential to human existence. We are
dependent upon God for many things,
both for the body and for the soul,
which are thoroughly necessary to our
well-being, and even to our life.

2. How many are the things which
we need! Who could write the cata-
logue of man’s necessities 4 (a)

8. How constant are our needs! We
may change our place and our circum.
stances, but we never change our de-
pendent condition. Both are and


CHAP, XXI,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,





spiritually we are ever drawing from the
fountain of Divine blessings. (0b)

Our constant dependence should
beget constant humility.

II, The Divine provision for the
needs of human pilgrimage,

The Divine provision for the Israel-
ites at Beer—

1. Was promised by God. “The
Lord spake unto Moses, Gather the
people together, and [ will give them
water.” Jehovah anticipated the need
of His people. “Thou comest to meet
him with the blessings of goodness,”
God designed and promised the provi-
sion before it was asked. How munifi-
cent is the prvision which He makes
for the needs of His creatures! (1) In
material things. The earth and sea
bring forth an abundant supply for the
needs of all men. “He giveth us
richly all things to enjoy.” (c) (2) In
spiritual things. “ He will abundantly
pardon.” ‘Who forgiveth all thine
iniquities,” &c. (Psa. ciii. 3-5, 8). “God
is able to make all grace abound toward
you,” &c. (2 Cor, ix. 8,11). “The un-
searchable riches of Christ.” He “is
able to do exceeding abundantly,” &a.
The fountain of Gospel blessings is in-
exhaustible, infinite. (d@) And, as in
the water of Beer, so also in the blessings
of salvation, the provision preceded the
need. Redemption was not an after-
thought of the Divine mind. The
cross was set up in eternity. “The
Lamb slain from the foundation of the
world.”

2. Was bestowed in connection with
human effort. A well was dug under
the direction of Moses, who was himself
directed by God, and in this way the
Lord fulfilled His promise to give them
water. God provides for man by means
of man’s own efforts. If man would
obtain temporal blessings, the Divine
rule is that he must work for them.
“If any man would not work, neither
should he eat” (comp. 1 Thess, iv. 11,
12; 2 Thess. iii. 8-13), In spiritual
things also God blesses man by the use
of the means of blessing. If we would
enjoy the bounteous provision of the
Heavenly Father for the supply of our

408


spiritual needs, we must read, meditate,
pray, work, &o,

It is noteworthy that the princes and
nobles took a prominent part in the
effort to obtain this water (see the
remarks of Perowne on this point,
quoted above). A glad seal and a
hearty co-operation amongst all ranks
seemed to have possessed the people.
It is well when the leading people of
® community are leaders in excellent
service, d&c. (¢)

3. Enkindled human joy; and this
joy was expressed in this song. The
music of our pilgrimage which honours
God is that of songs, not dirges, Our
glad and gratefulanthems are acceptable
unto Him. (f)

4, Was suitably commemorated. The
name of the place was called Beér, the
well, We commemorate our MMarahs,
let us do the same with our Beérs,
Let us be eager to perpetuate the
memory of our mercies.

III. The continuousness of human
pilgrimage.

‘And from the wilderness they went
to Mattanah ; and from Mattanah to
Nahaliel ; and from Nahaliel to Bamoth;
and from Bamoth in the valley, that is
in the country of Moab, to the top of
Pisgah, which looketh toward Jeshi-
mon.” Even scenes of refreshment
and joy must not detain them. The
well which afforded them so much satis-
faction and pleasure was not the goal of
their pilgrimage. Beér was not Canaan,
Onward must they go until they reach the
Promised Land. In our life-pilyrimage
we may, as it were, halt, but we must
not settle in this world. If we attempt
to settle here God speedily sends some
messenger crying to us, “ Arise ye, and
depart ; for this is not your rest.”
“ Here have we no continuing city, but
we seek one to come.” (g)


® Onward then, right onward !
This our watchword still,
Till we reach the glory
Of the wondrous hill.


* On through waste and blackness,
O’er this desert road :
On till Salem greets ua,
City of our God.”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XXI,





ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) Does not one man require in his own
experience the whole scheme of Divine re-
demption? Is it not with this as with the
light, the atmosphere, and the whole mechan-
ism of the world? Were there but oue man
upou the glvbe, be would as much require the
sun, the simmer, the harvest, us do the millions
who now exist upon it—Joseph Parker, D.D.

(6) We never wake up in the morning but
we want strength for the day, and we never go
to bed at night without needing grace to cover
the sins of the past. We are needy at all
periods of life: wheu we begin with Christ in
our young days we need to be kept from the
follies and passions which are so strong in
giddy youth; in middle life our needs are
greater still, lest the cares of this world should
eat ag doth a canker; and in old age we are
needy still, and need preserving grace to bear
us onward tothe end. So needy are we that
even in lying down to die we need our last bed
to be made for us by mercy, and our last hour
to be cheered by grace. bo needy are we that
if Jesus had not prepared a mansion for us in
eternity we should have no place to dwell in.
We are as full of wants as the sea is full of
water. We cannot stay at home and say, “I
have much goods laid up for many years,” for
the wolf is at the door, and we must go out
a-begging again, Our clamorous necessities
follow us every moment, and dog our heels in
every place.—C. Ai. Spurgeon.

(c) There is not a word on our tongue;
there is not a thought in our heart, but lo! O
Jesus, Son of man, Thou knowest it altogether!
And, knowing it, has He lef: it unprovided
for ? See what He has done for the recruiting
of man’s physical strength, and then say it He
who can be so careful about restoring the body
would leave the recovery of the mind and soul
altugether unprovided for, He has answered
that every day and eventide. He sends a
couling shadow over the earth, and, as it wraps
all things in its darkuess, it seems to say,
“ Rest awhile.” See how avove every weekday
He has set that singing, shining Sabbath Da
of His, to quiet men, to give them 4 moments
rest in the great strife and chase of life! It
He has made an evening to each day—a
sabbath to each week—if He has in many ways
shown an interest in men’s bones, muscles,
nerves, and sinews, has He forgutten the im-
mortal soul ? has He made no answer to the
ery of the heart when it is weary and sad, wheu
it sighs for release and rest? His whole life
is an auswer to that enquiry. “Come unto
Me,” said He, “all ye that labour aud are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” He
meets us, therefore, at every point, He provides
for the aching limb, aud answers tie sigh of
the weary heart |—Joseph Purker, DD.

(d) it is no small task to water one garden,
in the heat of the summer time, so that every
flower shall be refreshed, and no plant over-
looked. How great is the might of Him, who


from the salt sea extracts the precious clouds
of sweet rain, to fall not only on gardens, but
on the pastures of the wilderness, and the wild
forest trees, till all nature laughs for joy, the
mountaims and the hills break forth into sing-
ing, and the trees of the field clap their hands !
Brethren, it is a great thing to puta cup of
cold water to the lips ofa disciple; it shall not
lose its reward. To refresh the bowels of one
of (tod’s saints is no mean thing; but how
great is God’s goodness, which puts a cup of
salvation to every Christian’s lips, which waters
every plant of His right hand planting, so that
every one can have his leaf continually green,
and his fruit ever brought forth in due season.
—C. H. Spurgeon.

(e) For an Ulustration on the point see p. 18.

(/) It is always a token of a revival of reli-
gion, it is said, when there is a revival of
psalmody. When Luther's preaching began
to tell upon men, you could hear ploughmen at
the plough-tail smging Luther's psalms. Whit-
field and Wesley had never done the great
work they did if it had not been for Charles
Wesley's poetry, and for the singing of such
men as Toplady, and Scott, and Newton, and
Inany others of the same class; and even now
we mark that since there has been somewhat of
a religious revival in our denominations, there
are more hymn books than everthere were, and
far more attention is paid to Christian psalmody
than before. When your heart is full of Christ,
you will wantto sing. It isa blessed thing to
sing at your labour and work, if you are ina
place where you can do so; and if the world
should laugh at you, you must tell them that
you have as eee a right to sing the songs that
delight your heart as they have to sing any of
the songs in which their hearts delight. Praise
His name, Christiang; be not dumb; sing
aloud unto Jesus the Lamb; and if we as
Englishmen cin sometimes sing our national
air, let us as believers have our national hymn,
and sing—

“Crown Him, crown Him, Lord of all.”

—Ibid.

(g) A father with his little son is journey-
ing overland to California; and when, at
night, he pitches his tent in some pleasant val-
ley, the child is charmed with the spot, and
begs his father to rear a house and remain
there ; and he begins to make a little fence
about the tent, and digs up the wild-flowers,
and plants them within the enclosure. But
the father says, “No, my son. Our home is
far distant, Let these things go; for to-mor-
row we must depart.” Now, God is taking us,
His children, as pilgrims and strangers, heme-
wards ; but we desire to build here, and must
be often overthrown before we can learn to
seek the “city that hath foundations, whose
Builder and Maker is God.”—H. W. Beecher.

A stranger is very well known, not perhaps
in the great city where there are always thou-
sands of such, but in a country ante on a


CHAP, XXY.


country road. See him as he enters the village
at, nightfall ; you can see at once he is not of
the place. The dust is on his raiment; he is
footsore and weary ; yet he has no mind to stay
—he will be away again before the inhabitants
areup. His language is different ; his questions


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.
ee





are those of one who has but a superficial and
momentary interest in the answer that may be
given ; his very look is the life spelling of the
word “ onward ;” his home, wherever it may
be, is not here.—A, Raleigh, D.D.


A Sone at tan Weuineap,
(Verses 16-18.)


I. These people required water as
we greatly need grace, and there was
& promise given concerning the supply.

“The Lord spake unto Moses, Gather
the people together, and I will give
them water.”

1, The supply promised here was a
Divine supply. “I will give them
water.” . The supply of grace
that you are to receive in your time of
need is a Divine supply. Hence, know-
ing the attributes of God, you will
understand that however much you
may require, there will be an all-suffi-
cient supply ; however long you may
require it, there will be an everlasting
supply; at whatever hours you may want
it, there will be an available supply.

2. Jt was a suitable supply. The
people were thirsty, and the promise
was, “I will give them water.” Like a
father, God understands His children
better than His children understand
themselves, and He gives not according
to their foolish guesses of what they
need, but according to His wise appre-
hension of what they require.

3. The supply promised was an
abundant supply. “I will give them
water.” It included every child of
Israel, every babe that needed it, as
well as every strong man that thirsted
after it. No child of God shall be lett to
perdsh for want of the nec essary supplies,

4. It was @ sure supply. “I will
give them water.” We do not go for-
ward on the strength of “ifs” and
“buts,” and “peradventures ;” but we
advance confidently, invigorated and
inflamed, as to our courage, by “ wills ”
and **shalls.” God must un-deify Him-
telf before He can break His promises.

II. Observe, the song,

The children of Israel sing this song,

410


“Spring up, O well; sing ye unto it.”

1, This song may be looked upon as
the voice of cheerfulness. There was no
water, but they were still in good
spirits. Cheerfulness in want, cheer-
fulness upon the bed of pain, cheerful-
ness under slander, singing, like the
nightingale, in the night, praising God
when the thorn is in the breast, this is
a high Christian attainment, which we
should seek after and not be content
without,

2. I like, too, the look of these
children of Israel, singing to the Lord
before the water came, praising Ham
while they were yet thirsty. Let us
pitch a tune and join with them, how-
ever low our estate may be.

3. This song was the voice of cheer-
fulness susiained by faith. They believed
the promise, “ Gather the people to-
gether,” &c. They sang the song of
expectation. Sing of the mercy yet
to come, which your faith can see. ale
though as yet you have not receive it.

4. This song was no doubt greatly
increased in its volume, and more
elevated in tts tone, when the water did
begin to spring. All ye who have
received anything of Divine grace, sing
ye unto it! Bless God by singing and
praising His name while you are re-
ceiving His favours,

III. The song was a prayer.

“Spring up, O well,” was Faith's
way of singing her prayer.

1, This prayer went at once to the
work, and sought for that which was re-
quired. What was needed? Not a
well, but water. Now what we need
is not the means of grace, but the
grace of the means. You are retired
for your private devotions ; you
have opened the Bible ; you begin to


ee ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


NUMBERS.’ CHAP. XXI.





read. Now, do not be satisfied with
merely reading through a chapter,
Words are nothing: the letter killeth.
The business of the believer with his
Bible open is to pray, “ Here is the well:
spring up, O well; Lord, give me the
meaning and spirit of Thy Word,” &c.
Or perhaps you are about to kneel
down to pray. You want in prayer
not the well so much as the springing
up of the well. And it is just the
same when you go to the ordinances.
-... And is it not the same when
you come to the public assembly? Let
our prayer be like the song of the text,
direct and to the point. Lord, do not
put me off with the husks of ordinances
and means of grace; give me Thyself.

2. This prayer was the prayer of faith,
like the sung. Faith gives wings to
our prayers, so that they fly heaven-
high ; but unbelief clogs and chains our
prayers to earth. If you want some
well to spring up to supply the needs
of yourself and your family, pray in
faith; the rock, if needs be, shall flow
with rivers of water.

3. It was united prayer. All the
people prayed, “Spring up, O welll”
The prayer was a unanimous one.

IV. Then they went to work,


“T will give them water,” but “ the
princes digged the well, the nobles of
the people digged it,” &c.

1. When God intends to bless a
people, effort is always esteemed to be
honourable. ‘ The princes digged,” &c.
They were not ashamed of the work.
And when God shall bless a church and
people, they must all feel that it is a
very great honour to do anything in
the service of God. Our highest dignity
isto beservants of the Lord Jesus Christ.

2. It was effort which was accomplished
by very feeble means. They digged the
well with their staves—not very first-
class tools. But they did as they were
told. We must digas wecan. We must
use what abilities we have. If you
have but one talent, use that one talent.

3. It was effort in God's order. They
digged the well “ by the direction of
the lawyiver.” We must not forget in
everything we do for God, to go to
work in God’s way.

4. It was effort made in faith. They
digged the well, but as they digged it
they felt so certain that the water would
come that they sang at the work,
“Spring up, O well!” This is the
true way to work if we would geta
blessing. —C. H. Spurgeon.


Taz OverTHROW oF THB AmoRITES; on, THE Dereat ov “TH PEOPLE THAT
Deuigot my War.”


(Verses 21-26.)


The following points in this portion
of the history may be considered with
advantage.

I. A reasonable request preferred.

“ And Israel sent messengers unto
Sihon king of the Amorites, saying, let
me pass,” &e. (vers. 21, 22). Thesame
request was sent by them on a former
occasion to the king of Edom (chap.
xx. 17). This request was—

1. Reasonable in itself, “Let me
pass through thy land.” (On this and
the next subdivision see pp. 376, 377.)

2. Enforced by satisfactory assurances.
“ We will not turn into the fields, or
into the vineyards; we will not drink
of the waters of the well; we will go


along by the king’s high way, until we
be past thy borders.”

II. A hostile refusal returned.

“And Sihon would not suffer Israel
to pass through his border: but Sihon
gathered all his people together,” &.
(ver. 23). The reasons which led the
king of the Amorites to adopt this line
of action were probably partly those
which led the king of the Edomites to op-
pose their passing through his country ;
¢.g., fear that they should receive some
injury from the Israelites if they granted
their request, and envy of their growing
power (see pp. 876, 377). On receiving
the request Sihon gathered his people
together, and marched my Israel,


CHAP. XXL


‘HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


a  ————————


Not content with opposing their march
through his territory, “he went out
against Israel into the wilderness ; and
he came to Jahaz, and fought against
Israel.” He was theaggressor in the war;
and his assault was entirely unprovoked.
It isan evil thing when kings and their
advisers are so eager to make war. (a)

III. An unprovoked assault ending
in an unmitigated defeat.

“And Israel smote him with the
edge of the sword, and possessed his
land,” &c. (vers. 24, 25). If, like one
in modern times, Sihon entered upon
the conflict “with a light heart,” he
soon exchanged it for a heavy and
bitter heart. The battle was his last.
He and all his host were destroyed.
“They that take the sword shall perish
with the sword.” His defeat and de-
struction were a just retribution for his
unprovoked and hasty assault upon
Israel. (0)

IV. A great victory obtained by
those who had in vain asked for a
small favour.

Israel had asked as a favour that
they might be allowed to pass through


the land of the Amorites, who in reply
went out to war against them; “ and
Israel smote him with the edge of the
sword, and possessed his land from
Arnon unto Jabbok,” &c. Their modest
request for permission to pass through
the land was brutally refused, and, now
having been forced into battle, they
take possession of the land as their own.
Moderation of request or demand is far
more likely to be followed by large
attainments than unreasonable requests
or extravagant demands. An attitude
of bluster and swagger generally leads
to defeat and humiliation.

V. A territory which had been ob-
tained by conquest lost by defeat.

“ For Heshbon was the city of Sihon,
the king of the Amorites, who had
fought against the former king of Moab,
and taken all his land out of his hand,
even unto Arnon.” A policy of aggres-
sion often leads to enforced retrogression.
That which has been obtained by force
is often lost by reason of the opposition
of a superior force. Righteous and
beneficent government is the best se-
curity of an empire. (¢)


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) But war's a game, which, were their
gubjects wise,

Kings would not play at. Nations would do
well


To extort their truncheona from the puny hands
Ot heroes, whose infirm and baby minds
Are gratified with mischief ; and who spoil,
Because men suffer it, their toy, the world.
— Cowper,

b) Moses sent messengers unto Sihon, de-
siring that he would grant his army a passage,
upon what security he should please to require ;
he promised that he should be no way injured,
neither astothat country which Sihon governed,
nor as to its inhabitants; and that he would
buy his provisions at such a price as should be
to their advantage, even though he should de-
sire to sell them their very water. But Sihon
refused his offer, and put his army into battle
array, and was preparing everything in order
to hinder their passing over Arnon.

When Moses saw thut the Amorite king was
disposed to enter upon hostilities with them,
he thought be ought not to bear that insult;
and, determining to wean the Hebrews from
their indolent temper, and prevent the disorders
which arose thence, which had been the occasion
of their former sedition (nor indeed were they


412


now thoroughly easy in their minds), he in-
quired of God, whether he would give him
leave to fight ? which when he had done, and
God also promised him the victory, he was
himself very courageous, and ready to proceed
to fighting. Accordingly he encouraged the
soldiers; and he desired of them that they
would take the pleasure of fighting, now God
gave them leave so to do. ‘They then upon
the receipt of this permission, which they so
much longed for, put on their whole armour,
and set about the work without delay. But
the Amorite king was not now like to himself
when the Hebrews were ready to attack him ;
but both he himself was affrighted at the
Hebrews, and his army, which before had
showed themselves to be of good courage, were
then found to be timorous : so they could not
sustain the first onset, nor bear up against the
Hebrews, but fled away, as thinking this would
afford them a more likely way for their escape
than fighting; for they depended upon their
cities, which were strong, from which yet they
reaped no advantage when they were forced to
fly to them ; for as soon as the Hebrews saw
them giving ground, they immediately pursued
them close ; and when they had broken their
ranks, they greatly terrified them, and some of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


CHAT. XXI.





them broke off from the rest, and ran away to


the cities. Now the Hebrews pursued them
briskly, and obstinately persevered in the la-
bours they had already undergone; and being
very skilful in slinging, and very dexterous in
throwing of darts, or anything else of that
kind ; and also having nothing but lightarmour,
which made them quick in the pursuit, they
overtook their enemies; and for those that


- were most remote, and could not be overtaken,


they reached them by their slings and their
bows, so that many were slain ; and those that
escaped the slaughter were sorely wounded,
and these were more distressed with thirst than
with any of those that fought against them,
for it was the summer season; and when the
greatest number of them were brought down
to the river out of a desire to drink, as also
when others fled away by troops, the Hebrews
came round them, and shot at them; so that,
what with darts and what with arrows, they
made a slaughter of them all. Sihon their
king was also slain. Sothe Hebrews spoiled
the dead bodies, and took their prey. The
land also which they took was full of abundance
of fruits, and the army went all over it with-
out fear, and fed their cattle upon it ; and they
took the enemies prisoners, for they could no
way put a stop to them, since all the fighting


men were destroyed. Such was the destruction
which overtook the Amorites, who were neither
sagacious in counsel, nor courageous in action.
Hereupon the Hebrews took pv ssession of their
land, which is a country situate between three
rivers, and naturally resembling an island :
the river Arnon being its southern limit ; the
river Jabbok determining its northern side,
which, running into the Jordan, loses its own
name, and takes the other ; while Jordan itself
runs along by it on its western coast.—Josephus,
Ant. v. 5.

(c) There is one thing too apt to be forgot-
ten, which it much behoves us to remesaber :
in the Colonies, as everywhere else in this
world, the vital point is not who decides, but
what is decided on! ‘hat measures tending
really to the best advantage, temporal and
spiritual, of the Colony be adopted, and stren-
uously put in execution ; there lies the grand
interest of every good citizen, British and
Colonial. Such measures, whosoever have
originated and prescribed them, will gradually
be sanctioned by all men and gods; and
clamours of every kind in reference to them
may safely to a great extent be neglected, as
clamorous merely, and sure to be transient.—
Thomas Carlyie,


Lessons FRomM aN ANolENT War Sona,


(Verses 27-32.)


For the interpretation of these verses
see Lxplanatory and Critical Notes.

These verses suggest reflections on—

I, The triumphs of warriors.

1. Their selfishness. ‘Come ye to
Heshbon, let the city of Sihon be built
and established.” Warriors think only
of their own cities and of the interests
of their own country and people ; to
secure these they do not hesitate to
outrage the most sacred rights of other
peoples. (a)

2. Their destructiveness. “For there is
a fire gone out of Heshbon, a flame
from the city of Sihon; it hath con-
sumed Ar of Moab.” (6)

3. Their cruelty. “It bath consumed
the lords of the high places of Arnon.”


. ().


II. The vanity of idols.

‘“‘Woe to thee, Moab! thou art un-
done, O people of Chemosh! he hath
given up his sons as fugitives, and his
daughters into captivity, unto Sihon
king of the Amorites.” Chemosh, the


national god <f the Moabites, in whom
they trusted, failed to deliver them
from the power of the Amorites (comp.
Psa. cxxxv. 15-18 ; Isa. xliv. 9-20). An
illustration of every object in which man
reposes his supreme trust, except the
Lord God. The idols of our age and
country are wealth, power, pleasure,
friendship, knowledge, wisdom; ex
cellent things in themselves and in
their place; but utterly vain when
pursued and trusted as the chief good
of man, They cannot deliver in the
day of trouble, &c. Only God is
worthy of our entire and unlimited
confidence.

III. The discomfiture of conquerors.

“We have shot at them; Heshbon is
perished even unto Dibon, and we have
laid them waste even unto Nophah,
which reacheth unto Medeba ....
And Moses sent to spy out Jaazer, and
they took the villages thereof, and
drove out the Amorites that were there.”
The Amorites had pi the


CHAP, XXI. HOMILETIC


—_—_—


Moabites and seized much of their
territory; they also went out against
Israel ; but now Israel has vanquished
them and taken their territory. The
victoris now vanquished ; the spoiler is
now spoiled. How often has this been
repeated in subsequent times! What


COMMENTARY:


NUMBERS.





a striking illustration we have of it in
Napoleon Bonaparte! (d)

IV. The insecurity of earthly pos-
sessions.

“Thus Israel dwelt in the land of
the Amorites.” “ Worldly inheritances
are continually changing their masters.”


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(@) The spirit of all rulers and nations to-
wards foreign states is partial, unjust Indi-
viduals may be disinterested ; but nations have
no feeling of the tie of brotherhood to their
race. A base selfishness is the principle on
which the affairs of nations are commonly con-
ducted. A statesman is expected to take ad-
vantage of the weaknesses and wants of other
countries. How loose a morality governs the
intercourse of states! What falsehoods and
intrigues are licensed by diplomacy! What
nation regards another with true friendship ?
What nation makes sacrifices to another's

ood ? What nation is as anxious to perform
its duties, as to assert its rights ? What nation
chooses to suffer wrong rather than inflict it ?
What nation lays down the everlasting law of
right, casts itself fearlessly on its principles, and
chooses to be poor or to perivh rather than to do
wrong ? Can communities so selfish, so un-
friendly, so unprincipled, so unjust, be ex-
pected to wage righteous wars? Especially if
with this selfishness are joined national preju-
dices, antipatuies, and exasperated passions,
what else can be expected in the public policy
but inhumanity and crime? An individual,
we know, cannot be trusted in his own cause
to measure his own claims, to avenge his own
wrongs; and the civil magistrate, an impar-
tial umpire, has been substituted as the only
means of justice. But nations are even more
unfit than individuals to judge in their own
cause ; more prone to push their rights to
excess, and totrample on the rights of others ;
because nations are crowds, and crowds are
unawed by opinion, and more easily inflamed
by sympathy into madness. Is there not, then,

ways a presumption against the justice of
war i Wee Channing, D.D.

(b) Conceive but for a moment the conster-
nation which the approach of an invading
army would impress on the peaceful villagers
in this neizhbourhood. When you have
placed yourselves for an instant in that situa-
tion, you will learn to sympathise with those
unhappy countries which have sustained the
ravages of arms. But how is it possible to
give you an idea of these horrors? Here you
behold rich harvests, the bounty of Heaven
and the reward of industry, consumed in a
moment, or trampled under foot, while famine
and pestilence follow the steps of desolation.
There the cottages of peasants given up to the
flames, mothers expiring through fear, not for
themselves but their infants; the inhabitants


414


flying with their helpless babes in all direc-
tions, miserable fugitives on their native soil !
In another part you witness opulent cities
taken by storm ; the streets, where no sounds
were heard but those of peaceful industry,
filled on a sudden with slaughter and blood,
resounding with the cries of the pursuing and
the pursued ; the palaces of nobles demolished,
the houses of the rich pillaged, the chastity of
virgins and of matrons violated, and every age,
sex, and rank, mingled in promiscuous mas-
sacre and ruin.—Robert Hall, A.M.

(c) You may see what war is, as you mark
tens and hundreds of thousands of men, made
after the image of God, rushing together to tear
and destroy exch other with more than the
fury of wild beasts. You may see what it is
in the miserable crowds of innocent men,
women, and children that are flying from their
homes to perish, in too many instances, by
famine, and the pestilence which famine
breeds. You may see what it is, in devastated
fields, where the bounty of Providence had
blessed man with abundance, which now lies
trampled into the mire, or remains rotting and
ungathered, because the tide of war has rolled
over the country. You will see what it is, in
the bombarded towns, in the sacked and deso-
late houses, in the burned and buttered villages,
where a few of the unfortunate inhabitants
may be seen prowling like famished wolves
amid the ruins of their homes, to see if they
can pick some morsel of food to save them-
selves from starvation, You may see what it
is, in the heaps of decaying human corpses that
taint the air with corruption, or are eaten by
dogs which won’t be scared away from their
loathsome feast. You may see what it is, in
the still sadder spectacle of scores and hundreds
of wounded men lying for hours and days
where they fell, with no eye to pity amd no
hand to succour, and sometimes slain in their
wounds by men worse than wild beasts, who
haunt the battle-field for plunder and spoil.
You may hear what war is, in the wild cry of
vengeance and fury, more terrible than the
howl of the wolf or the roar of the lion as he
springs on his prey, with which men hurl them-
selves into deadly strife; in the groans of the
wounded, as they lie, mercilessly trampled be-
neath the feet of their comrades, or the pranc-
ing hoofs of horges that rush over them un-
heeded ; in the shrieks of women, rushing
with dishevelled hair and eyes starting out of
their sockets in the agony of terror, as they flee


AHOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XXxI.





from outrage worse than death before the face
of brutal soldiers, drunk with blood and lust;
in the piteous wails of little infants tossed on the
points of bayonets, or nailed alive to the doors of
their parents’ houses. This is war. Yes; this
is war. It is not the minister of justice ; it is
not the redresser of wrong ; it is not the vin-
dicator of right. To borrow Coleridge's
words :—
“ War is a monster all with blood defiled,
That from the aged father tears his child :
A murderous fiend, by fiends adored,

Who slays the sire and starves the son,
The husband slays, and from her hoard

Steals what his widow's toil hath won.
Plunders God’s world of beauty ; rends away
All safety from the night, all comfort from the


day.
—RHenry Richard.
(d) Where is the man at whose nod nations
lately trembled, at whose pleasure kings held
their thrones, and whose voice, more desvlating


than the whirlwind, directed the progress of
ravaging armies? A little island now holds
this conqueror of the world. No crowdis there
to do him homage. His ear is no longer soothed
with praise. The glare which power threw
around him is vanished. The terror of his
name is past. His abject fall has even robbed
him of that admiration which is sometimes
forced upon us by the stern, proud spirit, which
adversity cannot subdue. Coatmce and pity
are all the tribute he now receives from the
world he subdued. If we can suppose that
his life of guilt has left him any moral feeling,
what anguish must he carry into the silence
and solitude to which he is doomed. From
the fields of battle which he has strewed with
wounded and slain, from the kingdoms and
families which he has desolated; the groans
of the dying, the curses of the injured, the
wailing of the bereaved, must pierce his retreat,
and overwhelm him with remorse and agony.
—W, E. Channing, D.D.


Tue Battie oF Epret, aN ILLUSTRATION oF THB CHRISTIAN CoNnFLICT.


(Verses 33-35.)


We have here an illustration of the
following great truths—

I. The Christian has to contend
against a most formidable adversary.

“Og the king of Bashan and all his
people” were a most powerful enemy
to encounter. Many of their “cities
were fenced with high walls, gates, and
bars.” The message of Jehovah unto
Moses, “Fear him not,” &c., implies
that the Israelites were deeply sensible
that they were about to encounter a
powerful antagonist. In battling
against evil the Christian has to do
with a mighty foe. Thoughtless per-
sons may speak lightly of the vitality
and strength of evil; but no one who
has ever earnestly contended with it
can do so. See St. Paul’s estimate of
it (Eph. vi, 10-18). And St. Peter's
(1 Pet. v. 8, 9). And St. Jude’s (Jude
3, 20-24). The formidableness of the
adversary of the Christian may be seen
as regards,—

1. Sin in ourselves. The complete
victory of the Christian life often in-
volves painful and protracted warfare
comp. | Cor. ix. 24-27; 2 Cor. ix. 3-5;
Heb, xii. 1-4). (a)

2. Evil in the world. Think cf the
mora: darkness and death in heathen


lands; and in our own country, of the
criminal classes ; of the multitudes who,
though not criminal, are irreligious; of
the drunkenness, the commercial dis-
honesty, the social corruptions, the
religious formality, &c. Let any one
attempt to grapple with any one of
these forms of evil, and he will need no
argument to convince him that true
Christians are battling against a mighty
adversary. (6)

II. The Christian in his conflict is
inspired with the most encouraging
assurance.

“ And Jehovah said unto Moses, Fear
him not ;” &c. It has been well pointed
out in the Biblical Museum, that “ they
were likely to fear, since—1l., They had
before them a powerful foe, warlike and
well posted; 2. They were weakened by
previous battles; 3. They had enemies
behind and before them.” And we know
as a matter of fact that they did fear the
encounter. ‘The giant stature of Og,
and the power and bravery of his people,
excited a dread which God Himself alle-
viated by His encouragement to Moses
before the battle, and the memory of this
victory lingered long in the national
memory (Ps. oxxxv. 11; exxxvi. 20).”


The encouragement given to Vr illus


CHAP. XX1.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





trates that which is given to Christians
in their conflict with evil. Notice—

1. The assurance. ‘I have delivered
him into thy hand, and all his people,
and his land.” Christians are assured
of victory over sin (comp. John xvi. 33;
Rom. viii. 35-39; xvi. 20; 1 John iv.
4; v. 4, 5). (c)

2. The example. ‘ Thou shalt do to
him as thou didst to Sihon, king of the
Amorites,” &c. Past victories should
inspire us with courage and fortitude
in present conflicts (comp. 1 Sam, xvii.
34-37; 2 Tim. iv. 17, 18). (ad)

3. The exhortation. .“ Fear him not.”
Enforced by such an assurance from
such a Being, and by so recent and
striking an example, this exhortation
must have carried with it great power.
Christian soldier, “fear not! for they
that be with us are more than they that
be with them.”

III. The Christian in his conflict
shall obtain a most complete victory.

“So they smote him, and his sons,
and all his people,” &c. This illus-
trates the Christian victory in at least
“wo respects :—


1. The destruction of their enemies,
The Christian shall be victorious over
evil in himself. He shall be presented
“ faultless in the presence of His glory
with exceeding joy.” And the Christian
cause shall triumph in the world. “He
must reign till he hath put all enemies
under His feet.” “And death and
Hades were cast into the lake of fire.”

2. Their enrichment by the destruction
of their enemies. “ And they possessed
his land.” “All the cattle, and the
spoil of the cities, we took a prey to
ourselves” (Deut. iii. 7). So Christians
“are more than conquerors through
Him that loved” them, The Christian
is a gainer by reason of his moral bat-
tles; he comes out of the conflict greatly
enriched with the most precious spiritual
spoils. His wisdom, his strength, his
courage, the very noblest qualities of
his manhood, are all increased and per-
fected in the arduous strife with sin.

Christian soldiers, onward bravely to
the battle, and quail not in its fiercest
strife ; for through the Captain of your
salvation, a splendid triumph shall be
yours. (e)


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) When men are swimming with the tide,
how easy it is! They seem to themselves,
oh! how lithe and springy. Butlet them turn
round and attempt t» swi-w back, und they will
find that it is quite a different matter. There
is many and many a man whose conviction
of danger comes with his attempt to turn back
on habit—H. W. Beecher

(6) A soldier is a practical man, s man who
bas work to do, and hard, stern work. He
may sometimes, when he is at his ease, wear
the fineries of war, but when he comes to real
warfare he cares little enough for them; the
dust and the smoke, and the garments rolled
in blood, these are for those who go a soldier-
ing ; and swords all hacked, and dented ar-
mour, and bruised shields, these are the things
that mark the good, the practical soldier,
Truely to serve God, really to exhibit Christian
gxaces, fully to achieve s life-work for Christ,
aowally to win souls, this is to bear trait
wothy of a Christian. A soldier is a man of
deeds, and not of words. He has to contend
and Might. In war times his life knows little
of luxurious ease. In the dead of night per-
haps the trumpet sounds to boot and saddlé,
just at the time when he is most weary, and he
must ge to the attack just when he would

416


best prefer to take his rest in sleep. Tho
Christian is a soldier in an enemy's country ;
always needing to stand on his watch-tower,
constantly to be contending, theugh not with
flesh and blood, with far worse foes, namely,
with spiritual wickednesses in high places.—
C. A. Spurgeon.

(c) The fight may seem to hang in the scales
to-day, but the conquest is sure to come unto
Him whose right it is. He shall gather all
the sceptres of kings beneath his arm in one
mighty sheaf, and take their diadems from off
their brows, and be Himself crowned with
many crowns, for God hath said it, and heaven
and earth shall pass away, but every promise
of His must and shall be fulfilled. Push on,
then, through hosts of enemies, ye warriors of
the Cross. Fight up the hill, ye soldiers of
Christ, through the smoke and through the
dust. Ye may not see your banner just now,
neither do ye hear the trumpet that rings out
the note of victory, but the mist shall clear
away, and you shall gain .he summit of the
hill, and your foes shall fly before you, and
the King Himself shall come, and you shall
be rewarded who have continued steadfast in
His service.—Jbid,

(4) The desert was to Chriat a holy place,


SE


EE


anne


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


NUMBERS. CHAP. XXII.





after the initial battle; the sight of the old
footmarks inspired His depressed heart; the
echoes of the victorious quotations became as
voices of promise. In the first instance, He
was led up of the Spirit to be tempted: often
afterwards He was led up of the Spirit into
the same wilderness to be comforted. So all
chrough human life; recollection becomes in-
spiration, and memory speaks to the soul like
« prophet of the Lord —Joseph Parker, D.D.

For another illustration on this point, see
p- 407.

Sir Francis Drake, being in a dangerous
storm in the Thames, was heard to say, “ Must
I, who have escaped the rage of the ocean, be
drowned ina ditch!” Will you, experienced
saints, who have passed through a world of
tribulation, lie down and die of despair, or
vive up your profession because you are at the
present moment passing through some light
affliction ? Let your past preservation inspire
you with courage and constrain you to brave
all storms for Jesus’ sake.—C. 2. Sourgeon.


(e) Soldier of the Cross, the hour is coming
when the note of victory shall be proclaimed
throughout the world. The battlements of
the enemy must soon succumb ; the swords of
the mighty must soon be given up to the Lord
of lords. What! soldier of the Cross, is the
day of victory, wouldst thou have it said that
thou didst turn thy back in the day of battle ?
Dost thou not wish to have a share in the con-
flict, that thou mayest have a share in the
victory ? If thou haat even the hottest part
of the battle, wilt thou flinch and fly ? Thou
shalt have the hrightest part of the victory if
thon art in the fiercest of the conflict. Wilt
thon turn and lose thy laurels? Wilt thou
throw down thy sword? shall it be with
thee as when a standard-bearer fainteth ?
Nay, man, up tc arms again! for the victory
is certain. Though the conflict be severe, I
beseech you, on to it again! Qn, on, ye lion-
heurted men of God, to the battle once more }
for ye shull yet be crowned with immortal
glory.—Jbid,


CHAPTER XXIL


CritioaL anpD Expianatory Notes,


We now enter upon the last division
of this Book, which comprises fifteen
chapters (xxii.-xxxvi.).

“Tn the steppes of Moab the Israelites
encamped upon the border of the
Promised Land, from which they were
only separated by the Jordan. But
before this boundary line could be
passed, there were many preparations
that had to be made. {n tho first
place, the whole congregation was to
pass through a trial of great importance
to all future generations, as bearing
upon the relation in which it stood to
the heathen world; and in the second
place, it was here that Moses, who was
not to enter Canaan because of his sin
at the water of strife, was to bring the
work of legislation to a close before his
death, and not only to issue the requisite
instructions concerning the conquest of
tne promised inheritance, and the
division of it among the tribes of Israel,
but to impress once more upon the
hearts of the whole congregation the
essential contents of the whole law,
with all that the Lord had done for
Israel, that they might be confirmed
‘in their fidelity to the Lord, and pre-

RE


served from the danger of apostasy.
This last work of the faithful servant
of God, with which he brought his
mediatorial work toa close, is described
in the book of Deuteronomy; whilst
the laws relating to the conquest and
partition of Canaan, with the experience
of Israel in the steppes of Moab, fill up
the latter portion of the present book.”
—Keil and Del.

In this and the succeeding two chap-
ters we have the record of Balaam and
his prophecies.

Versol. “Theplains. Heb. araboth;
the word is the plural of that which is
used to denote the whole depressed
tzact along the Jordan and the Dead
Sea, and onward, where it is still called
the Arabah, to the Elanitio gulf. Near
the mouth of the Jordan this tract is
about eleven miles across, a breadth of
from four to five miles being on the
eastern bank, The space occupied by
the Israclitish camp consisted, in the
main, of a large and luxuriant oasis
upon this bank, slightly raised above
the barren flat, sultry because sheltered
by the Peraean hills which bear up the
fertile plateau above, and watered by

BiT


CHAP, XXII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


NUMBERS.





the brooks which, descending from those
hills, run westward across the plain
into the Jordan (see Tristram, ‘ Land
of Israel,’ pp. 528 sqq.).”—Speaker’s
Comm.

Plains of Moab: See on xxi. 20.

On this side Jordan by Jericho. Keil
and Del. translate, “ Beyond the Jordan
of Jericho.”

Verse 2, Balak = waster, destroyer.
— Fuerst.

Zippor =a bird.

Verse 3. ‘“ Was distressed because of.
Lit. ‘shrank from before them’ in
terror.” —Speaker’s Comm.

Verse 4. Midian. “The Midian-
ites, who are referred to here, must be
distinguished from the branch of the
same tribe which dwelt in the peninsula
of Sinai (chap. x. 29, 30; Exod. ii. 15,
16; iii. 1). They had been settled for
a long time (cf. Gen. xxxvi. 35) on the
eastern border of the Moabitish and
Amoritish territory, in a grassy but
treeless steppe-land—where many ruins
and wells are still to be found belong-
ing to very ancient times—and lived by
grazing (chap. xxxi. 32, sqq.) and the
caravan trade. They were not very
warlike, and were not only defeated by
the Edomites (Gen. xxxvi. 35), but
were also subdued and rendered tribu-
tary by Sihon, king of the Amorites.”
—Keil and Del,

“ The elders of Midian are heads of
tribes who administered the general
affairs of the people, who, like the Is-
raelites, lived under a patriarchal con-
stitution. The most powerful of them
bore the title of ‘kings’ (chap. xxxi. 8)
or ‘ princes’ (Josh. xiii. 21).—Jbid.

Verse 5. Balaam = “devourer of the
people” (Hengstenberg) ; or, ‘one not
belonging to the people, #.¢., a foreigner;
or, couqueror, corrupter of the people.”
—Fuerst.

Beor is regarded by many as derived
from “W2, to burn, to consume


Fuerst says it signifies shepherd, and
is from “YA, cattle. In 2 Pet. ii 15


the name is written Bosor.

“Pethor, which is by the river, &o.
Rather, ‘ which was on the river’ (2.¢.,
the Fuphrates, so called here and else-
where by pre-eminence) ‘in his native
land.’ ””— Speaker's Comm.

Pethor was a city of Mesopotamia
(Deut. xxiii. 4) on the Euphrates. Its
site is unknown.

Verse 7. Rewards of divination.
“The soothsayers’ wages” (comp. 2 Pet.
ii. 15).

Verse 15. Princes, more, and more
honourable ; t.e., more in number and
of more exalted rank, and with more
splendid presents or proffers of reward.

Verse 36. A city of Moab. Heb.,
Ir- Moab. See on chap. xxi. 15.

Verse 39. Kerjath-huzoth. Margin:
“a city of streets.” Fuerst: “city of
the steppes.” From the context, it
was “apparently within Balak’s domi-
nions, and therefore south of the Arnon.
Hardly however far south, for from it,
on the morrow, the company proceeded
to Bamoth-Baal, which lay north of the
Arnon. It was probably a place of
importance, and possibly that of Balak’s
residence. .... All the conditions
implied as to the site of Kirjath-buzoth
in the Scriptural notice of it are satis-
fied by the ruins of Shihan, four miles
west by south of the site assigned to
Ar or Ir, They stand ona slight but
insulated eminence, and form a con-
spicuous object to all the country
round.” —Speaker’s Comm.

Verse 41. The high places of Baal ;
or, Bamoth-Baal. See on xxi. 19.

The utmost part of the people; or,
“the end of the people,” te, the outer-
most portion of the camp of Israel.
Balak seems to have thought that
Balaam must have the Israelites in view
to curse them effectually.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP, XXIL


SSS
Pitermms Nearina Home.


(Verse 1.)


The Israelites have now ended their
wanderings, They have encamped tor
_ the last time. When they strike their
tents again it will be to march forward
towards the Jordan to enter the Pro-
mised Land. Viewing them in their
present position, we regard them as an
illustration of the Christian approaching
the end of his pilgrimage. There is an
analogy in the following particulars.
The Christian as he draws near to the
end of his pilgrimage, —

I. Is cheered by delightful prospects.

From their present encampment the
Israelites could behold the land pro-
mised to their fathers. They looked
forward to—

1. Rest from their toils and wander-
sngs. The Christian nearing home
anticipates rest from sin and sorrow,
from toil and trial, from doubt and
fear. Soon they shall “ rest from their
labours,” &c. (a)

2. Possession of the inheritance. The
‘inheritance incorruptible, and unde-
filed, and that fadeth not away,” will
soon be entered upon by the Christian
who has the end of his journey in view.

3. The realisation of precious and
long-cherished hopes. Foy generations
past the noblest of the Israelites had
been animated by the hope of the
possession of Canaan; and now that
hope is on the point of fruition. The
Christian hopes for freedom from sin,
for holiness, for likeness to Christ, for
the vision of God (1 John iii. 2, 3);
and as he nears the bourne of his pil-
grimage the realisation of these splen-
did hopes comes into clear and clearer
view. Most brilliant and blessed are
his prospects. (0)

Il. Needs preparation for the new
stale into which he is about to enter.

In tois encampment in the plains of
Moab much preparatory work had to
be done amongst the Israelites before
they could advance to the possession
of Canaan. This preparatory work is
narrated in the last eleven chapters of

BE


this hook, and in the book of Deute-
ronomy. Moses completed his work as
legislator for them, gave them direc-
tions as to the conquest and division
of the land, took great pains to guard
them against apostasy, to confirm them
in their covenant relation to God, and
to strengthen their loyalty to Him.
And as the Christian approaches the
end of his pilgrimage, the progress of
his preparation for heaveu is often
manifest to the spiritual observer. His
increasing meetness for his inheritance
may be seen in the beautiful ripening
of his character, which grows rich and
mellow. His life becomes luminous
with fore-gleamings of the great glory
to which he approaches. Gradually he
is ‘‘ made meet to be a partaker of the
inheritance of the saints in light.” (c)

ITI. Is still subjected to trials and
difficulties.

While encamped in the plains of
Moab, and before entering the Promised
Land, the Israelites experienced—

1, Perilous temptations. In the
twenty-fifth chapter we have an account
of temptations arising from their asso-
ciation with idolatrous peoples and
practices, to which great numbers of
the Israelites yielded. The true child
of God is sometimes sorely tempted
and tried, even when he has the bea-
venly Canaan within his view.

2. Painful separations. Their great
emancipator and leader, ‘‘ Moses the
servant of the Lord died there in the
land of Moab. .. . . And the children
of Israel wept for Moses in the plains
of Moab thirty days.” And the aged
pilgrim nearing the end of his course
often experiences painful separations.
The dear partner of his life is perhaps
summoned home before him, leaving
him to finish his journey alone in
weariness and sorrow. The end of the
pilgrimage always involves separations,
and very often trying ones,

3. Formidable difficulties. Jordan had
to be crossed before the bgt

419


CHAP, XXII,





entered intoCanaan. And death is an
experience which must be passed through
by the Christian pilgrim before he gains
the heavenly rest ; and to some this is
a source of great anxiety and trial. (d)

Ye aged pilgrims, and ye who by


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


NUMBERS.





reason of sickness or weakness are
nearing home, be of good cheer, for
your heavenly inheritance is at hand.
Be ye also diligent that when the sum-
mons to arise and depart is given to
you, ye may be ready joyfully to obey it.


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) O weary sons and daughters of Adam !
you will not have to drive the ploughshare into
the unthankful soil in heaven; you will not
need to rise to daily toil before the sun hath
risen, and labour still when the sun hath long
ago gone to his rest ; but ye shall be still, ye
shall be quiet, ye shall rest yourselves. Toil,
trouble, travail, and labour are words that can-
not be spelled in heaven; they have no such
things there; for they always rest.—C. H.

eon.

(5) I do not know a more beautiful sight to
be seen on earth than a man who has served
the Lord for many years, and who, having
grown grey in service, feels that in the order
of nature he must soon be calledhome. He is
rejoicing in the first-fruits of the Spirit which
he has obtained, but he is panting after the
full harvest of the Spirit which is guaranteed
to him. I think I see him sitting on a jutting
crag by the edge of Jordan, listening to the
harpers on the other side, and waiting till the
pitcher shall be broken at the fountain, and
the wheel at the cistern, and the spirit shall
depart to God that made it. A wife waiting
for her husband's footsteps; a child waiting
in the darkness of the night till its mother
comes to give it the evening kiss, are portraits
of our waiting. It is pleasant and precious
thing so to wait and so to hope.—Jbid.

During the last days of that eminent man
of God, Dr. Payson, he once said, ‘‘ When J
formerly read Bunyan’s description of the
land of Beulah, where the sun shines and the
birds sing day and night, I used to doubt
whether there was such a place; but now my
own experience has convinced me of it, and it
infinitely transcends all my previous concep-
tions.” The best possible commentary on the
glowing descriptions in Bunyan is to be found
in that very remarkable letter dictated by
Dr. Payson to his sister a few weeks before
his death. “ Were I to adopt the figurative
language of Bunyan, I might date this letter
from the land Beulah, of which I have been
for some weeks a happy inhabitant. The
Celestial city is full in my view. Its glories
have been upon me, its breezes fan me, its
odours are wafted to me, its sounds strike upon
my ears, and its spirit is breathed into my heart.
Nothing separates me from it but the river of
Death, which now appears but an insignificant
rill, that may be crossed ata single step, when-
ever God shall give permission. The Sun of
Righteousness has been gradually drawing
nearer, appearing larger and brighter as He

420


approached, and now He fills the whole hemi-
sphere, pouring forth a flvod of glory, in which
I seem to float like an insect in the beams of
the sun, exulting, yet almost trembling, while
I gaze on this bleeged brightness, and wonder-
ivg with unutterable wonder why God should
deign thus to shine upon a sinful worm,”—
George B. Cheever, D.D.

(c) Am I nearer heaven? then I will be
doing more of the work which I shall do in
heaven. I shall eoun use the harp: let me be
carefully tuning it : let me rehearse the hymns
which I shall sing before the throne; for if
the words in heaven shall be sweeter and more
rich than any that poets can put together here,
yet the essential song of heaven shall be the
same as that which we present to Jehovah here
below :

“ They praise the Lamb in hymns above,

And we in hymns below.”

The essence of their praise is gratitude that
He should bleed : it is the essence of our praise
too. They bless Immanuel’s name for un-
deserved favours bestowed upon unworthy ones,
and we do the same. My aged brethrea, I
congratulate you, for you are almost home: be
yet more full of praise than ever. Quicken
your footsteps as the glory land shines more
brightly. You are close to the gate of pearl;
sing on, dear brother, though infirmities in-
crease, and let the song grow sweeter and
louder until it melts into the infinite harmo-
nies.—C. H. Spurgeon.

(d) In itself, dexth ia the self-same thing to
the righteous as to the wicked. It isthe same
painful, convulsive separation between soul
and body, sometimes attended with greater
suffering, sometimes with less, but always con-
stituting the supreme last strife of agony en-
durable in this mortal tenement, . . .

Some wicked men have suffered much less
in dying than some righteous men. “One
dieth in his full strength, being wholly at
ease and quiet. Another dicth in the bitter-
ness of his soul. They shall lie down alike in
the dust, and the worms shall cover them.” It
would be interesting to draw a comparison
between the deaths and the death-beds of a
number of the most remarkable wicked men,
with an equal number of the most remarkable
righteous men, The circumstances of disease,
of mere material evil, are much the same, ex-
cept that as material evils, they are always
ageravated by spiritual distress ; the pangs of
conscience giving sharpness to the pangs of
dissolving nature. Compare even the death-


Boe ow


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





beds of Hume, Voltaire, and Paine, with those
of Edwards, Brainard, Henry Martyn and
Payson, and you will find that there is not
much to choose as to the physical pain of
dying. Take the deaths of Herod and of Paul,
the one eaten of worms, consumed inwardly,
and the last in all probability crucified, and
there was about as much ;hysical sutfering in
the one death as in the other. ‘Take the
deaths of Nero and W John, the one is a sui-


OHAP. XXII,


a


cide, the last dying quietly at a hundred yeara
ef age; the pangs of dissolution in both cases
were probably very nearly equal. The death
of the righteous is no more exempt from phy-
sical distress and suffering than that of the
wicked.— G. B. Cheever, DD.

For » nother lust ation see the description
of Christian and Hopeful passing through the
miver of Death in Bunyan’s Pilgrim's Progress


NauEpiess ALARM,


(Verses 2-4.)


i, This alarm was great.

* Moab was sore afraid of the people,
and Moab was distressed because of the
children of Israel.” ‘ As the Israelites
passed by the eastern border of the land
of Moab, the Moabites did not venture
to make any attack upon them ; on the
contrary, they supplied them with bread
and water for money (Deut. ii. 29). At
that time they no doubt cherished the
hope that Sihon, their own terrible con-
queror, would be able with perfect ease
either to annihilate this new foe, or to
drive them back into the desert from
which they had come But when they
saw this hope frustrated, and the Is-
raelites had overthrown the two kings
of the Amorites with victorious power,
and had conquered their kingdoms, and
pressed forward through what was for-
merly Moabitish territory, even to the
banks of the Jordan, the close proximity
of so powerful a foe filled Balak, their
king, with terror and dismay, so that
he began to think of the best means of
destroying them.” Kel and Del. To
go out and fight against them, to at-
tempt to oppose their progress by force,
were projects which could not be enter-
tained even for a moment by the Moab-
ites. They shrank from before them in
extreme alarm.

II. This alarm seemed to be justified.

‘he historian mentions three things
as giving rise to the terror of the Moab-
ites.

1, The number of the Israelites. ‘Moab
was sore afraid of the people, because
they were many.” The number of
men, “from twenty years old and up-


wards, able to go tv war in Israel,” was
at this time about 601,730 (chap. xxvi.
51), not including the Levites.

2. The needs of the Israelites. ‘ And
Moab said unto the elders of Midian,
Now shall this company lick up all
round about us, as the ox licketh up
the grass of the field.” The idea seems
to be that so great a multitude would
have great needs, and with their great
power would seize and entirely consume
all the possessions of the Moabites and
the Midianites. The Israelites ‘seemed
able to eat up the Moabites, to consume
their towns, to possess their substance,
and to take both their cities and sub-
stance into their own hands.”

3. The deeds of the Israelites. “ Ba-
lak the son of Zippor saw all that Israel
had done to the Amorites.” They had
conquered completely the former con-
queror of the Moabites; how, then,
could they expect to stand before them?
It is probable that they had also heard
of “the supernatural might of the
people of God,” of the wonders which
He had wrought for them, and this
increased their terror by reason of
them.

III, This alarm led to the forma-
tion of an alliance against Israel.

The Moabites induced their neigh
bours, the Midianites, to make common
cause with them against the people who
seemed such a dangerous foe to both of
them. In this we bave an illustration
of many alliances which have been
entered into against the cause and peo-
ple of God. “ Notwithstanding the dif-
ferences and divisions Tre the


CHAP. XXIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,





enemies of God and His truth, they
can join hand in hand together to op-
press the Church.” We have illustra-
tions of this in Judg. vi. 3; 2 Chron.
xx. 1; Psa. Ixxxiii. 5-3; Matt. xxii. 15,
16 ; Luke xxiii. 12; Acts iv. 27; vi. 9;
xvii. 18.

IV. This alarm was needless.

“There was no ground for such
alarm, as the Israelites, in consequence
of Divine instructions (Deut. ii. 9), had
offered no hostilities to the Moabites,
but had conscientiously spared their
territory and property ; and even after
the defeat of the Amorites, had not
turned their arms against them, but
had advanced to the Jordan to take
possession of the land of Canaan.”
We may regard this as an illustration
of—

1. The groundless fears of the good.
Vhus * David said in his heart, I shall
now perish one day by the hand of
Saul.” And the disciples of Christ
“cried out for fear,” when Jesus came
to them walking on the sea. (a)


But the terror of the Moabites more
appropriately illustrates—

2. The groundless alarms of the wicked.
“The wicked fleeth when no man pur-
sueth.”


“ Suspicion always haunts the guilty mind ;
The thief doth fear each bush an officer.”
—Shakespeare,


“The evil man feareth oftentimes
where no fear is, trembling at the fall
of a leaf, starting at his own thought,
and shaking at his own shadow.” ‘ Con-
science before sin committed, is a bridle
to keep us from it, but when it is
committed, a most sharp scourge and
whip.” (6)

Lessons.

1. It ts not always well to judge by
appearances, In this respect the Moab-
ites erred. (c)

2. No alliance can prevail against the
cause of God.

3. The infallible antidote against
alarm is firm faith in God (comp, Psa
lvi. 3, 115 cxii. 7).


ILLUSTRATIONS,


(a) I remember, when a boy, reading a story
of a traveller, who arrived in the dusk of the
evening at a place where two roads met, and
was greatly alarmed by what appeared to him,
at a distance, to be a frightful ghost, dressed
in white, with arms extended, ready to seize
him in his frightful embrace. Cautiously
advancing, however, he soon discovered that
what appeared to be a terrible monster, ready
to clutch him, was only a gutde-board to direct
him on his journey. Such are the afflictions
that often befall us in this life. Seen ata
distance, in the feeble light of our dim faith,
they are frightful apparitions that alarm and
terrify us; but, in the event, they prove so
many friendly guide-boards, that a wise and
gracious Providence has placed by the way-
side, to guide us on to glory.—Anon,

It often happens that the coming of Christ
to His disciples, for their relief, is that which
frightens them most, because they do not know
the extent of God’s wardrobe ; tor I think that
asa king might never wear the same garment
but once, in order to show his riches and
magnificence, 50 God comes to usin all exi-
gencies, but never twice alike. He sometimes
puts on the garments of trouble; and when
we are calling upon Him as though He were
yet in heaven, He is walking by our side ; and
that from which we are praying God to deliver
as is sr but God Himself. Thus it is with

22


us as with children who are terrified by their
dreams in tie night, and scream for their
parents, until, fully waking, behold, they are
in their parent’s arms.—A. W. Beecher.

In regard to these temptations, Bunyan was
gometines just like a scared child that thinks
it sees a ghost, or like a timid person in a
wood by twilight, that sees in the stump of a
tree a man crvuched and lying in wait, and in-
stead of daring to go boldly up to it to see what
it is, stands shivering and almost dead with
terror. Who has not realized this in his own
experience, timid or brave? And just so
Bunyan did not dare to go up to and examine
and look in the face of the shocking blasphe-
mies, accusations, and wrathful passages that
Satan would be ever thrusting into his soul ;
but went cowering and shivering and bowed
down 2g a man in chains under the weight of
them. There was a time when all that Satan
said to him he seemed morbidly inclined to
take upon trust; and if it were a fiery passage
of God’s Word, so much the worse; for in-
stead of coming up to it as a child of God to
see what it was, and whether it were really
against him, he fled from it at once as from
the fiery flaming sword in the gate of Eden.
And nothing can be more curions, more
graphic, more affecting in its interest, more
childlike in its simplicity, than the manner in
which Bunyan describes the commencement and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP, XXII.





progress of his recovery out of this state of con-
demnation and terror: how timidly and
cautiously, and as it were by stealth, he be-
gan to look these dreadful passages in the face
when they had ceased pursuing him, standing
at first afar off, and gazing at them, and then,
as a child that cannot get rid of its fear,
_ slowly drawing near, and at length daring to
touch them, and to walk around them, and to
see their true position and meaning, but
always conscious of their awful power.—
G. B. Cheever, D.D.

(6) However vauntingly men may bear
themselves in the hour of prosperous villainy,
proofs enough have existed of the fears of
guilt, when the hour of calamity approaches.
Why did our first parents hide themselves after
their sin, when they heard the voice of the
Lord in the garden? Why did Cain alarm
himself at being pursued by the people of the
earth? Why shrunk Belshazzar from the
handwriting on the wail? Adam had before
heard the voice of the Lord, and trembled not:
Cain knew that no witness of the murJer of
his brother existed: Belshazzar understood
not the meaning of the writing upon the wall:
—and yet they all, after the commission of
their several deeds of sin, trembled at the
voices that were heard, and the signs that were
avout. Whence, then, was this? It was be-
eause conscience told them, that there is an
Wye to which all hearts are open, and whis-


pered the important truth, which has since
been proclaimed aloud to all the world, that
doubtless there “is a God that judgeth in the
earth.”’— Mathew,


What a state is guilt,
When everything alarms it! Like a sentinel
Who sleeps apon his watch, it wakes in dread
E’en at a breath of wind.
When apprehension can form naught but fears,
And we distrust security itself—W. Havard,


(c) I remember well, one night, having been
preaching the Word in a country village, I
was walking home alone along a lonely foot-
path. Ido not know what it was that ailed
me, but I was prepared to be alarmed, when
of a surety I saw something standing in the
hedge, ghastly, giantlike, and with outstretched
arms. Surely, I thought, for once I have come
across the supernatural ; here is some restless
spirit performing its midnight march beneath
the moon, or some demon of the pit. I de-
liberated with myself a moment, and having
no faith in ghosts, I plucked up courage, and
resolved to solve the mystery. The monster
stood on the other side of a ditch, right in the
hedge. I jumped the ditch, and found myself
grasping an old tree, which some waggish
body had taken pains to colvur with a little
whitewash, with a view to frighten simpletons.
That old tree has served me a good turn full
otten.—C. H. Spurgeon,


Bawax’s First APPLICATION To BauaaM: MAN AND THE SUPERNATURAL


(Verses 5-14.)


Here we have the beginning of the
action arising from the alliance between
Moab and Midian against Israel. “*‘ Wil-
ling to wound, but yet afraid to strike,’
the Moabites felt that it would be in
vain to contend with them while they
so manifestly enjoyed the blessing and
protection ofamighty God. But they
did think that it might be possible to
withdraw or neutralize the force of that
advantage, by laying upon them the
heavy ban of some powerful magician ;
and by having them thus rendered
weak as other men, they might be
assailed with every prospect of success.
It must have been a great recommenda-
tion of the design to them, that the
result would enable them to recover
the territory that had once been theirs,
but which the Israelites now held by
right of conquest from the Amorites.
Iadeed, could the Israelites be extermi-


nated, or driven back into the desert,
the children of Lot might well calcu-
late on not only recovering what they
had lost, but on adding the rich lands
of Argob and Bashan, which the I[srael-
ites had won from Og, to their former
territories ; and they would thus, with
some allied tribes of Abrahamic origin,
become the sole possessors of the whole
country east of the Jordan.”—Kitto.
With these views they sent to Balaam,
a celebrated soothsayer, requesting him
to come and curse Israel. In this por-
tion of the history we have the following
instructive themes for meditation—

I. Men in difficulty seeking super-
natural help.

“ Balak sent messengers unto Balaam
the son of Beor,” &c. (vers.5-7). This
action manifests the belief that Balaam
wielded supernatural powers. “It was
supposed that prophets marred


CHAP, XXII,


ee


had a power to curse persons and places
so as to confound all their designs,
frustrate their counsels, enervate their
strength, and fill them with fear, terror,
and dismay.” (a)

1. There is a measure of truth in this.
It is true that men have had power
granted them to curse others. We
have examples of this in Gen. ix. 25;
Josh. vi. 26; 2 Kings ii. 24. It is
probable that Balaam had this power.
It is also true that when natural re-
sources are unavailing, under certain
circumstances and conditions man may
obtain supernatural aid. The godly
man may obtain such aid by means of
prayer to God. —

2. There is much error tn the views
under consideration. It was utterly
erroneous to suppose that Balaam, or
any one else, possessed this power in-
dependently, and could wield it arbi-
trarily. “The curse causeless shall not
come.” No man can curse those whom
God hath blessed. And the power to
curse or bless does not depend upon
sacrifices or incantations ; it is rather a
gift bestowed by God, and which can
be exercised only by His permission.

II. Man conscious of supernatural
powers and of his subjection to Divine
authority in the use of them.

And he said unto them, “ Lodge here
this night, and I will bring you word
again, as the Lord shall speak unto me.”
Balaam was certainly not altogether an
impostor. ‘In his career,” says Dean
Stanley, “is seen that recognition of
Divine inspiration outside the chosen
people, which the narrowness of modern
times has been so eager to deny, but
which the scriptures are always ready
to acknowledge, and, by acknowledging,
admit within the pale of the teachers
of the Universal Church the higher
spirits of every age and of every nation.”
But notico—

1. His consciousness of great powers.
This is clearly implied in the history.
“He was endowed with a greater than
ordinary knowledge of the one true
God: he was possessed of high gifts of
intellect and genius: he had the intu-
ition of truth, and could see into the

424





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; NUMBERS,





life of things—in short, he was a poet
and a prophet.” (0)

. Mis consciousness of subjection to
God in the use of his powers, Repeatedly
in the history he confesses that all his
great powers were not his own, but
derived from God, and could be used
only by His permission. This is clearly
implied in the portion of the history
now under consideration (vers, 8, 13).
He seems also to have been aware of
the relation of Israel to the true God ;
and to heve doubted whether he would


be allowed to curse them. Hence we


see—

3. His sin against God. Knowing
what he did, he ought at once, and
decidedly, to have refused the request
of Balak. But he said to his messen-
gers, “Lodge here this night,” &.
He coveted “the rewards of divina-
tion”; he “loved the wages of un-
righteousness.” For unhallowed gain
he would have prostituted his great
gifts to wicked uses ; and hoped to gain
permission to go with the messengers
of Balak. (ce)

III. Man receiving a supernatural
visitation.

“And God came unto Balaam, and
said, What men are these with thee?”
(vers. 9-12). This was an extraordinary
visit, But here are three points of
general application :

1. God's access to man’s mind. It
was probably by means of a dream or
vision that God came to Balaam that
night, and made known to him His will.
By many avenues God can enter into
man’s mind, and influence his conscious-
ness, With or without the concurrence
of man’s will, or even against His will,
God can enter hismind and speak to him.

2. God’s interest in man’s life. This
is seen in His question to Balaam,
“What men are these with thee?” and
in His prohibition, “Thou shalt not go
with them,” &o. The Lord was con-
cerned for Balaam’s welfare ; He was
solicitous that he should not succumb
to the temptations presented to him. (d)
In many ways God still manifests His
solicitude for man’s salvation, and His
deep interest in every human life.


ii i i) Pe


oo. <


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





3. God's authority over man’s life.
“God said unto Balaam, thou shalt
not go with them,” &c. It is God’s
to command; it is man’s to obey.
Man’s well-being is in the practical
recognition of God’s authority over


_ him.


IV. Man dealing unfaithfully with
a Divine communication.

‘And Balaam rose up in the morn-
ing, and said unto the princes of
Balak,” &c. (ver. 13). The most im-
portant part of God’s message to him,
that which would effectually have ended
the business, he withheld from the
messengers of Balak. He spoke as if
it were possible to curse them, and as
if he were inclined to accede to the
request of Balak. His avarice is still
further manifest in this: he could not
bear to lose for ever “the rewards of
divination” which the messengers had
brought with them. ‘ Balaam’s char-
acter is not so peculiar as it seems.
Separated from the external accidents
of time, of country, and position, we
may go into the streets, and find a
Balaam in every third man we meet.
He belonged to that still numerous
class who theoretically know God,
and who actually do fear Him, but
whose love and fear of God ure
not the regulating and governing
principles of their minds. They are
convinced, but not converted. They
can prize, and strongly desire the privi-
leges of God’s elect ; they long to ‘ die
the death of the righteous,’ but are
unwilling to live their life. They would
serve God, but they must serve mam-
mon also ; and in the strife between the
two contending influences, their lives


— ee


CHAP. XXII.





are made bitter, and their death ia
perilous.” —Kitto.

V. Men dealing unfaithfully as
messengers,

“And the princes of Moab rose up,
and they went unto Balak, and said,
Balaam refuseth to come with us.”
“Observe Satan’s practice against God’s
word,” says Ainsworth, “seeking to
lessen the same, and that from hand to
hand, till he bring it to naught.
Balaam told the princes less than God
told him, and they relate to Balak less
than Balaam told them; so that when
the answer came to the king of Moab,
it was not the word of God but the
word of man; it was simply, ‘ Balaam
refuseth to come,’ without ever intima-
ting that God had forbidden him.”

Learn.

1. The Divine communications have
never been limited to any one people, or
country, or age. Amongst heathen
peoples Divine voices have been heard,
Divine visions have been seen.

2. Great goodness is not always asso-
ctated with great gifts. ‘The illumina-
tion of the mind is by no means neces-
sarily associated with the conversion of
the heart.” “ Broad is the distinction
between spiritual endowments and
spiritual character.”

3. Great gifts involve great responsi-
bility and grave peril. The responsi-
bility of using them in accordance with
the will of the Giver, and the peril of
misusing them.

4. The temptation to covetousness is of
great subtlety and strength, and assatls
even the most gifted natures. ‘Take heed
and beware of covetousness ;” dc, (Luke
xii. 15-21).


ILLUSTRATIONS,


(a) Their proceedure, in seeking to lay the
armies of Israel under a curse, that their own
arms might be successful against them, is a
strange notion to us. But it is not so in the
Mast. Even at the present day, the pagan
Orientals in their wars have always their
magicians with them to curse their enemies,
and to mutter incantations for their ruin.
Sometimes they secretly convey a potent charm
among the opposing troops, to ensure their
destruction. Im our own war with the Bur-


mese, the generals of that nation had several
magicians with them, who were much engaged
in cursing our troops; but as they did not
succeed, a number of witches were brought for
the same purpose. We may indeed trace it
ag a very ancient opinion among all people,
that the maledictions, and the blessings, the
charms, the incantations, and the devotements
of men who were believed to be inspired by a
superior spirit, good or evil, had the most
marked effects, not only upon me Er oan: but


CHAP. XXII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


ce


upon regions and entire nations, and even upon
cattle and upon the fruits of the field. Not
seldom they soaght by strong enchantments to
evoke the tutelary divinities ot their enemies’
cities, desiring thus to deprive them of what
was regarded as their chief defence. Hence
the proper name of many great cities was pre-
served as a state secret, that no enemy might
be able to make use of it in thsir invocations.
‘The names by which cities were ordinarily
known,—as, for instance, Troy, Carthage,
Rome—were not the true and secret naiwes of
these places. Rome was called Valentia—a
name known as hers by very few persous ; and
Valerius svranus was severely punished for
having disclosed it. The heathens had, indeed,
certain solemn invocations, hy means of which
they devoted their enemies to certain divinities,
or rather to malignant and dangerous demons,
The following is the formula of one of these
imprecatious, as preserved by Macrobius : “Dis-
Pater, or Jupiter, if it better ple:se thee to be
ealled by that name—or by whatever name
thou mayest be invoked—I conjure thee to
pour upon this army (or this town) the spirit
of terror and trepidation. Deprive of their
sight all those who shall aim their strokes at
us, our armies, or our troops. Spread dark-
ness over our enemies, over their cities, their
fields, their forces. Look upon them as ac-
cursed. Bring them under the most rigorous
conditions to which any armics have ever been
obliged to submit. Thus do I devote them ;
and I and those whom I represent, the nation
and the army engaged in this war, stand for
witnesses, If this doom be accomplished, I
promise a sacrifice of three black sheep to thee,
O Earth, mother of all things, and to thee,
great Jupiter.” —John Kitto, D D.

For additional illustrations on this point see
Dr. Adam Clarke tn loco,

(0) Was this knowledge a reality or @ pre-
tence ? If we take the narrative in its plain
meaning—and that is the meaning in which
we think that all historical Scr/pture should be
taken—there can be no doubt that Balaam ac-
tually had this knowledge, that he not only
held the truth, or much of truth, though he
held it in unrighteousness, but that God did,
in subservience to His own high purposes, ac-
tually communicate with him. Any other ex-
planation, however ingenious, is but a continu-
ous and paiuful distortion of the whole
narrative, which revolts the understanding
more than do even the strong facts which it
tries to mitigate, in deference to the tastes and
tendencies of the age. Besides this, the deep
attention that Balaam had given (and was
doubtless known to have given) to the affairs
of the Hebrews, and his acquaintance with
their early history, their existing condition,
and their future hopes, are shown in the noble
prophecy which he waseventually constrained to
utter.

How he became possessed of the knowledge
he held—and held with so little advantage
to his own soul—is a question that looks more


426


difficult than it is. May he not have owed
something to such remains of the patriarchal
religion as still existed in Mesopotamia when
Jacob was there, and which his residence for
twenty. years in that quarter may have contri-
buted to maintain ? But the only supposition
which accounts /ully for the knowledge which
Ba'aam possessed of Jehovah, whom he gener-
ally mentions by that hgh and peculiar name,
is the one which adds to whatever knowledge
he possessed from other sources, that which he
owed to the Israelites themselves. ‘he way
in which this knowledge might be acquired is
clear. There could not but be many reporis
concerning the Israelites during their forty
years’ wandering in the desert. With a mind
awake to everything which concerned his pro-
fession, he would be naturally attracted by the
reports of the deliverance effected by the
Lord. for this people who had come out of
Egypt, and whose parentage could not be un-
known to him. He had surely heard of the
passage of the Red Sea, of the waters of Meri-
bah, of the miracle of the brazen serpent ; and,
as in the case of Simon Mxgus, a new source
of celebrity and of emolument seemed to open
up before him, most enticing to his besetting
sins. He then, we may conceive, adopted
Jehovah as his God, and named himself Jeho-
vah’s prophet. Nor, it may be, was this
wholly with views of worldly advan age. It
is quite possible, as Hengstenberg supposes,
that there was a mixture of a higher order of
sentiments, a sense of the wants of his moral
nature, which led him to seek Jehovah, and
laid the foundation of his intercourse with
Him. This is all the more probable, as we
feel bound to understand that the Lord did, in
the accomplishment of His own great purposes,
vouchsafe unto him special manifestations of
the Divine will—Jbid.

(c) Take heed of cares and covetousness,
which is an immoderate desire of getting and
enjoying the wealth of this world. For it
stealeth away the heart of man from God and


godliness, and maketh him bend the whole —


course of his life on earthly pleasures. This
is the common sickness and disease of this age
wherein we live. For give me one among


many that is not overcome with the pleasures —


of sin, and the profits of the world. It stealeth
on such as have sanctified affections, and have
escaped out of the fil'hivess of the world,


through the acknowledgisg of the Lord, and ©


seeketh to overcome them. It is so deceitful
and dangerous a sin, that it hath greatly
assaulted, and fearfully overcome them after


their calling to the truth and profession of —


the glorious Gospel of Ubrist our Saviour, and —


after hey have began to make some conscience —


of their life and conversation.
before their calling and conversation felt no
such desires and cares, now begin to be pressed,
cumberrd, and tempted with them, For as
Satan by ali meuns secketh whom he may de-
your, and how he may hinder the repentance of


Nay, such ag -


sinners, so when he cannot any longer hold


i


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





men in horrible sins of idolatry, blasphemy,
adultery and contempt of God. then like a wily
and subtle serpent, he creepeth in another way
before we can espy him; then he suffereth us
to hate evil company, surfeiting, drunkenness,
riot, and excess, but he driveth to another ex-
tremity, and possesseth us with distrustful
cares, and immoderate thoughts of this world,
_ to desire greedily, to seek continually, to keep
wretchedly, and to depart heavily from the
vain and momentary things that perish with
the use. And as this is a secret and subtle
sin (albeit deeply rooted, yet hardly espied)
so is it seldom cured and recovered, because
men do not much consider of it and regard it,
but please and flatter themselves init. If we
would attain to our former estate, and see the
danger of this disease, consider the vanity and
uncertainty of all worldly things; compare
them with spiritual blessings, and they are as
dung and dirt matched with gold and silver.
* Love not the world,” &c. (1 John ii. 15-17 ;
1 Tim. vi. 17-19).— W. Attersoll.

(d) Balaam was blessed with God’s special
favour. You will ask at once, How could so
bad a man be in God’s favour? ButI wish
you to put aside reasonings, and contemplate
facts. I say he was specially favoured by
God. God has a store of favours in His
treasure- house, and of various kinds—some
for a time, some for ever ; some implying His
approbation, others not. He showers favours
even on the bad. He makes His sun to rise on


CHAP. XXIL





the unjust as well as on the just. He willeth
not the death ofa sinner. He is said to have
loved the young ruler, whose heart, notwith-
standing, was upon the world. His loving
mercy exte:ds over all His works. How He
separates, in His own Divine thought, kindness
from approbation, time from eternity; what
He does from what He foresees, we know not,
and need not inquire. At present Heis loving
to all men, as if He did not foresee that some
are to be saints, others reprotates to all eter-
nity. He dispenses His favours variously—
gifts, graces, rewards, faculties, circumstances,
being indefinitely diversified, nor admitting of
discrimination or numbering on our part.
Balaam, I say, was in His favour; not indeed
for his holiness’ sake, not for ever; but in a
certain sense, according to His inscrutable
purp se who chooses whom He will choose,
and exalts whom He will exalt, without des-
troying man’s secret responsibilities, or His
own governance, and the triumph of truth and
holiness, and His own strict impartiality in the
end. Balaam was favoured in an especial
way above the mere heathen. Not only had
he the grant of inspiratiou, and the knowledge
of God’s will, an insight into the truths of
morality, clear and enlarged, such as we
Christians even cannot surpass, but he was
even admitted to conscious intercourse with
God, such as even Caristians have not.—J. H
Newman, D.D.


Gop’s Interest 1n Man’s CoMPANIONSHIPS,


(Verse 9.)


Human companionships are—

1. Observed by God. The guests we
entertain, the persons who visit us, the
associations we enter into, the friend-
ships we form, are all known unto the
Lord.

2. Challenged by God. “ Whatmen
are these with thee?” This enquiry
was made neither because the Lord
needed information, nor yet simply to
open the conversation on the mission
of the messengers of Balak. It was
designed, as Hengstenberg suggests, to
awaken “ the slumbering conscience of
Balaam, to lead him to reflect upon
the proposal which the men had made,
and to break the force of his sivful
inclination.” God addresses the same
question to the young who are forming
dangerous associations; to Christians
who take pleasure in non-religious and
worldly society, &c. He urges this


solemn enquiry (1) by the voice of
couscience ; (2) by the preaching of His
truth ; (3) by the exhortations and
admonitions of His Word ; and (4) by
the remonstrances of His Spirit.

This enquiry also indicates the Di-
vine concern as to human companion-
ships.) We may regard this concern
as—

I, An indication of the Divine
solicitude for the well-being of man.

Nothing whatever that is of import-
ance to us is uninteresting to God. In
every man, created in His image and
redeemed by the precious blood of His
Son, He has the deepest and tenderest
concern.

IL. An indication of the importance
of our companionships.

Inasmuch as He is so concerned as to
the character of our associates, it must
be a matter of vital at gah to Us,


CHAP. XXII, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY N UMBERS.


i


and should receive our serious atten-
tion.

1. Our associates indicate our cha-
racter, “A manis known by the com-
pany which he keeps.”

2. Our associates influence our
character. “He that walketh with
wise men shall be wise; but a com-
_panion’ of fools shall be destroyed.”
(a) “My son, if sinners entice thee,
consent thou not ;” &e. (Prov. i. 10-15).
“Enter not into the path of the wicked,”
&e, (Prov. iv. 14-19) “Blessed is
the man that walketh not in the
counsel of the ungodly,” &c. (0)

III. An indication of our responsi-
bility to God for our companionships.

For the associations we form and the
alliances we contract we must every one
give account to God. Soon or late we





each must answer the interrogation,
“What men are these with thee?”

IV. An indication of the danger of
dallying with temptation.

Balaam should have sent the mes-
sengers back to Balak at once, with
a firm refusal to comply with his
request. His longing for “the rewards
of divination” led him to keep them
for the night; and by so doing he
increased the perilousness of his position
tenfold. ‘To parley with temptation —
is to play with fire.” In matters of —
right and wrong let us never hesitate;
for hesitation in such matters is both —
sinful and dangerous. (c) To the in- —
vitations of the tempter let us respond —
with a prompt and decisive Vo. To
the summons of Duty let us render
speedy and hearty obedience.


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) The examples of our companions will
exert a plastic influence in the formation of
our own character, slow and silent, perhaps,
but irresistible and successful: and this in-
fluence will be in proportion to the love and
esteem we cherish for them. All nations and
all ages have confessed the truth of this senti-
ment. The example of a beloved companion
is omnipotent, more especially if he be a sinfal
une, because a bad model finds in the depravity
of our nature something that prepares it to
receive the impression. One evil companion
will undo in a month all that parents and
teachers have been labouring for years to ac-
complish.—J. A. James.

There is a certain magic or charm in
company, for it will assimilate, and make
you like to them by much conversation with
them; if they be good company, it is a
great means to make you good, or confirm you
in goodness ; but if they be bad, it is twenty
to one but they will infect and corrupt you.
Therefore be wary and shy in choosing, and
entertaining, or frequenting any company or
companions; be not too hasty in committing

ourself to them; stand off awhile till you

ave inquired of some (that you know by ex-
perience to be faithful), what they are; observe
what company they keep; be not too easy to
gain acquaintance, but stand off and keep a
distance yet awhile, till you have observed and
earnt touching them. Men or women that
are greedy of acquaintance, or hasty in it, are
oftentimes snared in ill company before they
are aware, and entangled so that they cannot
easily get loose from it after when they would.
—Sir Matthew Hale.
(6) arc! company, as baneful to the


.
power of godliness. Be but as esreful for thy
soul as thou wouldst be for thy body. Durst —
thou driuk in the same cup, or sit in the same
chair with one that hath an infectious disease?
And is not sin as catching a disease as the
plague itself? Of all trades, it would not do
well to have the collier and the fuller live to-
gether; what one cleanseth, the other will
blacken and defile. Thou canst not be long —
among unholy ones, but thou wilt hazard the
defiling of thy soul, which the Holy Spirit hath
made pure.— W. Gurnull.

Those who willingly associate with the sin-
ful are like men strolling with some trivial
object through a district infected with fever,
heedless of the invisible arrows of disease
spreading through the air: or they may be —
compared to the River Thames, which is a
sweet and pretty river enough near its source ;
but in the great metropolis it has kept com-
pany with drains and sewers, under the belief
that its current was too powerful and pure to
be injured by them. It was meant that the
river should purify the sewer; but, instead of —
that, the sewer has corrupted the river— —

Onion Maguzine. :

(c) Suffer not Satan’s fiery darts to abide 4
one moment with you; entertain no parley or
dispute about them ; reject them with indigna- —
tion; and strengthen your rejection of them ~
with some pertinent testimony of Scripture, as :
our Saviour did. If a man have a grenadoor —
fire-ball cast into his clothes by the enemy, he
does not consider whether it will burn or no,
but immediately shakes it off from him, Deal —
no otherwise with these fiery darts, lest by their —
abode with you they inflame your imaginations —
unto greater eee eee Owen, DD.

|


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.








Young persons should, above all things, be-
ware of beginnings, and by no means parley
with temptations; their greates" security is in
flight, and in the study to avoid all occasions


CHAP. XXII,





of evil; for the cockatrice, which may be
easily crushed in the egg, if suffered to hatch
and grow up, will prove a deadly serpent hard
to be destroyed.— Bains.


History oF Bataam, anv Hs Proparcies.—No, L


(Verses 1-14.)


This story of Balaam I believe to be
an honest narrative of facts as they
actually occurred (see Micah vi. 5; 2
Pet. ii, 15; Jude 11; Rev. ii. 14),
These repeated references to the history
of Balaam in the Old and New Testa-
ments come in support of our belief in
the reality of the history ; and teach us
that since Peter and Jude and John
were anxious that the man’s character
and history should not be forgotten,
and that the Church in their days
should profit by the beacon-warning
which the whole career of this half-bad,
half-good man furnished; s0, too,
should we in our day gather up the
details of his history and from them
learn what is the lesson of the whole,
how a man may struggle and fight
against God; against God’s kindness
and God’s voice, and God’s warnings,
and against his own thoughts and con-
victions, and better aspirations, until
he beeomes a light quenched in dark-
ness, @ heart hopelessly hardened, a
man whom it is ‘‘impossible to renew
unto repentance.”

Look at the circumstances that
brought Balaam into notice. . . .

Let us notice three things, as illus-
trative of human character and of the
general history of Divine Providence.

I. How the career and fortunes of
the children of Israel were made
known in those days.

Those were the days of mere oral
communication. From mouth to mouth,
and from father to son, events passed
along and through society. There was
no machinery for the spread of intel-
ligence: it was circulated just in the
natural order of things. By these
means the knowledge of Israel and of
Tarael’s God appears to have been spread
throughout all the countries surround-


ing the Sinaitic peninsula. This was
in fact a revelation to these people; a
mercy in making known to them, that
amidst all their gods and vanities, there
was yet a mivhtier and holier One, who
would not give His name to idols, nor
His “ praise to graven images.”

Il. But this fear of the Moabites
was needless, from the express in-
structions given to the Israelites (see
Deut. ii. 9).

Of course the King of Moab, Balak,
knew nothing of this ; he and his elders
might, however, have reflected upon
the fact that the Israelites with anxious
solicitude had avoided doing the least
injury to the territory of the Moabites ;
they might have remembered that this
powerful body of people had scrupu-
lously paid for the bread and water that
had been furnished them as they passed
through their territory (Deut. ii. 28,
29). But the Moabites themselves
were a lawless predatory tribe, in whom
the will for conquest was manifested as
far as their power went; and hence
the needless fear of the King of Moab,
expressed in that nervous language that
at once reminds us of the old shepherd
princes: “Now shall this company
lick up all that are round about us, as
the ox licketh up the grass of the field.”
What a fine illustration is this of
human nature! How “the wicked
fleeth when no man pursueth:” how
suspicious unprincipled men generally
are! how men have estimated others
by their own standard of right and
wrong !

III. Let us add a word or two
about Balaam.

What was he? Was he a heathen
soothsayer ? (and in Josh. xiii, 22 he
is called so) : and if he was a heathen
soothsayer, how did he eee By utter


CHAP. XXII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


ae a


such glorious and far-reaching predic-
twos? Or was he a prophet of the
true God, like Isaiah or Micah? And
if so, how did he come to do such
wicked things, and be so base and
avaricious, atid at last so gross and
sensual a tempter of the people of
Israel #

In reply to such questions, we re-
mark, that previous to the constitution
of the children of Israel into a separate
religious nation, a nation selected for a
religious purpose, with ultimate refer-
ence to the Messiah, there was a patri-
archal Church extending among all the
faithful that preserved uncorrupted the
early traditions of the human family.
This church, doubtless, received fre-
quent oral communications from God
Himself. The men composing this
church were not of the seed of Abra-
ham, but were in those far distant days
a pledge and type of the enlargement
of the Church of Christ among all
nations. Such were Shem, Job, and
Jetbro.

Now, Balaam, I take it, was one of
that ancient patriarchal church . tradi-
tions, partly correct and partly corrupt,
had been handed down generation after
generation until they came to him; on
these traditions, and on occasional
visits from God, his soul lived. There
was a religiousness and purity about
the man that attracted attention among
the wild and lawless Moabites; they
were impressed and awe struck with


the blameless simplicity of his life as
compared with the licentious character
of their sensual Baal worship; and so
the man came to be regarded with
reverence and fear by them, to be in-
vested with a kind of supernatural and
mysterious power by which whomso-
ever he blessed was blessed, and whom-
soever he cursed was cursed, in the
estimation of these wild Moabites,
Now you can hardly imagine a more
difficult and perilous position for a man
to be placed in. A man standing alone
in his religious ideas; far in advance
of all around him in real and essential
truth; got to be regarded by others,
until he comes to regard himself, as a
very extraordinary character ; looking
down upon others quite as much as they
look up to him; surrounded by wild
nomadic tribes, who are filled with a
vague but real, and all the more real
because it was vague, dread of this
superior being. What a school this,
to learn lessons of the human heart—
to learn how it will shuffle, and cheat,
and lie, to keep up this spiritual power
—to learn how, under seeming re-
ligiousness, it will aim at personal
agerandizement and influence ; to learn
how, step by step, he who was at one
time the most religious man among
them, may become the darkest and the
blackest sinner among them. To us
in this history the Scripture says, “‘ Let
him that thinketh he standeth take
heed lest he fall."— W. G@. Barrett.


History oF BaLaaM, AND HIS Propuecizs.—No, II.


(Verses 1-14.)


There is nothing so dear to man as
power ; the acquisition of influence over
the minds of others is a conquest full
of hazard and responsibility. Balaam
had this influence. He had the key of
Balak’s heart, and could turn its wards
which way he pleased. To him, living
a retired life in the desert, the mes-
sengers of the king come ; their request
is urgent, for it is from the king ; their
request is flattering, for it isa testimony

430


from Balak that a prophet’s word is
better than a king’s sword ; their request
is apparently reasonable, for why should
the Moabites be destroyed ? and their
request was accompanied by “ those re-
wards of divination” without which
the heathen never consulted their
favourite oracles,

But their request was a sinful one;
and I believe from the language of ver.
9, Balaam saw even then that it was a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





wicked request ; but it had come before
him so unexpectedly—he was so
honoured and flattered by it, that his
moral sense, his religious convictions,
got crushed and overpowered as this
huge temptation came and stated itself
before this weak man, and said to him,
“ Yield to me, yield at once, for riches
and honour are in my right hand: all
these things will I give thee, if thou
wilt fall down and worship me,”

Let us notice—

I. The first false step Balaam took,
as indicative and prophetic of all the
other downward ones,

(Ver. 8.) ‘And he said unto them,
Lodge here this night,” &.

This was not the way to meet this
great peril.’ I believe he had quite
enough knowledge on the subject to
have shaped for himself a different
course. I believe this was just a hypo-
critical pretence to gain time, and that
the man, even now dazzied by the gifts
of gold, the rewards of divination, was
clutching them in his heart long before
they came into his actual possession.
This I think furnishes the key to the
whole after-history of this greatly bad
man. I do not think Balaam meant
at all to consult God. The matter was
too plainly before him to create any
necessity for that ; but it was a capital
trick to play off upon these Moabitish
courtiers to impress them with a deeper
sense of his importance and influence,

Do not you think we may do the
very same thing? We may talk of
praying over such and such a matter,
and seeking Divine direction, and asking
for the leadings of Providence, when
really God’s will is the last thing we
are thinking about; when we have
already decided and determined what
to do. God sees our purpose and de-
termination to have our own way, and
man hears our words about Divine
direction aud guidance; and so, next
to cheating God, the worst thing a man
can do is to cheat himself; so Balaam
did, and you know how it succeeded.

II The warning Balaam had during
the night of agitation that followed
this visit.





CHAP. XXII.





My reason for thinking that Balaam
did not intend to consult God at cil is
the language of the ninth verse, which
reads to me very much like a reproof.
It is not Balaam going to God and
asking, ‘ Lord, what wilt Thou have me
to do?” but God coming to Balaam and
saying to him, “ What are you doing!
‘What men are these with thee?’ How
is it they are with thee? How is it
that you did not dismiss them at
once }”

Ah! that must have been a sore
night of perplexity and agitation to
Balaam. . . . . How often must
he have resolved and re-resolved, and
yet, spite of all his resolutions, in the
absence of a holy will did he reconsider
the thing, and make up his mind, if
possible, to go with the messengers of
Balak.

Then in the stillness of that night,
came this warning to Balaam, “ What
men are these with thee?”’? How that
warning might have saved him if he
bad heeded it: but out of stammer-
ing lips and from an undecided heart he
speaks the truth, and tells God their
character and message to him.

All this was the beginning of the end
of Balaam. . Let us look
here, and see the easy steps to hell.
“ What does it profit a man, if he gain
the whole world and lose his own
soul?” Learn how a man, in spite of
his better nature and religiousrevivings,
may quench the Spirit and die a deso-
late and forsaken outcast.

IIL The positive refusal God gave
to Balaam.

“Thou shalt not go with them.”

Here was mercy and severity! It was
mercy not to abandon this man; not to
give him up hopelessly and for ever to
his own heart's lust, without another
word of warning ; mercy to follow him
after his stammering, hesitating, half-
hearted confession, to say, “ No, no,
thou shalt not go! There is a way
that seemeth right to thee, Balaam,
but the end of it is death.” And does
God never follow us in that manner f
Does he not come and cry unto vs,
“Turn ye, turn ye at ae ee ;


’


OHAP, XXII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,





why will ye die?” Oh! if you have
aver heard that voice, listen to it ; it is
thy life! “To-day, if ye will hear His
voice, harden not your heart.”

Here was severity too. Do you think
a man like Balaam ought to have re-
quired such a prohibition? Ought he
not at once to have felt that the whole
scheme was a wicked one, which he
ought to hate, and to shun and to pro-
test against ?

Ill fares it with the health of life and


soul when it must be put under the
care of lock and key ; when nothing but
commands and prohibitions can keep
it in order ; when it must be surround-
ed by “thou shalt,” and “ thou shalt
not,” to keepit right. Where the spirit
of the Lord is, there is liberty; and
the emancipated spirit has higher but
happier constraints than the law of
Sinai, in the law of the Spirit of life in
Christ Jesus.— Zoid.


Baak’s Szoonp APPLICATION TO BaLaaM: THE DEOREASE OF Resistance To Evi.
(Verses 15-21.)


In this section of the history we
have four conspicuous steps.

I. The repetition with increased
force of the request of Balak to
Balaam.


“And Balak sent yet again princes,”
&c. (verses 15-17).

1. The embassage was more influential.
The princes who were sent this second
time were more numerous and more
honourable than the former ones. Here
was @ powerful appeal to the vanity of
the prophet.

2. The message was more urgent. “ Let
nothing, I pray thee, hinder thee from
coming unto me.”

3. The inducements were stronger,
“For I will promote thee unto very
great honour, and I will do whatsoever
thou sayest unto me,” &. If Balaam
wanted rank and dignities, he should
have them ; if he wanted wealth, he
should have it also. If he will but
comply with the request of the King of
Moab, the most splendid honours and
the most munificent treasures shall be
freely given to him. Learn: that
temptations which have been declined
reluctantly or half-heartedly are pre-
sented again, and with greater force.
The manner of Balaam’s dismissal of the
former messengers prepared the way for
a repetition of their mission.

IL. Therepetition under aggravating
circumstances of guilty delay by
Balaam.


‘And Balaam answered and said
433


unto the servants of Balak,” &c. (vers.
18,19). In entertaining the proposal
at all, and in keeping the messengers
during the night, the prophet sinned
and that heinously ; he ought to have
sent them back to Balak with a firm
and final refusal. And his guilt was
the greater because —

1. He had been challenged by God as
to the presence of the former messengers,
“God came unto Balaam, and said,
What men are these with thee?”

2. He had already been prohibited —
from complying with the request of —
Balak. “God said unto Balaam, Thou
shalt not go with them,” &c. (ver. 12).
To a really good man this would have
been a final settlement of the question.
So it ought to have been to Balaam.

3. He himself felt and plainly declared
that he was bound by the Word of the
Lord in the matter. He “said unto the
servants of Balak, If Balak would giveme
his house full of silver and gold, I cannot
transgress the command of Jehovah my
God, to do little or great.” An utter-
ance worthy of a holy man anda true
prophet. But in the light of this
declaration, Dr. Kitto forcibly enquires :
“Then why not at once dismiss the
messengers He already knew the
mind of God, and he ought to have
known that ‘ God is not a man, that He
should lie ; nor the Son of Man, that He
should repent.’ Instead of that, he
says, ‘ Now therefore, I pray you, tarry
ye also here this night, that I may know


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


=|


_ what the Lord will say unto me more.’
What ‘more’? Did Balaam fashion to
himself a god after his own heart, and
imagine that he also was to be moved
from his declared purpose by the gifts
and promises of Balak? Could he mean
- to insult God by his importunities ?
Did he hope to extort from Him, out of
regard to his own worldliness, per-
nission to bring a curse upon an entire
nation which, as was well known, had
been 80 long the object of His covenant


care? Even such was what Peter calls |


‘the madness of the prophet.’” Such
also was the great wickedness of the
prophet. He was afraid to transgress
the command of God ; but he hoped to
obtain from Him permission to accom-
pany the messengers, and so to gratify
his passion for worldly gain. (a) The
temptation was stronger than before ;
but the reasons for resisting it were also
more clear and cogent; and his guilt
in not doing so was darker and heavier.
A temptation once dallied with, it
‘becomes more difficult to resist it here-
after.


“ Vice is a monster of so frightful mien,
As to be hated, needs but to be seen ;
Yet, seen too oft, familiar with her face,
We first endure, then pity, then embrace.”

Pope,


III. The repetition of the Divine
visit to Balaam.

“ And God came unto Balaam at
night, and said,” &c. (ver. 20). Here
are two things which claim attention—

1. The permission granted. God said
unto Balaam, “If the men come to call
thee, rise up, and go with them.” When
man is determined to have his own way,
a time comes when God ceases to oppose
him in the matter. “ My people would


CHAP. XXII.





not hearken to my voice, and Israel
would none of me, So I gave them up
unto the stubbornness of their heart ;
they walk in their own counsels.” In
giving permission to Balaam, “God
granted in anger what He denied in
mercy ” (comp. chap. xi. 18-20, 31-33).

2. The condition enforced, “ But yet
the word which I shall say unto thee,
that shalt thou do.” God allows Balaam
to go, but He restrains him so that he
shall not in any way injure His cause
and people. The power of the wicked
for injury is limited by the Lord.

IV. The setting out of Balaam on
the journey.

“And Balaam rose up in the morn-
ing, and saddled his ass, and went
with the princes of Moab,” (5) Mark
his unbecoming and sinful haste: God
said to him, “If the men come to call
thee, rise up and go with them ;” but
he did not wait to be called: he
“rose up in the morning,” &ec. * Be-
cause,” says Dr. Adam Olark, ‘he was
more hasty than he ought to have been,
and went to them instead of staying till
they should come to him, it was said of
him, not 71 9D. ki halach, that he
went ; but NIT TIT ID Mt Aolech hu,
t.6., he went of his own head—without
being oalled.” He “ran greedily for
reward.”

The chief lesson of our subject is, the
importance of meeting the first tempta-
tion to evil with uncompromising resist-
ance: to hesitate or to parley is to
diminish our power of resistance, and to
increase the power of the temptation,
thus making successful resistance a task
of almost insuperable difficulty. (¢) “Be
sober, be vigilant; because your adver-


sary the devil,” co. (1 Pet. v. 8, 9).


ILLUSTRATIONS.


ca) You will observe he wished to go with
Balak’s messengers, only he felt he ought not
to go ; and the problem which he attempted
to solve was, how to go and yet not offend God,
He was quite resolved he would, anyhow, act
religiously and conscientiously ; he was too
honourable a man to break any of his engage-
ments ; if he had given his word, it was sacred ;
if he had duties, they were imperative ; he had

RF


acharacter to maintain, and an inward sense
of propriety to satisfy ; but he would have
given the world to have got rid of his duties ;
and the question was, how to do so without
violence; and he did not care about walking
on the very brink of transgression, so that he
could keep from falling over. Accordingly,
he was not content with ascertaining “a
will, but he attempted to cam He im


CRAP, XXII.





quired of Him a second time, and this was to
tempt Him. Hence, while God bade him go,
His anger was kindled against him because he
went.

This surely is no uncommon character ;
rather, itis the common case even with the
more respectable and praiseworthy portion of
the community. I say plainly, and without
fear of contradiction, though it is a serious
thiny tosxy, that the aim of most men esteemed
conscientious and religious, or who are what
is calied honourable, upright men, is, to all ap-
pearance, not how to please God; but how to
please themselves without displeasing Him,
his surely is so plain that it is scarcely neces-
sary to enlaige upon it. Men do not take for
the object towards which they act, God’s will,
but certain maxims, rules, or measures—right
perhaps as far as they go, but defective be-
cause they admit of bei:g subjected to certain
other ultimate ends, which are not religious.
Men are just, honest, upright, trustworthy 3
but all this, not from the love and fear of God,
but from a mere feeling of obligation to be so,
and in subjection to certain worldly objects.
And thus they are what is popularly called
moral, without being religious. Such was
Balaam. He was, in a popular sense, a strictly
moral, honourable, conscientious man; that he
was notso in aheavenly and true sense is plain,
if not from the considerations here insisted on,
at least from his after history, which (we may
presume) brought to light his secret defect, in
whatever it consisted. His defect lay in this,
that he had not a single eye towards God’s
will but was ruled by other objects.—J. A.
Newman, D.D.

(4) That Balaam saddled his ass, must not
lead us to suppose that there were in those
days any proper saddle. This is a far later
invention, even for riding on horseback, and
is not even now in the East generally used in
riding on agses. On this subject we have the
negative evidence of sculptures. In Egypt,
indeed, there are no equestrian sculptures at
all except those which represent riding in
chariots. Classical sculpture has no saddles
or saddle cloths. We us d to think that the
earliest sud ics were to be seen in the sculptures
of the Sussanian dynasty at Shahpur in
Persia ; but the following passage would take


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


NUMBERS.





them back to the last age of the Assyrian
empire : “In the earliest'sculptures (at Nineveh)
the horses, except such as are led behind the
king’s chariot, are unprovided with cloths or
saddles, The rider is seated on the nuked
back of the avimal. Ata later period, how-
ever. a kind of pad appears to have been intro-
duced ; and ina sculpture at Konyunjik was
represented a high saddle, not unlike that now
in use in the East ” (Layard).

The saddling of asses mentioned in Seri»
ture probably consisted merely in placizg
upon their backs such thick cloths or mats as
we see in some of the asses represented in the
Egyptian paintings. Something of the same
kind, or pieces of rug, felt, carpet, or cloth,
are still in general use; although a kind of
pad is now frequently to be seen upon asses in
the larg: towns of Egypt, Syria, and Arabia,
especially among those let out for hire. Such
town asses have also bridles, and sometimes
stirrups, none of which, any more than the
pad, do we remember to have noticed on asses
upon actual journeys ; and we have known of
asses being used continuously on journeys
quite az long as that which Balaam now
undertook ; and that by persons whose posi-
tion in life quite enabled them to ride a horse
or mule had they so chosen. It would not be
at all extraordinary, even now, that a person,
expecting to be laden with riches and houours,
should ride upon an ass, still less in an age
and country where no other mode of convey-
ance, except that of riding upon camels,
appears to have been known.—J. Kiito, D.D.

(c) In world'y matters, “ think twice ;” but
in duty, it has been well said, “ first thoughts
are best;” they are more fresh, more pure,
nave more of Godin them. There is nothing
nke the first glance we get at duty, before
there has been any special pleading of our
affections or inclinations. Duty is never un-
certain at first. It is only after we have got
involved in the mazes and sophistries of wish-
ing that things were otherwise than they are,
that it seems indistinct. Considering a duty,
is often explaining it away. Dcliberation is
often only dishonesty, ds guidance is
ov when we are true.—, W. Robertson,


APposTacy.


“And Balak sent princes more and
more honourable” (ver. 15).

“Tarry ye also here this night” (ver.
22).

: Balaam also the son of Beor they
slew with the sword” (chap. xxxi. 8).

We assume Balaam to have been a
true prophet, though not of Israel.
He appears to have been a singularly

434


goodman, And, taking the history as it
rises, we may learn what his religion was.
Jt was very enlightened. “ His eyes
were open” (see Mic. vi. 5, 8). These
were Balaam’s views of religion.
Balaam’s religion was founded on
principle,—the all-comprehensive prin-
ciple of godliness. All considerations
are kept in abeyance, waiting on the


—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


will of God, “Lodge ye here this
nignt: 1 will bring you word as the
Lord shall speak.”

His religion was practically exempli-
fied. Balaam acted on principle, and
obeyed the word of the Lord. ‘ Thou
shalt not go with them,” &c. (ver. 12),
Then Balaamsaid to the princes of Moab,
“Get you unto your land,” &e. (ver. 13).

But Balaam fell, and the first of our
texts brings us to the turning point of
his life—downwards.

I SBalaam apostatized through
worldliness.

The temptation was strengthened.
“Balak sent princes more honourable.”
The overtures now comprehend all
that kings can do. ‘I will do what-
soever thou sayest unto me.” Still the
prophet resists; but after a hard con-
test principle relaxes under the in-
fluence of this sun of worldly glory.
Balaam becomes a soft and pliant thing
in the hands of these monarchs—a
total apostate from God. By means
of the world the devil ever tempts
man; tempting again and again by
worldly pleasures, ambition, gain. Take
heed and beware of covetousness. Of
all mortal sins this is perhaps the most
insidious and self-deceptive.

Balaam apostatized progres-
sively.

Religion is neither got nor lost all
at once. ‘The progress of Balaam’s fall
may be traced.

1. His heart went after covetousness. He
“loved the wages of unrighteousness.”

2. He tampered with temptation. Why
were these ambassadors kept a second
night ?

3. He struggled against his own con-
science. Mountain after mountain is
ascended, sacrifice after sacrifice offered,
that by some means he may obtain sanc-
tiun todo what God said he should not do.

4, He departs from the word of the
Lord. “If the men call thee thou
mayest go with them”—a final check
and test interposed. Now he is on the
downhill course. The deepest, darkest
sins follow. “Let him that thinketh
he standeth take heed lest he fall.”


CHAP, XXII.





IIT. Balaam apostatized despite the
greatest obstacles.

Conscience was a perpetual obstacle.
The fear of death haunted him. From
the high places of Baal, where he would
have cursed, he saw the Israelites en-
camped below. ‘ How goodly are thy
tents, O Jacob,” he utters in apos-
trophe; when at once his own death
appals him, like a dark vision. Then
he abruptly exclaims, “Let me de
the death of the righteous!” There
were extraordinary as well as ordinary
obstacles. What is to do with that poor
ass? Mercy, Balaam!.... At last
the angel reveals himself, sword in hand.
“T have come out to withstand thee,”
&c. “If,” said Balaam, “it displease
thee, I will get me back.” I. Alas!
he is not turned back yet. “The Lord
is longsuffering, not willing that any
should perish.” Providence is media-
torial. The very difficulties and ob-
stacles and adversities of life are in-
corporated with God’s saving plans ;
yea, are ordered, permitted, or over-
ruled for our good.

IV. Balaam’s apostacy was not only
sad but fatal.

Never did he obtain the “ wages of
unrighteousness.” His career was one
of unmitigated disappointment, issuing
in the sin unto death. Very briefly is
the last tragic scene given. God will
be avenged of the Midianites. In the
war against them Balaam is found among
the enemies of the Israelites. ‘‘ Balaam
the son of Beor they slew with the
sword.” Thus the veil is drawn darkly ;
nor does the sacred historian ever name
the fallen prophet’s name more ; but the
silences of the Bible are significant as
its utterances. Nor did that man
perish alone in his iniquity. Does the
backslider ever 4

From this subject many additional
lessons may be gathered—there is one of
hope for apostates. The forbearance of
God should lead to repentance. Balaam’s
case shows that there is hope for the
worst and hope to the last.—A Military
Chaplain, in The Homiletic Quarterly.


CHAP. XXII


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


a


BavaaM aND H1s Ass; Divine Cuzoxs on Man’s Downwarp Course.


(Verses 22-35).


Weare met by a preliminary inquiry ;
why was God angry with Balaam be-
cause he went with the princes of Moab,
when He had given consent to his going
with them? (1) Itis important to ob-
serve that God had not given to Balaam
an unconditional permission to go with
them. He might go with them on con-
dition that the men came to call.him.
‘““If the men come to call thee, rise up,
and go with them.” This condition had
not heen fulfilled when “ Balaam rose
up in the morning,” &o. (ver. 21).
“And God’s anger was kindled because
he went of himself.” (2) Even this
conditional permission was given not
because God approved of his going, but
because Balaam was determined to ob-
tain permission if it were possible. (3)
He went hoping to set aside the re-
striction which God had imposed upon
him,—that he was to do that which He
commanded. Clearly Balaam both desir-
ed and hoped to be able to curse Israel,
and thus obtain the wealth and honours
upon which his heart was set. Hence,
“‘God’s anger was kindled because he
went.” (a) God mercifully places ob-
structions in his way to save him from
further sin, and to warn him against
attempting to curse Israel, or exceed or
deviate from His word to him. This
part of the history is a striking illustra-
tion of Divine checks on man’s downward
course.

I. These checks are sometimes in
operation when unperceived by man.

“The Angel of the Lord stood in the
way for an adversary againsthim....
And the ass saw the Angel of the Lord
standing in the way, and his sword
drawn in his hand.” Thrice the ass saw
the Angel, and presented indications of
alarm ; but Balaam saw Him not until
God had opened the mouth of the ass to
remonstrate with him. Balaam was
blinded to. such sights by the fierce
lust of wealth and honours which pos-
sessed him. Many a dispensation of
God’s providence is intended as a check

436


upon man’s downward course, which fe
not seen to be such by the person most
concerned, As Balaam saw the trou-
bled and troublesome ass, but not the
forbidding Angel ; so men see the afflie-
tions, the losses, the difficulties of their
course without perceiving the merciful
design of God in them ; they are irritated
at the obstructions in their path, but do
not see the Angel who is beyond the
obstructions.

IL These checks are numerous.

“ Mark,” says Babington, “ the mani-
fold admonitions that Balaam had,
and yet all in vain. The ass avoids the
Angel once, twice, and thrice ; she hurts
his foot against the wall, she lied down
under him, never used to do thus before
—yetallthiscould not smite his heart to
think, Surely my journey pleaseth not
God. Even thus in some sort doth
God still deal with men, and yet all in
vain ; their sin will not be seen—their
fault will not be amended. He giveth
us a twitch within, either at some
sermon, or otherwise, and yet that
vanisheth away, and we forget it.
Then He striketh our foot against the
wall, that is, He crosseth us with sick-
ness or loss, or some calamities, assay-
ing whether that will bring us home ;
but still we beat the ass, and continue
our course. When this will not serve,
He throweth us down, ass and all, that
is, when the lesser crosses profit not,
He layeth on greater, greater, I say,
and greater, till He makes us feel, even
asa father smiteth more, till he humble
the froward stomach of his child, yet
many times in vain still.”

III. These checks are of various
kinds.

This is very clear in Balaam’s case,
in which we see—

1. Obstructions to his progress. . The
advance of his ass was thrice arrested
by the Angel of the Lord. When our
ourse is delayed, or difficulties crowd
our path, or sickness removes us for a
time from the active walks of life, wa


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


—_— re


shall do well to enquire whecher these
things are checks to restrain us from
sin, or warnings that we are on a
dangerous road.

2. Appeals to his reason. God gave
to the dumb ass a voice to summon
the erring and angry prophet to the
exercise of reason. ‘ The Lord opened
the mouth of the ass, and she said unto
Balaam, What have I done,” &c. (vers,
28-30). “And where,” asks Dr. A.
Clarke, ‘is the wonder of all this? If
the ass had opened her own mouth, and
reproved the rash prophet, we might
well be astonished; but when God opens
the mouth, an ass can speak as well as a
man.” (6)

And God by various means still
addresses the reason of sinful man.
“Come now, and let us reason together,
saith the Lord,” &c. “ Why will ye
die?” Christianity is a sublime and
mighty appeal, not only to the heart,
but also to the understanding of man.

3. Rebukes for his conduct. ‘‘The
Angel of the Lord said unto him,
Wherefore hast thou smitten thine ass
these three times?” &c. (yers. 32, 33).
(c) The Lord now rebukes men for their
sins by the penalties of those sins, by
the condemnations of His holy Book, and
by the voice of conscience. And these
rebukes are designed to deter from sin.

4. The awakening of his conscience.
“ Balaam said unto the Angel of the
Lord, I have sinned,” &. His whole
line of conduct shows a mind ill at ease,
a troubled, anxious mind. His irrita-
tion, petulance, and unreasonable anger
with his ass, indicate clearly that he
had no rest within. God in his great
mercy was checking him by the voice
of his conscience. Conscience will not
allow the sinner to pursue his down-
ward course without stirring remon-
strances and stinging rebukes. (d) ‘Lo,
all these things worketh God oftentimes
with man, to bring back his soul from
the pit to be enlightened with the light
of the living.”

IV. These checks are graduated in
force.

See this in the case of Balaam: first
his “ass turned aside out of the way ;”


CHAP, XXII.





then “she thrust herself unto the wall,
and crushed Balaam’s foot against the
wall;” then “she fell down under
Balaam ;” and then there appears unto
the angry man “the Angel of the Lord
standing in the way, and his sword
drawn in his hand,” who administers
to him a stern rebuke. “In this
carriage of the Angel,” says Mr. Ains-
worth, “the Lord shows us the pro-
ceedings of His judgments against sin-
ners: First, He mildly shakes His rod
at them, but lets them go untouched.
Secondly, He comes nearer, and touches
them with an easy correction, as it
were wringing their foot against the
wall. Thirdly, when all this is in-
effectual, He brings them into such
straits that they can neither turn to
the right hand nor to the left, but
must fall before His judgments, if they
do not fully turn to Him.”

V. These checks are limited in their
effects,

1. By the perverseness of man’s cha-
racter, The earlier obstructions only
irritated and enraged Balaam. His
eager lust for wealth and honour
blinded him that he did not even see
the forbidding Angel. To a perverse
and hardened heart mild restraints are
utterly ineffectual. There are, alas!
some men to whom even severe checks
seem ineffectual.

2. By the irreversibleness of man’s
conduct. ‘‘If it displease thee,” said
Balaam, “1 will get me back again.
And the Angel of the Lord said, Go
with the men ; but only the word that
I shall speak unto thee, that thou shalt
speak. So Balaam went with the
princes of Balak.” He had advanced
too far to turn back then. He must
go on. Only in one respect will the
Divine restraint be effectual now ; and
that God insists upon : “ Only the word
that I shall speak unto thee, that thou
shalt speak.” Unutterably solemn is
this irreversibleness of moral conduct.
The career once entered upon, in many
instances, must be continued. The
deed once done, can never be undone ;
and many of its consequences will live
on—for ever ! (e)

437


CHAP. XXII.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) Why did Almighty God give Balaam
leave to go to Balak, and then was angry with
him for going ? I suppose for this reason, be-
cause his asking twice was tempting God.
God is a jealous God, Sinners as weare—ne_,
as creatures of His hand—we may noi safely
intrude upon Him, and make free with Him.
We may not dare to do that which we should
not dare to do with an earthly superior, which
we should be punished, for instance, for at-
tempting in the case of a king or noble of
this world. To rush iuto His pre ence, to ad-
dress Him familiarly, to urge Him, to strive
to make our duty lie in one direction when it
lies in another, to handle rudely and practise
upon His holy word, to trifle with truth, to
treat conscience lightly, to take liberties (as it
may be called) with anything that is Gid’s;
all irreverence, profaneness, unscrupulousness,
wantonness, is represented in Scripture, not
only as a sin, but as falt, noticed, quickly ve-
turned on God’s part (if I may dare use such
human words of the Almighty and All-holy
God, without transgressing the rule I am my-
self laying down—but He vouchsafes in Scrip-
ture to represent Himself to us in that only
way in which we can attain to the knowledge
of Him)—I say, all irreverence towards God is
represented as being jealously, and instantly,
and fearfully noticed and visited, as friend or
stranger among men might resent an insult
shown tohim. ‘his should be carefully con-
sidered. We are apt to act towards God and
the things of God as towards a mere system,
a law, a name, a religion, a principle; not as
against a Person, a living, watchful, present,
prompt, and powerful eye and arm. ‘That all
this is a great error, is plain to all who study
Scripture ; as is sufficiently shown by the
death of 50,070 persuns for looking into the
Ark—the death of the prophet by the lion, who
was sent to Jeroboam from Judah, and did not
immediately obey his instructions—the slaugh-
ter of the children at Bethel by the bears, for
mocking Elisha— the exclusion of Moses from
the Promised Land for smiting the rock twice
—and the judgment on Ananias and Sapphira.
—J. H, Newman, D.D.

(6) The true explanation lies between the
notion that the whole occurrence was purely
internal, and consisted exclusively in ecstasy
brought by God upon Balaam, and the grossly
realistic reduction of the whole affair into the
sphere of the senses and the outward material
world. ‘The Angel who met the soothsayer in
the road, as he was riding upon his ass,
though He was not seen by Balaam till Jehovah
had opened his eyes, did really appear upon
the road, in the outward world of the senses,
But the form in which He appeared was not a
grossly sensuous or material form, like the
bodily frame of an ordinary visible being; for
in that case Balaam would inevitably have
seen Him, when his beast became alarmed and
restive again and again, and refused to go
forward, since it ia not stated anywhere that

433


God had smi‘ten him wich blindness, like the
men of Sodom (Gen. xix. 11), or the people in
2 Kings vi. 18. It rather reserabled the ap-
pearance of a spirit, which cannot be seen by
everyone who has h althy bodily eyes, but only
by those who have their senses awukened for
visions from the spirit-world. Thus, for ex-
ample, the men who went to Damascus with
Paul, saw no one, when the Lord appeared te
him in a miraculous light from heaven, and
spoke to him, although they also heard the
voice (Acts ix. 7). Balaam wanted the spiri-
tual sense to discern the Angel of the Lord,
because the spirit’s eye was blinded by his
thirst for wealth and honour. This blindness
increased to such an extent, with the inward
excitement caused by the repeated insubordi-
nation of the beast, that he lost all self-control.
As the ass had never been go restive before, if
ne had only been calm and thoughtful himself,
he would have looked about to discover the
cause of this remarkable change, and would
then, no doubt, have discovered the presence
of the Angel. But as he lost all his thought-
fulness, God was obliged to open the mouth of
the dumb and irrational animal, to show a seer
by profession his own blinduess, “He might
have reproved him by the words of the Angel;
but because the rebuke would not have been
sufficiently severe without some deep humilia-
tion, He made the beast his teacher ” ( Calvin).
The ass’s speaking was produced by the om-
nipotence of God; but it is impossible to
decide whether the modulation was miracn-
lously communicated to the animal’s voice, so
that it actually gave utterance to the human
words which fell upon Balaam’s ears (Kurtz),
or whether the cries of the animal were formed
into rational discourse in Balaam’s soul, by the
direct operation of God, so that he alone heard
and understood the speech of the animal,
wheres the servants who were present heard
nothing more than unintelligible cries. In
either case Balaam received a deeply humiliat
ing admonition from the mouth of the irra-
tional beast, and that not only to put him to
shame, but also to call him to his seuses, and
render him cupable of hearing the voice of
God. The seer, who prided himself upon
having eyes for Diviue revelations, was so
blind, that he could not discern the appearance
of the Angel, which even the irrational beast
had been able to see. By this he was taught
that even @ beast is more capable of discerning
things from the higher world, than a man
blinded by sinful desires. It was not till after
this humiliation that God opened his eyes, so
that he saw the Angel of the Lord with a
drawn sword standing in his road, and fell
upon his face before this fearful sight.—Keil
and Del,

(c) We shall find in the sequel the person
styled the Angel of the Lord, as in other
places, so here, assuming the character and
exercising the prerogative of Deity: for He it
is that afterwards says, “The word that I shall


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





speak ur‘o thee, that thou shalt speak.” We
are to understand, therefore, by this designa-
tion, the mighty, the uncreated Angel, by
whom God made the worlds, the eternal Word,
which was in the beginning, which was with
God, and which was God, and which in the
fulness of time was made flesh and dwelt among
men.— Dr. H, Hunter.

The Angel of Jehovah's presence, which went
before His people in the wilderness, not only
to guile, but to guard and protect them; and
who was an adversary to their adversaries,
and at all times stood up for their help and
assistance against all those that hated and op-
posed them.—Jo'n Gill. D_D.

(d) Balaam did only what men go entangled
always do. The real fault is in themselves.
They have commiited themselves to a false
position, and when obstacles stand in their
way, they lay the blame on circumstances,
They smite the dumb, innocent occasion of
their perplexity as if it were the cause. And
the passionateness—the “ madness” of the act
is but an indication that all is going wrong
within. There was a canker at the heart of
Balaam’s life, and his equanimity was gone $
his temper vented itself on brute things.
Who has not seen the like—a grown man,
anreasoning as a child, furious beyond the
oc‘asion ? If you knew the whole, you would
see that was not the thing which had moved
him so terribly; you would see that all was
wrong inwardly.

It isa strange, sad picture this. The first
man in the land, gifted beyond most others,
conscious of great mental power, ging on to
splendid prospects, yet with hopelessness and
misery working at his heart. Who would
have envied Baluam if he could have seen all—
the hell that was working at his heart ?—
F. W. Robertson, M.A,

It is a man’s own dishonesty, his crimes, his
wickedness, and buldness, that take away from
him soundness of mind; these are the furies,
these the flames and fircbrands of the wicked.
—M., T, Cicero.


CHAP. XXII.





(e) Here is a serious reflection, that when
we have begun an evil course we cannot re-
trace our steps. Balaam was forced to go with
the men ; he offered to draw back —he was not
allowed—yet God's wrath fo lowed him. Thig
is what comes of committing ourselves to an
evil line of conduct; and we see daily in-
stances of it in our exp:rience of life. Men
get entangled, and are bound hand and fvot in
dangerous courses. They make imprudent
marriages or connections; they place them-
selves in dangerous situations; they engage
in unprofitable or shamefnl undertakings. Too
often, indeed, they do not discern their evil
plight : bat when they do they cannot draw
back. God seems to say, “ Go with the men.”
They are in bondage, and they must make the
best of it; being the slave of the creature,
without ceasing to be the responsible ser-
vant of God; under His displeasure, yet
bound to act as if they could please Him.
ae this is very fearful—J. H, Newman,

Consider the impossibility under such cir-
cumstances of going back. Balaam offers to
go back. The Angel says, “Go on.” There
was yet one hope for him, to be true, to utter
God’s words, careless of the consequences ; but
he who had been false so long, how could he
be true ? It was too late. In the ardour of
youth you have made perhaps a wrong
choice, or chosen an unfit profession, or suf-
tered yourself weakly and passively to be
drifted into a false course of action, and now,
in spite of yourself, you feel there is no going
back. To many minds, such a lot comes as
with the mysterious force of a destiny. ‘hey
see themselves driven, and forget that they put
themselves in the way of the stream that
drives them. They excuse their own acts as
if they were coerced. They struggle now and
then faintly, as Balaam did—try to go back—
cannot, and at last sink passively in the might,
current that floats them on to wruag.—/’. W.
Robertson, M.A.


BataamM AND His Ass; on, A Lesson ow OxsTrvotivs ProvipENnozs,


(Verses 22-35.)


Ts this a literal narrative? Yes;
for,—

1. The style in which it is written is
plain and unadorned.

2. The story is not essentially in-
eredible,

3. It is referred to in other parts of
Scripture as piain matter of fact.

4. The end to be gained was quite
enough to warrant the miracle.

5, The speech of the ass is so simple


and natural that it could not be either
a delusion of Balaam’s excited imagina-
tion, or an invention of some later
fabulist.

I. See the lessons it taught Balaam.

1. Jé convinced him of spiritual blind:
ness. He was more stupid than his ass,
She could seean angel, but Balaam could
not, because he was engrossed and
blinded by his covetous greed.

2. Lt taught absolute nen te


CHAP, XXIL


God. He made his ass, however re-
luctant, obey iim ; and he, too, however
obstinate, must be taught to obey God.
This was indispensable to prepare him
to do God’s work among the Moabites.

II, The subject is full of lessons to
us,

It shows us the worth of obstructive
providences, and the wisdom of giving
patient attention and heed to them.

1. We often go on wrong errands, or
on right errands in a wrong spirit. Some
go on wrong errands, seeking a change
of place, from selfish ambition—pur-
suing @ business necessarily sinful—
projecting a mutrimonial union without
regard to piety-—resolution to leave
home and country from recklessness
and self-will. Some have wrong mo-
tives in a right way :— eg, mer-
cenary ministers of religion, self-seeking
teachers, &c.— insincere rebukers of sin,
who pander to the rich and make allow-
ance for their vices, while they are very
severe on the offending poor, &o.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





2. God checks us in His prowdence,
and in love to our souls. Illness; raising
up of insuperable difficulties ; falling off
of friends ; superior success to rivala, &c.

3. We are apt to fret and be angry at
the énstruments of our disappointment.
We cast our spite and blame on second
causes.

4. We should seek spiritual enlighten-
ment, to see that tt 1s God's doing. Be
not angry and resentful, but give your-
selves to prayer ; else, like Balaam, you
will not see that it is God who opposes
you (ver. 34).

5. We can only be permitted to go
forward when we are brought to a state of
perfect subjection to God. Two things
are here included: a perfect purity of
motive and freedom from worldly self-
seeking; and an entire acquiescence in
whatever God appoints, desires, or does.
Thus, acknowledge God in all your
ways, and He will direot your steps.—
I. G. Horton.


Bazaaw’s Asa
(Verses 28-30.)


Observe—

L The historic character of the mi-
racle here recorded.

In the history of Christ and in that
of His apostles, incidents are recorded
which are miraculous, side by side with
those which are not miraculous. The
one cannot be separated from the other ;
they are interwoven into one narrative,
which must be accepted as a whole, or
rejected altogether. So it is in the
history of Balaam. It is well to note,
concerning this incident, that it is
spoken of by a New Testament writer
as an undoubted fact (2 Pet. ii 16).

II. The miracle itself.

The speech of the ass as the instru-
ment of a higher intelligence, finds an
analogy in another Scriptural record.
In the first temptation of man, the
speech of the serpent was used to con-
vey the thought of a higher and more
intelligent creature. If God permitted

440


Satan to use a serpent to tempt man,
why should He not Himself use an ass
to reprove man? If the tongue of the
Serpent was used to convey intelligible
sounds, why should not that of any
other animal be used for the same pur-
pose? In one case the miracle was
wrought by Satan for an evil end, in
the other by God for a good end. We
have another somewhat analogous case
in the speech of parrots and other birds,
who utter intelligible sentences with-
out understanding them, the difference
being that the ass did at once, and
therefore miraculously, what these crea-
tures learn to do by imitation. It ig
evident that these birds possess a spe-
cial God-given faculty to imitate human


words, and He who made them madethe ~


ass also.

III. The object of the miracle,

It was to bring Balaam to obey the
Divine voice of his conscience, which


—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


NUMBERS. CHAP. XXII.


/





- was well nigh drowned in the clamour
of his covetousness for “the wages of
unrighteousness.”

1. It was ca'culated to humble him
in relation to « gift of God upon which
he probably priued himself. It is likely
- he was an eloquent man. He would
now see that God could endow a brute
with the gift of speech.

2. He would also see that an ass
could discern a messenger from heaven,
where he, blinded by his desire for gain,
could see nothing but empty space.

8. He might also have learned that
all speech was under Divine control,
and that he would be able to utter only
such words as God would permit.

Lessons.

i. That the means used by God to
bring men to obedience are always


adapted to that end, although they do
not always attain it. Balaam needed
to repent of his present course, and
nothing could have been more likely
to startle him into reflection upon it
than a reproof from his own beast. He
had a moment’s space for consideration
before he stood face to face with the
Angel of the Lord ; but his half-hearted
confession of his sin (ver. 34) showa—
ii. That, when obedience to a certain
command is withheld (ver. 12), miracles
are powerless to’ change character.
Those who were unwilling to take the
yoke of Christ (Matt. xi. 29), were not
won by His miracles. See also Luke
xvi. 81, Miracles startle the soul, but
obedience transforms the character.—
From Outlines of Sermons on the Mira-
eles and Parables of the Old Testament.


Toe Meerina oF BALaaM AND Batak.


(Verses 86-41.)


In this portion of the history these
are the principal points:

I. The king receives the prophet
with marks of great honour.

« And when Balak heard that Balaam
was come, he went out to mect him”
é&c. (ver. 36). And as a further token
of his respect, the king sent unto Ba-
laam and to the princes who were with
him a feast from the sacrifices which he
offered (ver. 40). The heathen were
accustomed to pay great respect and re-
verence to their priests and prophets.
We have evidence of this in Gen. xlvii.
22; 1 Kings xviii. 19 ; Ezra vii. e al.
Their conduct in this respect is—

1. Arebuke to many Christians. Paul
exhorted the Christians at Thessalonica
toesteem their ministers “very highly in
love for their work’s sake :” yet how many
Christians fail lamentably in this respect !

2. An example to many Christians.
In this respect we may profitably imi-
tate them. Our Lord saith to His
faithful ministers, “ He that heareth
you, heareth Me ; and he that despiseth
you, despiseth Me; and he that despiseth
Me, despiseth Him that sent Me” (see


also Matt. x. 40, 41 ; John xiii. 20). (a)

IL. The king expresses his surprise
at the delay of the prophet in coming
to him.

“And Balak said unto Balaam, Did
I not earnestly send unto thee to call
thee?’ &c. (ver. 37). Thus he gently
rebukes him for not having come to
him when he was first asked to do so.
And he seems surprised that his power
to reward the prophet had not secured
his ready compliance with his request.
Clearly he was of opinion that the
blessing or curse of a prophet was pur-
chasable if the would-be purchaser could
only bid high enough for them; that
Balaam had his price; and that he,
Balak, was able to pay it (b) (comp.
Acts viii. 18-23). Balak seems to have
had no idea of the sacredness of genius,
or of the solemn responsibilities involved
in the possession of great gifts, or that
endowmentsfrom God must be used only
in religious accordance with His holy
will. A worldly-minded man, he can
think of no higher motive than this,
“ Am I not able indeed to promote thee
to honour #” (e)

441


CHAP, XXII. HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY:


NUMBERS.





But of what value are the highest
honours and the richest rewards which
kings can bestow, when they areobtained
at the cost of righteous principles and
a clear conscience ? (d)

III. The prophet endeavours to mo-
derate the expectations of the king.

“ And Balaam said unto Balak, Lo,
I am come unto thee,” &c. (ver. 38).
Balaam felt himself under a restraint
which he could not throw off; no, not
even for all the wealth and honours
which a king has power to bestow. (e)

The Lord was watching over the
interests of Israel; and while He pro-
tected them neither could Balaam curse


them, nor Balak conquer them, “ Be-
hold, He that keepeth Israel shall
neither slumber nor sleep,” &. (Psa.


exxi. 4-8). (f)

IV. The king endeavours by sacri-
ficial offerings to induce Jehovah to
favour his design.

“Balak offered oxen and_ sheep.”
Keil and Del. : “ The sacrifices were not
so much thank-offerings for Balaam’s
happy arrival, as supplicatory offerings
for the success of the undertaking before
them. ‘This is evident,’ as Hengsten-
berg correctly observes, ‘ from the place
and time of their presentation ; for the
place was not that where Balak first
met with Balaam, and they were only
presented on the eve of the great event.’


Moreover, they were offered unquestion-
ably not to the Moabitish idols, from
which Balak expected no help, but to
Jehovah, whom Balak wished to draw
away, in connection with Balaam, from
His own people (Israel), that He might
secure His favour to the Moabites.”

How utterly mistaken in this view of
the Divine Being! He changes not.
No sacrifices can alter His will, or turn
Him aside from His purposes. How
unworthy of God and how dishonouring
to Him is such a view of His character !
No bribes, however costly, can induce
Him to forsake His people, or to favour
an unrighteous cause. And the sacri-
fices offered to Him with such a view
are an abomination in His sight.

V. The king and prophet ascend
a height and obtain a view of the
camp of Israel.

“ And it came to pass on the morrow,
that Balak took Balaam, and brought
him up into the high places of Baal,
that thence he might see the utmost
part of the people.” Balak thought
that Balaam must see the Israelites in
order that he might curse them effec
tually. And now the time had come
for the prophet to make the awful
attempt. Balak wasin a state of eager
anxiety. But who shall tell the state
of Balaam’s mind at this time %


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) For illustrations on this point see p. 62.

(6) As a mere matter of fact, known to us,
by distressing observation, the saving of money
is a fascination of the devil to many men ; it
absorbs their energies ; it engrosses their time ;
it perverts their moral nature; it destroys
natural affection ; it sets them on fire of hell.
Kept from the sizht of gold, they may even
bear a strong resemblance to pious men ; they
may be intelligent, genial, and entertaining,
yet the moment their thoughts are turned to
the accumulation of property, every trace of
noblencss is destroyed. The victim of the
world is entirely without self-control: every
speck of dust is to him as a shackle of bou-
dage ; he would risk his eternity for a stone or
aclod, At all times he would not know this,
for in the moments of his release from the
urgency of his tormentor he might discover
traits of a better disposition ; it is when he is
brought again into contact with worldly con-

442


cerns that he shows how utterly he is enslaved
and unmanned. I may remind my young
heirers of the tiger that was trained to be the
playmate of a favourite child. Weeks and
months and years elapsed, and the tiger was
gentle and playful; it so happened, however,
that in licking the child’s hand it tasted blood,
and instantly the natural appetite of the crea-
ture was excited, and the child fell a victim to
its ferocity. It isso in the moral history of
many a man: there are breaks in human life
which are filled up by many excellencies, and
which apparently give the lie to the charge of
apostacy, and yet suddenly some besetting sin
will set the whole nature on fire, and in the
madness of an hour the fabric of a lifetime
may be overthrown.—Joseph Parker, D.D.

c) But few men in any country touch the
highest point of fame ; thousands upon thou-
sands in all generations come to honour and
influence, yet in a few months after their death


Ie Opa,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,





their names cease to have any interest but for
the smallest circles. This reflection ought not
to discourage virtue. Peace of heart is better
than mere renown. To be known in heaven
isthe best fame. To have a place in the love
of God is to enjoy the true exaltation.—ZJbid.

(d) With money you can buy the canvas and
the oil, but not the artistic eye which interprets
and appreciates the pictnre ; you can buy the
poem, but the living and inspiring poetry is
not for sale ; you can rent the garden, but
cannot bribe the flowers to whisper their tender
messages. After all, it is but a very little way
that money can go; it can do nearly every-
thing in the market-place or among the dust of
cities, but what do the angels know of your
currency, your bills of exchange, your promis-
sory notes, and your intricate conveyancing of
estates ? Not one of the great redemptions of
life can be wrought out with money ; death takes
no bribe; the grave will not sell its victories
for gold; you may buy the Bible, but you can-
not buy the Holy Ghost; you may pay forthe
masonry, but no money can put you in posses-
sion of the Spirit of the altar.—J/b7d.

(e) The kite broke away from its string,
and instead of mounting to the stars it de-
scended into the mire. The river grew weary
of its restraining banks, and longed to burst
them, that it might rush on in the wild joy of
freedom ; down went the embankwents, the
river became a flood, and carried destruction and
desolation wherever it rushed. Unrein the
coursers of the sun, and lo! the earth is burned ;
unbind the girdle of the elements, and chaos
reigns! Let us never desire to be rid of those
restraints which God has seen fit to lay upon
us; they are more needful than we dream.


CHAP, XXL.


Remember how the vine, when bound to the
stake which upheld it, judged itself a martyr,
and longed to be free; but when it saw the
wild vine at its feet, rotting on the damps and
pe amidst the heats, and producing no
ruit, it felt how needful were its bonds if its
clusters were ever to ripen.—C. H. Spurgeon.
(J) According to the gloomy prophets, all
England is going to the bad—not England
alone, but all countries are hastening on to a
general and everlasting smash. Then one be-
gins to fret about the Church of God; for
according to the soothsayers of the age, Anti-
Christ is yet to come, and new heresies are to
spring up; the dogs of war are to be let loose,
the Pope is to rule and-burn us, and one hardly
knows whai else. Daniel, Ezekiel, and Reve-
lation, have been made sometimes to minister
poison to every bright hope, but here is our
comfort with regard to the future :—


“ He everywhere hath sway,
And all things serve His might :
His very act pure blessing is,
His path unsullied light.”


Let the worst come to the worst, the best
will come of it ere long. “ If the heavens were
a bow,” saith one, “and the earth were the
string, and God should fit the arrows of His
vengeance thereon, and shoot at the sons of
men, yet they could find shelter with the archer
himself.’ Our refuge is in God ; let the worst
calamities occur to the world in years to come
we are secure. Ji must be well: it cannot be
ill. “ Jehovah, Jireh.” Lift high the banner
and hopetully advance to the battle, for the
victory shall surely come unto the Arm eternal,
the Will immutable.— bid.


History oF Bataam.—No. IIL*


(Verse 36—chap. xxiv. 25.)


We approach the termination of this
eventful history. The portion of Scrip-
ture that forms the basis of our re-
marks is chap. xxii. 36, to the end of
chap. xXiv.

We left Balaam on his journey to
Balak; we now commence with his
arrival in the land of Moab. With
what strangely mingled feelings must
Balaam have pursued this journey!
That dumb ass had not spoken for
nothing : a good many twinges of con-
science, no doubt, Balaam had on the
way ; perhaps, after all, God did not
like his going with these messengers ;
perhaps he had better have been con-
tent with his humble mountain home;


perhaps he will get into trouble, for he
cannot forget—‘ The word that I shall
speak, that shalt thou speak.” How-
ever, Balaam goes on, just this once,
and when this affair is over he will re-
turn home, eschew Balak and his mes-
sengers for ever; in fact, Balak had
made him so many presents already,
that he will be able in future to afford
to keep a conscience, and to say ‘ No *
to temptation.

As the key to this history, recall
what was said before of Baluam’s con-
naction with the old patriarchal churoh :
he was a monotheist amongst a multi-





® For Nos. L and II, see pp. 429-431,
443


CHAP. XXIII.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : NUMBERS.


! ——


tude of polytheists ; to that idea of
God he was faithful, Moreover, Balaam
knows God to be the God of Israel, that
God has chosen Israel, and that God is
with them, The history of their eight
and thirty years’ weary pilgrimage in
the peninsula of Sinai, was matter of
notoriety among all the wild Ishmael-
ites of that part; and Balaam is seer,
he can prognosticate out of existing
facts; and in the opposition of the
Amulekites, and Moabites, and Edom-
ites to the Israelites, he sees the cer-
tainty of their final overthrow. And
yet the King of Moab sends to him to
eurse the people of God’s choice; a
people that Balaam knows are to be
victorious; and he goes, although he
knows it to be impossible to curse them ;
but he hopes to get his “ wages of
iniquity.”

And so Balaam and Balak meet. The
first words of the interview are ominous.
Balak chides Balaam, and Balaam ad-
mits that all he says is right ; but adds,
“the word that God putteth in my
mouth, that shall I speak.”

When a man has come to that pass
it is all over with him. How many do
we meet every day, who would be
wicked if they dared; who would go


here, and would go there, only they
sin at all, only its exposure :—they
might be reproved; they might lose a
situation, &c. There is nothing left,
but another edition of Solomon’s pic-
ture in the Proverbs, ‘“ How have I
hated instruction, and my heart despised
reproof,” &c.

Endeavour to realize the scene.
Balaam was alone ; he “ went to a high
place ;” there he stood by his burnt
offering; below, on the plains, were
God’s people Israel: from the top of
the rocks he saw their encampment,
the “pillar of cloud” still hovering
over the assembled host: all was order,
security, and strength amongst Israel.
Far away is the uncrowned king and


his nobles, waiting the return of Balaam : © i


but meanwhile a very notable event
occurs, —“ And God met Balaam.”


Balaam shall yet be warned, shall yet —


have another word ; and so God met
him.
The lessons from the whole are—
The formidable power of sin.
can degrade himself below the level of


are not at liberty ; who don’t mind the |


Man —


a beast. The dumb ass was wiser than —


Balaam.—W. G. Barrett.


CHAPTER XXIIL


CriticaL AND ExrPLanatory Notss


Verse 1. Build me here seven altars,
‘As seven was a number of perfection,
Balaam chose it on this occasion, because
he intended to offer a grand sacrifice,
and to offer a bullock and a ram upon
each of the altars ; the whole to be made
a burnt offering at the same time. And
as he intended to offer seven bullocks
and seven rams at the same time, it
could not be conveniently done on one
altar, therefore he ordered seven to be
built."——A. Clarke LL.D,

The offerings were presented to
Jehovah, whom Balaam acknowledged
as his God.

Verse 2. Balak and Balaam offered.
“ Balak presented the sacrifices to be

444


offered for him and for his people; and —


Balaam performed the office of a priest

and offered them.”— Bp. Patrick,
Verse 3. I will go; peradventure

Jehovah will come to meet me,


“Them


meaning of these words is apparent from —


chap. xxiv. 1: and ‘ he went no more to
meet with the auguries.’ Balaam went
out to look for a manifestation of Jehovah
in the significant phenomena of nature”
—Keil and Del,

He went to an high place, Ketl and
De.: “a bald height.” Speaker's
Comm. ; “‘a bare place on the hill,’ or
‘a scar’; as opposed to the high place
with its grove of trees,” Heathen augurs
were wont to select the lonely and


a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


NUMBERS, CHAP. XXIm,


LN


barren summits of mountains for their
auspices.

Verse 4, God met Balaam. “God
served His own purposes through the
arts of Balaam, and manifested His will
_ through the agencies employed to seek
it, dealing thus with Balaam in an
exceptional manner. For to God’s own
people auguries were forbidden (Lev.
xix, 26).”—Speaker’s Comm.

I have prepared seven aitars, &o. “The
spirit of these words is thoroughly that
of a heathen worshipper expecting in
all his devotions his guid pro guo.”—
Ibid.

Verse 7. Parable. Heb.: mashal, a
proverb, similitude, sententious poem.

Aram. This word signifies “ high-
land,” and denotes the country to the
north-east of Palestine as far as the
banks of the Euphrates. The country
between the Euphrates and the Tigris
was specially designated ‘‘ Aram-naha-
raim,” or “ Aram of the two rivers.”

Mountains of the east, t.e., of Meso-
potamia (comp. Deut. xxiii. 4).

Defy Israel. Rather “threaten,” or
“menace Israel.”

Verse 8. How shall I defy, &. Rather :
“how shall I threaten whom Jehovah
hath not threatened ?”

Verse 9. Dwell alone, &c., t.e., separate
from other nations. The outward sepa-
ration was a symbol of their inward
separation from the heathen world ; and
this inward separation was an indispens-
able condition of their outward separa-
tion and safety.

Verse 10. Lhe fourth part, &c. (comp.
chap. ii).

Verse 13. Come with me unto another
place, &c. Bualak’s idea seems to be,
that Balaam’s view of the camp of
Israel was so extensive, and so im-
pressed him with their number and
order and power, that he could not
curse them ; and that if he took him to
a place from whence he could see only
a small portion of them, he would thea
be able to curse them.

Keil and Del., however, take a dif-
forent view of this, They say the
translation should be, “‘ whence thou
wilt see it (Israel) ; thou seest only the


end of it, but not the whole of it’ (se.
here upon Bamoth-Baal). This is re-
quired,” they say, “by a comparison of
the verse before us with chap. xxii. 41,
where it is most unquestionably stated,
that upon the top of Bamoth-Baal
Balaam only saw ‘the end of the
people.’ For this reason Balak regarded
that place as unfavourable, and wished
to lead the seer to a place from which
he could see the people, without any
limitation whatever.”

Verse 14. The field of Zophim. “Or
‘of watchers.’ It lay upon the top of
Pisgah, north of the former station, and
nearer to the Israelitish camp; the
greater part of which was, however,
probably concealed from it by an in-
tervening spur of the hill, Beyond the
camp Balaam’s eye would pass on to
the bed of the Jordan. It was perhaps
@ lion coming up in his strength from
the swelling of that stream (cf. Jer.
xlix. 19) that furnished him with the
augury he awaited, and so dictated the
final similitude of his next parable.—
Speaker's Comm.

Verse 18. Rise up, Balak, &. A
summons to minute and earnest atten-
tion.

Verse 20. Omit the
ment” of the A. V.

Verse 21. “ He hath not beheld wni-
quity, &c. There is a large diversity
in the interpretation of this verse.
That of Keil and Del. seems to us
correct: “God sees not }IX, worthless-


“ command-


ness, wickedness, and Dy, tribulation,


misery, as the consequence of sin, and
therefore discovers no reason for cursing
the nation. That this applied to the
people solely by virtue of their calling
as the holy nation of Jehovah, and con-
sequently that there is no denial of the
sin of individuals, is evident from the
second hemistich, which expresses the
thought of the first in a positive form :
so that the words, ‘Jehovah his God
is with him,’ correspond to the words,
‘He beholds not wickedness ;’ and ‘ the
shout of a king in the midst of it,’ to
His not seeing suffering. Israel there-
fore rejoiced in the loses ee God


CHAP. XXIII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


SS


only s» Jorg aa it remained faith-
ful to the idea of ity Divine calling, and
continued im covenant fellowship with
the Lord. So long the power of the
world could do it no harm. The
‘shout of @ king, in Israel is the re-
joicing of Israel at the fact that Jeho-
vah dwells and rules as King in the
midst of it (cf. Exod. xv. 18; Deut.
xxxiii. 5). Jehovah had manifested
Himself as King, by leading them out
of Egypt.”

Verse 22. @od. 5x, the Mighty
One.

Unicorn, Rather, the buffalo, or wild
bull.

Verse 23. Surely there is no enchant-
ment, &¢, Keil and Del. translate:
“For there is no augury in Jacob, and
no divination in Israel. At the time
itis spoken to Jacob, and to Israel
what God doeth.” “wWm) and OD),


oiwvicpos and pavreia, auguriun et
divinatio, were the two means employed
by the heathen for looking into futurity.
The former was the unfolding of the
future, from signs in the phenomena of
nature and inexplicable occurrences in
animal and human life; the latter pro-


phesying from a pretended or supposed
revelation of the Deity within the hu-
man mind, JD, ‘according to the


time,’ ze, at the right time, God re-
vealed His acts, His couusel, and His
will to Israel in His word, which He
had spoken at first to the patriarchs,
and afterwards through Moses and the
prophets. In this He revealed to His
people in truth, and in a way that
could not deceive, what the heathen
attempted in vain to discover through
augury and divination (cf. Deut. xvui.
14-19).”

Verse 25. Neither curse taem, &e.
Keil and Del.: “*‘Thou shalt neither
curse it, nor even biess.’ In his vexa-
tion at the second failure, he did not
want to hear anythirg more from Ba-
laam.”

Verse 28. Peor. “Mount Peor was
one peak of the northern part of the
mountains of Abarim by the town of
Beth-peor, which afterwards belonged to
the Reubenites (Josh. xii, 20), and op-
posite to which the Israelites were
encamped in the steppes of Moab (Deut.
fii, 29 ; iv. 46).”—HXesl and Del.

Jeshimon, See on chap. xxi. 20.


Tue Saoririog ov Bauak aND Baiaay,


(Verses 1-4.)


Observe—

I. Objectively this sacrifice was as
perfect as the offerers could make it.

Clearly they aimed at presenting a
perfect offering. ‘This is exhibited—

i, In the number of offerings. There
were seven altars, upon each of which
they offered a bullock anda ram. Seven
was regarded as a sacred and perfect
number.

2. In the victims offered. “Seven
oxen and seven rams.” The victims
were not.mean or of little worth; but
of the most valuable that were used for
sacrifices.

3. In the kind of offerings. They
were burut offerings, which were pra-
seated without any reserve, being en-

446


tirely consumed in honour of the Divive
Being.

It was a law amongst the Hebrews
that they should present to God offer-
ings of their choicest and best. Spiri-
tually that law is still binding. (a)

II. Subdjectively this sacrifice was
very imperfect, and even sinful.

In the sentiments aad ractives of the
offerers there was much that was botk
erroneous and evil.

1. The sacrifice was offared wath an
admixture of futth and superstition.
Balak und Ba:aam believed tke trath
that acceptable approach to God munt
be by sacrifice. But there was supersti-
tion in their view of His regard for
sacrifives, or the way in which He was





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





Influenced by them. It was also belief
in heathen superstitions, which led Ba-
laam to go to look for auguries (ver. 3).
Superstitions commend neither the of-
ferer nor his offerings to God.

2. The sacrifice was offered under the
impression that the offering was merito-
rious on the part of the offerers, and
placed God under an obligation to them.
“And God met Balaam, and he said
unto Him, [ have prepared seven altars,
and I have vffered upon every altar a
bullock anda ram.” The state uf mind
which led Balaam thus to catl Divine
attention to the sacrifices, implied the
ignoring of two facts of vital importance :
—(1) God’s proprietorship of all things.
We can only present unto Him His own.
David felt this, and said, “ All things
come of Thee, and of Thine own have we
given Thee” (comp. Psa, 1. 8-13). (2)
Man’s relation to God as a dependent
and sinful creature. Where this is
realised. all notions of merit in man in
relation to God, or of obligation upon
God in relation to man, are effectually
excluded. The best man at his best, is
but an unprofitable servant, as regards
God (Luke xvii. 10). Balaam did not
feel thus: he was not humble, but
thought he had rendered to God very
meritorious service. (5)

3. The sacrifice was offered as a means
to induce God to change His mind. He
had forbidden Balaam to curse Israel
(chap. xxii. 12); Balaam desired Him
to revoke that prohibition, and to per-
mit him to curse them; and for this


CHAP. XXiit.


—_—-_ + re


purpose he offered his sacrifice, At
first God absolutely forbad his accom-
panying the messengers of Balak ; then
afterwards He gave him conditional per.
mission to go with them; and Balaam
probably regarded this as the result of
a change of mind in the Divine Being,
and drew from it encouragement to
hope that he might obtain from Him
permission to curse Israel. How false
and dishonouring was such a view as
regards God! how perilous as regards
man ! (ec)

4. The sacrifice was offered with a
view of obtaining permission and power
to curse the people of God. This was the
final cause of the sacrifice, and was
utterly sinful in the sight of God.

Conclusion.

1. Learn that the true value of sacrt-
fice ts to be looked for not in the quantity
or quality of the offering, but in the spirit
of the offerer. ‘Thou desirest not sacri-
fice,” &c. (Psa. li. 16-19). (d)

2. Trusting in Christ Jesus for ac-
ceptance, let ws present ourselves to God.
“God must be worshipped with our best.
A man’s best is himself; and to sacri-
fice this is the true sacrifice.” ‘TI be-
seech you therefore, brethren,” &c.
(Rom. xii. 1). (e)

3. He who has truly given himself tu
God will keep back nothing from Him.
Hearty obedience and reverent worship
he will render to God, and kind and
helpful service to man. “ By Jesus,
therefore, let us offer the sacrifice of
praise,” &c, (Heb, xiii. 15, 16).


ILLUSTRATIONS,


(a) For an illustration on this point see
. 101.
Z (6) For an illustration on this point, see
. 100.
4 (c) Balaam wanted to please himself with-
out displessing God. The problem was how
to go to Balak, and yet not offend God. He
would have given worlds to get rid of his
duties, and he sacrificed, not to learn what his
duty was, but to get his duty altered. Now
see the feeling that lay at the root of all this—
that God is mutable. Yet of all men one
would have thought Balaam knew better, for
had he not said, “ God is not a man, that He
should lie; neither the son of man, that He
should repent: hath he said, and shall He not


doit?” But, when we look upon it, we see
Balaam had scarcely any feeling higher than
this—God is more inflexible than man, Pro-
bably had he expressed the exact shade of
feeling, he woald have said, more obatinate,
He thought that God had set His heart upon
Israel, and that it was hard, yet not impossi-
ble, to alter this partiality. Hence he trie
sacrifices to bribe, and prayers to coax God.
How deeply rooted this feeling is in human
nature—this belief in God’s mutability—you
may see from the Romish doctrine of indul-
gences and atonements. The Romish Church
permits crime for certain considerations. For
certain considerations it teaches that God will
luryive vsuiaes. Atonements Ba cn indul-


CHAP, XXUI,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,





gences before sin, are the same. But this
Romish doctrine never could have succeeded,
if the belief in God’s mutability and the desire
that He should be mutable, were not in man
already.

What Balaam was doing in these parables,
and enchantments, and sacrifices, was simply
purchasing an indulgence to sin; in other
words, it was an attempt to make the Eternal
Mind change. What was wanting to Balaam
to feel was this—God cannot change. What
he did feel was this—God will not change.
There are many writers that teach that this
and that is right because God has willed it.
All discussion is cut short by the reply, God
has determined it, therefore it is right. Now,
there is exceeding danger in this mode of
thought, for a thing is not right because God
has willed it, but God wills it because it is
right. It is in this tone the Bible always
speaks. Never, except in one obscure passage,
does the Bible seem to refer right and wrong
to the sovereiynty of God, and declare it a
matter of will: never does it imply that if He
so choose, He could reverse evil and good. It
says, “Is not My word equal? are not your
ways unequal?” “Shall not the Judge of
all the earth do right ?”” was Abraham’s ex-
clamation in a kind of hideous doubt whether
the Creator might not be on the eve of doing
injustice. So the Bible justifies the ways of
God to man. But it could not do so unless it
admitted Eternal Laws, with which no will
can interfere. Nay more, see what ensues
trom this mode of thought. [f Right is right
because God wills it, then if Gud chose, He
could make injustice, and cruelty, and lying to
be right. ‘This ig exactly what Balaam
thought. If God could but be prevailed on to
hate Israel, then for him to curse them would
be right. And again: if power and sove-
reignty make right, then, supposing that the
Ruler were a demon, devilish hatred would be
as right as now it ia wrong. ‘There is great
danger in some of our prescnt modes of think-
ing. It is a common thought that Might
makes Right, but for us there is no rest, no
rock, no sure footing, as long as we teel right
and wrong ave mere matters of will and decree,
There is no safety then, from those hankering
feelings and wishes to alter God’s decree.
You are unsafe till you feel “Heaven and


earth may pass away, but God’s word caxmeh
pass away.”—F’. W. Robertson, M.A.

_(d) All sacrifice is worthless which is not
vitalized by the moral element. Where the
sacrifice represents a broken spirit, where it
sets forth the operations of a contrite heart, it
becomes acceptable to God, and useful as a
basis of negotiation with heaven. Where the
moral element is prescnt, the physical element
will not be forgotten. Though sacrifice in it-
self, without the presence of spiritual feeling,
is absolutely worthless in the sight of God, yet
where the moral element is present in the form
of a broken spirit and a contrite heart, sacri-
fice will be presented even in its material
forms. Thereby the penitent man expre-ses
his love, and fosters his faith, and testifies his
gratitude. Blessed be God, in our case it is
unnecessary that we provide bullock or burnt
offering. The one final sacrifice has been
offered in the person of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ. Higher than this no man can
go. After His blood has been shed, the blood
of all animals is unavailing. It is enough
that the Lamb of God poured out His blood
for the sing of the world. Yet we have to
offer sacrifices, not indeed of atonement, but of
gratitude ; we have to testify by exalted puz-
suits, by noble endeavours, by generous efora
to ameliorate the condition of mankind, by ai
holy labour in the cause of evangelization,
that our hearts have been broken and healed.
that our spirits have been bowed down, and
yet lifted up.—Joseph Parker, D.D.

(e) “I will have mercy and not sacrifice.”
That is a very solemn enunciation, Sacrifice is
worship. You may pray devout prayers, you
may sing sweet hymns with rapture, you may
rejoice in all the peacefulness of the Sabbath
well observed, you may be a religious man, and
yet you may not have mercy ; men may perish
about you, and you be indifferent; works of
beneficence may be going on under your eye,
and you have no part or lot in them, It is
possible for a man to be a reliyious man, and
not a Christian. To be a Christian a man
must have that spirit which led Christ to give
Himself to be a ransom for the world, and he
must carry his life so as to be a perpetual
benefaction not to himself, but to others, To
be Christlike in these regards is to be a Chris-
tian.—H. W. Beecher,


Bataam’s First PaRABLE ; THE BLESSEDNESS OF THE PEOPLE oF Gop,


(Verses 5-12.)


Balaam went out to look for auguries,
and the Lord God met him and puta
word in his mouth. ‘God designed to
serve His own glory by him, and there-
fore met Balaam, Balak having chosen
him for his oracle, God would constrain
him to utter such a confession, to the

448


honour of God and Israel, as should
render those for ever inexcusable who
should appear in arms against them.”
Thus the Divine message was spoken
by the lips of a bad man; and he who
longed to curse Israel, in exalted strains
pronounces their blessedness. Balaam’s


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


CHAP, XXIII,


Re nesses. snftnnenynncenesarensetteneen,


declaration of the happiness of Israel,
sets forth the Blessedness of the People
of God.

I, It is placed beyond the power of
their enemies.

Balaam both felt and declared this
—“ How shall I curse whom God hath
not cursed? or how shall I threaten
whom the Lord hath not threatened ?
: . And Balak said unto Balaam,
What hast thou done unto me?” &.
(vers. 8, 11,12). Balaam felt that he
could not curse Israel. And if he had
cursed them, his curse would not have
injured them, but himself. ‘‘ See what
it is to live within the wall of God’s
blessing.” “ Behold, He that keepeth
Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep”
(Psa. cxxi. 4-8). ‘They that trust in
the Lord shall be as Mount Zion,” &,
(Psa. exxv. 1, 2). ‘Upon this rock I will
build My Church,” &c. (Matt. xvi. 18).
“Tf God be for us, who can be against
us? Who shall separate- us from the
love of Christ 1” &c.(Rom. viii. 31, 35-
39). “ Who is he that will harm you,
if ye be followers of that which is
good?” (a)

IL. It consists in their separation
from the ungodly.

“From the top of the rocks I see
him, and from the hills I behold him:
lo, the people shall dwell alone, and
shall not be reckoned among the na-
tions.” ‘The separation of Israel from
the rest of the nations was manifested
outwardly to the seer’s eye, in the fact
that ‘the host of israel dwelt by itseifin
aseparate encampment upon the plain.
In this his spirit discerned the inward
and essential separation of Israel from
all the heathen.’” In three respects
were the Israelites separated from other
uations—

1. Politically they were independent
of them. Both their country and their
polity the Hebrews received from the
Lord God; and so long as they kept
themselves from the vices of the hea-
then, their independence was unim-
paired.

2. Morally they were separated from
them. God called them to complete
separation from the idolatries and vices

GG


of the corrupt Canaanites and others,
and to the practice of a pure morality
and the observance of an exalted and
exalting worship.

3. By the possession of peculiar privi-
leges they were separuted from them.
“Thou art an holy people unto the
Lord thy God; the Lord thy God hath
chosen thee to be a special people unto
Himself, above all people that are upon
the face of the earth” (comp. Deut,
vii.). To them pertained “ the adoption,
and the glory,” &c. (Rom. ix. 4, 5).
This declaration of their separation
from other nations “has been so marvel-
lously realized in the history of the
Israelites, notwithstanding their falling
short of the idea of their Divine calling,
‘that whereas all the mightier king.
doms of the ancient world, Egypt, As.
syria, Babel, &c., have perished without
a trace, Israel, after being rescued from
so many dangers which threatened
utter destruction under the Old Testa-
ment, still flourishes in the Church of
the New Testament, and continues also
to exist in that part which, though re-
jected now, is destined one day to be
restored’ (Hengstenberg).”

The people of God are still called to
be a separate people, ‘They are not
of the world,” said Christ, “even as I
am not of the world. I pray not,” &c.
(Johu xvii. 14-16). Their maxims,
customs, laws, and conduct are dis-
similar from those of the world;
“their inheritance, their home, their
citizenship are in heaven; their affec-
tions, conversation, pursuits, and plea-
sures are heavenly.” (0)

III. It consists also in their vast
numbers.

‘““Who can count the dust of Jacob,
and the numbers of the fourth part of
Israel”? To the eye of Balaam the
Israelites seemed an innumerable host
(comp. Gen. xiii. 16, and Deut. x. 22).
Their rapid increase was regarded as
the result of the blessing of the Lord
their God.

The spiritual Israel of God is “a
great multitude which no man can
number.” We may form an approxi-
mately correct idea of the ihe


CHAP, XXIII,


AHOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


—_——_—_—_—_—_———————————


Losts of the people of God from three
considerations. Their number is—

1. Unlimited as regards time. It
includes the good of all past ages of the
world’s history, of the present, and will
include those of all future ages.

2. Unlimited as regards place. The
good of all lands are members of the
great Church of the living God. “ They
shall come from the east, and the west,
and from the north,” &¢. (Luke xiii. 29).
“A great multitude, which no man could
number, of all nations,” &c. (Rev. vii. 9).

3. Unlimited as regards race or class.
The godly African as well as the godly
European, &c. The rich and the poor ;
the learned and the unlearned; the bond
and the free, &c. (c)

IV. It consists also of righteousness
of character,

Balaam speaks of the Israelites as
“the righteous” (ver. 10) “But
Israel,” says Keil and Del., “was not
only visibly blessed by God with an
mnumerable increase; it was also in-
wardly exalted into a people of on,


righteous or honourable men. The pre-
dicate righteous is applied to Israel on
account of its Divine calling, because it
bad a God who was just and right, a
God of truth and without iniquity
(Deut. xxxii. 4), or because the God of
Israel was holy and sanctified His people
(Lev. xx. 7, 8; Exod. xxxi, 13), and
made them into a Jeshurun (Deut.
xxxii.15; xxxiii.5, 26). Righteousness,
probity, is the idea and destination of
this people, which has never entirely
lost it, though it has never fully realised
it. Even in times of general apostasy
from the Lord, there was always an
éxAoyy in the nation, of which pro-
bity and righteousness could be truly
predicated (cf. 1 Kings xix. 18). The
righteousness of the Israelites was a
product of the institutions which God
had established among them, of the
revelation of His holy will, which He
had given them in His law, of the for-
giveness of sins, which He had linked on
to the offering of sacrifices, and of the
communication of His Spirit, which was
ever living and at work in His Church
(Hengstenberg).”
450


The people of God are still called to
be righteous ; and they realize this call-
ing by the exercise of faith in Jesus
Christ :—“even the righteousness of
God through faith of Christ Jesus unto
all and upon all that believe.” There
cannot be any true blessedness apart
from righteousness. (d)


V. It isin some respects desired even
by the ungodly.

“ Let me diethe death of therighteous,
and let my last end be like his!”
“Death,” again quoting from Keil and
Del., “is introduced here as the end
and completion of life. ‘Balaam desires
for himself the entire, full, indestructible,
and inalienable blessedness of the Israel-
ite, of which death is both the close and
completion, and also the seal and at-
testation’ (Kurcz). This desire did not
involve the certain hope of a blessed
life beyond the grave, which the Israel-
ites themselves did not then possess 3 it
simply expressed the thought that the
death of a pious Israelite was a desirable
good. And, this it was, whether viewed
in the light of the past, the present, or
the future. In the hour of death the
pious Israelite would look back with
blessed satisfaction to a long life, rich
‘in traces of the beneficent, forgiving,
delivering, and saving grace of God’;
he could comfort himself with the de-
lightful hope of living on in his children,
and his children’s children, and in them
of participating in the future fulfilment
of the Divine promises of grace ; and
lastly, when dying in possession of the
love and grace of God, he could depart
hence with the joyful confidence of being
gathered to his fathers in Sheol (Gen.
xxv. 8),”

Thus the ungodly bear testimony to
the excellence of the lct of the people of
God by desiring to share their bleszed.
ness. ‘Their rock is not as our Rock,
even our enemies themselves being
judges.” There is but one way of en-
joying their privileges, and that is by
possessing their character. To “die
the death of the righteous,” we must
live the life of the righteous, (e)

Is this blessedness ours? Are wa
truly of the number of God's spiritual


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XXIII,


nent


Israel? By faith in Christ every man
may become a member of the “chosen
generation,” and the “holy nation.”


“They which be of faith are blessed with
faithful Abraham.”


ILLUSTRATIONS,


(a) I read a story the other day of some
Russians crossing wide plains studded over
here anu there with foresis. ‘The villages were
ten or a dozen miles from each other, and the
wolves were out, and the horses were rushing
forward madly, and the traveilers could hear
the baying of the wolves behind them ; and
though the horses tore alony with all speed,
yet the wolves were fast behind, and they only
escaped, as we say, “‘by the skin of their
teeth,” managing just to get inside some hut
that stood in the road, and to shut-to the door,
Then they could hear the wolves leap on the
roof; they could hear them dash against the
sides of the hut ; they could hear them gnaw-
ing at the door, and howling, and making all
sorts of dismal noises ; but the travellers were
safe, because they had entered by the door, and
the door was shut. Now, when a man gets in
Christ, he can hear, as it were, the devils
Kowling like wolves, all fierce and hungry for
fim ; and his own sins, like wolves, are seek-
ing to drag him down to destruction. But he
has got in to Christ, and that is such a shelter
that all the devils in the world, if they were
to come at once, could not start a single beam
of the eternal refuge: it must stand fast,
though earth and heaven should pass away.—
C, H. Spurg-on.

For additional illustrations on the Security
of the People of God, see pp. 105, 154.

(6) It is our duty to flee from all ungodli-
ness and worldly lusts, and to have no fellow-
ship with the ungodly. nor with the unfruitful
works of darkness. ‘This indeed is “ pure re-
ligion and undefiled, to keep ourselves unspot-
ted from the world.” This the Apostle Paul
urgeth, 2 Cor. vi. 14-18. We know that a
little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. One
rotten sheep infecteth a whole flock. One
leper spreadeth the disease further, to the hurt
of sundry other. Now there is no leaven like
to the leaven of sin (1 Cor. v. 6); no infec-
tion comparable to the infection of sin ; no lep-
rosy so deadly and dangerous as the contagion
of sin, which bringeth danger and destruction
to soul and body. ‘Therefore we must not
join ourselves with the ungodly, seeing that
we are an holy people to the Lord our God.
He hath chosen us to be a precious people unto
Himself xbove other people that are upon the
earth. We “are achosen generation, a royal
priesthood,” &c. (1 Pet. ii. 9). Seeing we are
washed from the corruptions of the flesh, let
us not defile ourselves again; seeing we are
called out of the world, let us not return into
the world ; and seeing we are freed from the
thral..om of sin, let us not sell ourselves again
to our own lusts, which fight against the soul.


ea 2


We cannot come near an infectious disease
without danger of infection. We cannot
touch pitch without danger to be defiled with
it— W. Attersoll.

For another illustration on Separation from
the world, see p. 94.

(¢) The Lord’s Church is bigger than any
church that men’s hands ever formed. There
is no wall that can contain the Church of God
on earth, and there is no sect line that can
reach round it. The Lord’s garment is large
enough to cover all sects, and to leave room
for nations to camp under it besides—H. W.
Beecher,

“Lo! a great multitude of all nations, and
people, and kindred, and tongues.” The pur-
pose of the Lord is fixed! Idols he shall
utterly abolish! The march of Christianity
may have been slow and impeded, but the
truth shall yet prosper and prevail; and
faith, guided by the sure word of prophecy,
may even now behold the wild children of the
desert, the wandere’s, whose hand is against
every man, and every man’s hand against
them, the slaves of bloody rites, the victims
of fearful delusions, sitting at the feet of
Jesus, clothed, and in their right mind, and
made meet for the inheritance of the saints in
light. O glorious society, which shall thus
be gathered from all ages, and all ranks, and
all countries! ‘{‘here is beauty in diversity |
There is majesty in combiation! I kindle
at the thought of there being a great multi-
tude in heaven; I kindle the more at that of
this multitude being drawn from every nation, |
every tribe, and every tongue. What a throng
to joinin! What a company with which to
associate and enter into fellowship! The
righteous of past days, of the present, and
the future—those who under the earlier dis-
peusations caught faint glimpses of the star of
Bethlehem—they who, possessing but a few
brief notices of traditional relizion, followed
after God, and proved that He never left Him-
self without witnesses—Jews, who deciphered
the types, and gave substance to the shadows
of the law—Gentiles, on whom shone in all
its effulgence the light of the Gospel—the
mighty gathering of that splendid season
when ‘‘the knowledge of the glory of the
Lord shall cover the earth as the waters do
cover the sea.” What a multitude through
which to move ! with which to make acquaint-
ance! with which to hold converse !—JH.
Melville, B.D.

For anotner illustration on the immense
numbers of the people of God, see p. 175.

d) When society claps hands to the cry,


“O feliz!” “Oh, lucky fellow!” “Oh, rare


451


OHAP. XXIII.





success !” it is the fortunate circumstances of
a man’s lot of which society is thinking. It
is the blessedness of having a great deal of
money, of being always comfortable, of being
environed with what may minister to pleasure,
and able always to command what one desires ;
it is the blessedness of condition which society
crowns with its beatitudes, and to which men
pay the tribute of envying it. Alas for this
blessedness, which is outside the man; the
blessedness of circumstance, and accident, and
transient condition; the blessedness which
Time’s scythe mows down like grass to be
cast into the oven! Not condition does Jesus
bless, but character. He counts no earthly
state enviable, least of all a state of unbroken
ease. But the happy man is the good man,
What a man is in himself, not where he is,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





nor how he lives, nor how much he has, but
what aman is, is the ground of his blessedness.
—J. 0. Dykes, M.A., D.D.

(e) Many in these days desire the death of
the righteous, but they never regard their life;
they desire their end, but they will not walk
in thelr way ; they are willing to end with
them, but not to begin with them ; they catch
for the crown, but will not come to the cross ;
they would taste the sweet, but they cannot
abide the sweat. If we will live with Christ
for ever, we must here die with Him for a
season ; if we will reign with Him in heaven,
we must first suffer with Him on earth (2 Tim.
ii, 11, 12); we can neser die comfortably
unless we be careful to live unblameably.— W.
Attersoil.


Tus VISION From THE Rocks,


(Verse 9.)


“From the top of the rocks I see
him.”

It was of Israel and Israel’s glory
that the false seer of Pethor spoke.
He stood upon the top of Moab’s barren
rocks, and gazed down on the happy
nation whom God had delivered from
Egypt, had brought through the desert,
and was about to lead into the land
flowing with milk and honey. It was
with wonder, perhaps with envy too,
that Balaam looked on the goodly
tents beneath him.

So from these desert lands, and these
desert hills, we gaze upon the Church
on her way to Canaan, about to be set-
tled in the blessed land and holy city.
And when we gaze, what do we see }?

I. The ruggedness of the land of
our present sojourn.

It is the region of hostility as well as
barrenness. This is not our rest. These
dark mountains are not our home. We
may pitch our tents among them for
a scason, or climb to the top to gaze
around us, but they are no dwelling
place for us. We may look upon
Canaan from Pisgah, but Pisgah will
not do for a home. Nebo lies hard
by Pisgah, and Nebo tells of death,
not of life—mortality is here. This is
the land, not of Israel, but of Moab;
and its gods are Baal, not Jehovah.
We could not abide here,

452


II. The glorious land.

Afar off just now, but still visible,
still beautiful. It is the Paradise of
God; it is the new Jerusalem; the
city which hath foundations ; the new
heavens and new earth, wherein
dwelleth righteousness. The vision
gives us a wondrous contrast be-
tween what we are and what we
shall be, making us long for the day of
entrance.

III. A people delivered from a pre-
sent evil world.

Once in bondage, now free; once
groaning under oppression, now in
the service of a heavenly Master,
and heirs of the world to come; the
Red Sea crossed, and now between
them and their persecutors an iron
wall. Forgiven and redeemed ; with
their backs on Egypt, and their faces to
Jerusalem. “A people saved by the
Lord.”

IV. A people sustained by Jehovah
himself.

Theirs is the hidden manna, the
water from the smitten rock. Jehovah
feeds them; Jehovah gives them
the living water. It is not man but
God who cares for them. All that
they have they owe to Him who has
delivered them. They feed on angel’s
food; nay, better, the very bread
of God; on Him whose flesh ig


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


CHAP, XXIII,





meat indeed, whose blood is drink
indeed.

V. A pilgrim band.

They are strangers on the earth; this
is not their home ; here is not their city.
Their loins are girt, and their staff is
in their hand, and they are hastening
onward. No sitting down; no taking
ease ; no folding of their hands. For-
ward, still forward, is their watchword |
Theirs is a pilgrimage, not a pleasure
tour. They mus’ not tarry.

VI. A people vought with a price,

Their ransom has been blood; and
they are not their own. Another life
has gone for theirs. They have been
plucked from death and the grave, be-
cause Another has died and risen for
them, To that Other they belong—not
to themselves, nor the flesh, nor the
world,

VIL. A people loved with an infinite
love,

The banner that is over them is
love. The song they sing is love,
“ Unto Him that loved us.” Itisalove
which passeth knowledge; a love with-
out bound or end ; a love eternal and
divine. All around and above them is
love—the love of Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost. They are the monuments
of love; the witnesses of love—free
love, forgiving love, redeeming love;
love beyond that which angels know—


8 love which constrains them, purifies
them, urges them forward, gladdens all
their way.

VITI. A people preparing to pass
over to the goodly land.

It is within sight; a few days, per-
haps less, will bring them over. Their
journey is nearly done. Their toil and
weariness will’ soon be exchanged for
rest and glory. And “now is our sal-
vation nearer than when we believed.”
“ From the top of the rocks” they can
see Jerusalem, and Olivet, and Beth-
lehem ; and get glimpses of the whole
outstretched land. It is a land of plenty,
where they shall hunger no more,
neither thirst any more ; it is a land of
light, where there is no night; a land
of blessing, where there is no curse ; a
land of gladness, where sorrow comes
not; a summer land, where the frosts
of winter chill not ; a calm sunny land,
where storms vex not, and shadows fall
not ; a land of health, where the in-
habitant shall not say, “I am sick;” a
land of peace, where the war-trumpet
never sounds ; a land of life, where cor-
ruption and mortality enter not, where
death and the grave are unknown; a
land of union, where broken ties are all
reknit, and broken hearts all healed
(Rev. vii. 17). There Jesus reigns ;
there we reign with him.—H. Bonar,
D.D. From Light and Truth.


Tan TESTIMONY OF THB I[RRELIGIOUS TO THE VALUE OF RELIGION.


(Verse 10.)


The character and example of good
men are influential after death. They
shine upon us like stars upon the deep
—to guide us onward—to allure us up-
ward. They who have turned many
to righteousness are not only blessed in
their own time, but they shine as stars
for ever ;—monuments of the greatness
of the human mind and of the power of
religion, they awaken in the bosoms of
others the sparks of kindred excellence.

The works of the wicked do not
perish with them. They live as beacons,
“The censers of the sinners against


their own souls” were to be preserved
as a memorial against them (chap. xvi.
38). A mercy if their memory could
quite perish, if their evil deeds could
perish.

Balaam of this order: held up to
perpetual infamy. A man of fine talents
—even of prophetic illumination.

I. Remarks upon this exclamation
as coming from the lips of such a
man.

A man of talent, genius, acquirements,
great influence over the minds of others;
but not truly religious,

453


GHAP. XXIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; NUMBERS.





1. That solemn thoughts of death and
judgment may often occupy, though tolittle
purpose, the minds of trreligious men.
They cannot hide from themselves the
thoughts of mortality, nor the respon-
sibility that follows it.

In the history of man, the last solved
problem always produces a new one to
solve. Three stages in the history of
man—his birth—conversion—death.

We have an existence beyond death.
Greatest men have died young. Alex-
ander 33, Raffaelle 30. The most pious
attain elements of better nature and dis-
position.

After death no change—“ my last
end.” Everything fixed at death, and
for ever. This is the world of change,
and of great and mighty possibilities.
But when the ultimatum of life is over,
all stand one unvaried, fixed, eternal
character and destiny.

2. That trreligious men are often con-
strained to bear a reluctant testimony in
Javour of religion, and against themselves.
God’s love to His people is wonderful to
their very enemies. ‘“ Who can count %”
&e. So struck with the sight of their
privileges, blessings, tents, goodly ar-
ray, Balaam forgot to curse, was com-
pelled to bless, and for once in his life
to pray. Bad men envy the security
and comfort of the righteous. ‘‘ How
many hired servants,” &c. They
know the worth of religion by its loss,


Perhaps that offender never lived whe
has not occasionally sighed to possess
the mercies and blessings of the righ-
teous. The system of irreligion that
will do for health will not do for sick-
ness, Speculations which amuse in life
will not support in death.

3. That men cheat themselves with the
fallacy of wishing to die oy a religion
by which they are not willing to live. This
man calculated wisely for his dying
hour ; he ought to have calculated as
wisely for his living ones. We must
live by faith if we would die by it.

4, That none go as far from God as
those who fly in the face of their own
convictions. Balaam gave counsel black
as the pit whence it sprung (comp.
chap. xxv., and Rev. ii. 14). :

II. Remarks upon this exclamation
as replete with instruction to the
people of God.

1. Let this testimony confirm you tn
attachment to the religion you profess.
Proof that it is no cunning fable: it
“is a faithful saying.” ‘ Wisdom is
justified,” &c. Cling with tenacity.
Take the ground they give. Yield not
to the claims of infidelity.

2. Let it prompt to the cultivation of
this righteousness.

3. Let wt lighten life of tts cares, and
death of tts terrors.

4. Let prompt with compassion for
trreligious men. —Samuel Thodey.


Tas DzatH oF THE RIGHTEOUS,


(Verse 10.)


The text refers to—

I A character that we must define
—‘“ the righteous.”

None are such by nature ; none are
such by mere education, or parental
discipline ; none are such by self-exer-
tion. This character is divine, and
therefore of God. It includes—

1. Justification. By which, through
faith in the Lord Jesus, we are consti-
tuted righteous, and dealt with as such
(Isa. xlv. 25; Rom. iii. 26).

2. we Born from above ;

54


born of God; “ partakers of the Divine
nature.” ‘This is the “ new man;” the
holy nature which the children of God
possess (John iii. 3, seq. ; Col. iii. 10).

3. Sanctification ; or the progress of
the new man in holiness; the spiritual
growth and advanceinent of the Divine
life. This includes also the consecra-
tion of the heart to the service and
glory of God. An increasing conformity
to the holy image of the blessed God
(2 Cor. iii. 18).

4. Practical obedience ; or righteous.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP, XXIIL


fll


ness of life. This is the great evidence
of righteousness of heart. The fruit
testifies that the tree is made good;
the stream, that the fountain has be-
come pure. He only is righteous who
doeth righteousness, Those who “have
received Christ Jesus the Lord, walk in
Him,” following His example, tread-
ing in His imitable footsteps. (Rom.
vi. 22).

II. An event that we must illus-
trate—“ the death of the righteous.”

Even the righteous must die. The
righteous of all ages, except Enoch and
Elijah, have died. “It is appointed
unto men,” &c. But the righteous
die—

1. Under the immediate direction of
God. The wicked often die prema-
turely—by their own hands; by the
hands of the executioner ; by the power
of sin producing disease; by the judg-
ments of God. But the righteous, in
life, in sickness, in old age, are the
especial objects of the Divine care.
They are in His hand ; and “ precious
in His sight is the death of His saints.”
When their work is done. He calls them
home. When they are meet for glory,
he receives them to Himself.

2. In a state of gracious security.
They die in covenant with God; with
an interest in Christ; the subjects of
the indwelling Spirit; heirs of glory.
“ Die in the Lord.” ‘ Death is theirs.”
Not an enemy to destroy ; but a mes-
senger to conduct them to their better
home. Death cannot separate the
saint from Jesus. The righteous often
die—

3. In ecstasy and triumph ; have “an
abundant entrance ministered unto
them,” &c. Thus died Stephen, with
the vision of glory before his eyes,
Hearken to the apostle, ‘I have fought
a good fight,” &c. So thousands and
myriads. Death has been victory.
“@Q death, where is thy sting?” &c.
Thus Payson: “The battle is fought,
and the victory is won.” The righteous
always at death— ;

4. Enter upon a life of immortality,


They are intimately present with the
Lord. To die is gain, immediate, con-
summate, eternal gain. ‘‘ Blessed are
the dead who die in the Lord,” &c.
Death is the gate of life—the vestibule
of glory.

III. A desire that must be regu-
lated.

“Let me die,” &o. It is a very
proper desire. Should be the desire of
every human being. But it will be
fruitless unless it is regulated—

1. By a personal regard to the charac-
ter of the righteous. The character
and the death are united; they
cannot be separated. We cannot die
their death if we are wicked, impeni-
tent, merely moral, or only pro-
fessors of righteousness. We must
attain the spirit and principle of the
righteous.

2. Bya preparation for dying. This,
by the righteous, cannot be forgotten.
He therefore acts and prays and be-
lieves in reference to this solemn want.
He is anxious to be ready for the com-
ing of the Son of Man; to have the
lamp and the oil, the title and the
meetness, This is the only desire of
any value.

3. By a constant deference to the Divine
will, The righteous cannot suggest
anything as to the mode, the place, or
the circumstances of dying. They say,
“ My times are in Thy hand.” They
regard present duties and privileges,
and leave all that concerns the act of
dying in the Lord’s hands, “All the
days of my appointed time,” &. With
God are the issues both of death and
life.

Application.

1. The subject of the teat is solemn.
Dying is always a momentous thing,
@ great crisis in man’s history, &c.

2. What is your prospect respecting
death? I ask, not what you wish, but
what is the well-grounded prospect ?

3. How different is the death of the
wicked to that of the rwhteous! Dark;
the beginning of sorrows, &c. Oh!
avoid this.—J/abes Burns, D.D.


455


CHAP, XXIII,





=


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





How to Dis We,
(Verse 10.)


. How do the righteous die?
. In the favour of God.

. In the love of Christ,

. Tranquilly.

. Fitted for heaven.


Wm 0b et


II, How may we die this death?

1. Repent.

2. Turn to God.

3, Believe on Christ.

4. Live righteously.—W. W. Wythe.


PERSISTENCE IN THE PursuIT oF A SINFUL Purpose,


(Verses 13-18.)


In these verses there are several
important topics for illustration and
application.

I. A wicked persistence in the
pursuit of an evil purpose.

Both Balaam and Balak knew that
God had prohibited the cursing of
Israel (see ver. 8 and chap. xxii. 12);
yet Balak is determined to have them
cursed if possible. Notwithstanding
that Balaam had blessed instead of
cursing them, Balak will have him
make another attempt, and under
somewhat different conditions, “ Balak
said unto him, come, I pray thee, with
me unto another place,” &c. (ver. 13).
And Balaam, urged on by his cursed
hunger for “the rewards of divination,”
is willing to serve Balak in this if he
possibly can. This power of persistence
in the pursuit of an object, if it had
been worthily directed, might have led
to great good; but in this case it is
daringly and wickedly perverted. (a)

II. A mischievous error as to
man’s power to curse his fellow-
man,

Balak thought that if Balaam’s point
of view were changed, and he saw but
a small portion of the camp of Israel,
he would then be able to curse them,
Hence he “said unto him, come, I pray
thee, with me unto another place,” &c.
(vers, 13, 14). Balak was in error in
this (see p. 424). And this error is a
mischievous one. It has made men
the dupes and the victims of witchcraft
and priestcraft ; it has hindered healthy
mental and spiritual development, and

456


been a prolific cause of many and
great evils. (0)

III, A grievous error as to the
nature of the Divine Being.

Balaam and Balak seem to have
thought that God might be induced to
change His mind, by their sacrifices.
For the second time they “built seven
altars, and offered a bullock and a ram
upon every altar.” They regarded
Him as a being who might be bribed
by their gifts, or prevailed upon by
their importunities. The language of
God, by the Psalmist, is applicable to
them: “Thou thoughtest that I was
altogether as Thyself.” How dishonour-
ing to God is such a view of His
nature! In certain forms this error
survives to this day, and that in
Christendom. (c)

IV. An illustration of the com-
munication of the message of God
to an ungodly man.

Balaam “ said unto Balak, stand here
by the burnt offering, while I meet the
Lord yonder. And the Lord met
Balaam,” &c. (vers. 15, 16).

1. God has access to the minds of
wicked men. Pharaoh (Gen. xli. 1-36),
Nebuchadnezzar (Dan, ii.), Balaam, iv.
are examples, (d)

2. God can use wicked men for the
accomplishment of His own purposes.
In this way He used Balaam. “Surely
the wrath of man shall praise Thee,” &e.

V. An illustration of the attention
with which Divine communications
should be received.

when he came to him. behold,


aa


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS. CHAP, XXIII.





he stood by his burnt offering, &o.
(vers. 17, 18). Balak was standing by
his burnt offering, yet Balaam said to
him, “Rise up, Balak, and hear;
hearken unto me, thou son of Zippor.”
It was a summons to thoughtful and


earnest attention to the Word of God,
which he was about to speak to him.
Not with listless ear and lethargic
mind should Divine messages be heard,
but with eager attention and thoughtful
consideration. (¢)


ILLUSTRATIONS,


(a) There are single acts of sin, and con-
tinued or repeated acts of sin; sins committed
after convictions, promises, and resolutions,
Now there is not so much of guilt in a single
act of gin, as there is in a continued and
repeated course of sin, called (Deut. xxix. 19)
‘adding drunkenness to thirst,” and (Isa.
xxx. 1)‘ adding sin tosin.” For as it is in
numbering, so it is in sinning; if the first
fivure be 1, the second is 10, the third 100,
the fourth 1000, and every addition makes a
greater multiplication, O, what a dreadful
reckoning will there be hereafter for the
consciences of poor sinners!—FTavel,

(6) When the confessor of Louis XIV. said,
“With my God in my hand and my king at
my knee, lam greater than any monarch on
the earth,” he gave utterance to no idle boast.
He only expressed, somewhat move epi-
grammatically, what every priest would claim
in his soherest moments. Ia his Catéchisme
de la Perséverance, Gaume says, “The priest,
mighty as God. can, in one moment, snatch
the sinser from hell, and render him worthy
of Paradise, and from a slave of the devil
make him a son of Abraham, and God
Himself is bound to adhere to the judgment
of the priest. The sentence of the priest
precedes: God has only to sign it.” Such are
the well-known assumptions of Rome.—
Literary World,

When John Knox began the work of reform
in Glasgow, the idea prevailed that if a heretic
should but touch the great bell in the church
there, he would be struck dead instantly. He
accepted the test on condition that the bell
should be lowered into the street. He declared
that it should either kill him, or he it. Then


. he stood over it, anathematized the church of


Rome, the pope, and the wicked priests. The
superstitious crowd looked in vain to see the
bold heretic fall dead. Instead, men armed
with hammers, at Knox’s ordcr, broke the bell
into fragments Thus a great imposture was
detected, Romanism defeated, and Protestant-
ism established.—Dict. of Illust. ,

For another illustration on Superstition see
pp. 425, 426. i

(c) For an illustration on this point see

. 447,
4 (d) For illustrations on this point see
pp. 426, 427. ;

(e) Let no man allow himself to neglect
the hearing of the Word, or hear it in @
careless or irreverent manner, under the pre-


tence of his having an opportunity of reading
it in private; since the public ministry
possesses, with regard to its tendency to excite
the attention and interest the heart, many
unquestionable advantages. Besides, such a
pretence will generally be found to be hollow
and disingenuous. If you observe a person
habitualiy inattentive under an awakening,
searching ministry, follow him into his retire-
ment, and, it may be confidently predicted,
you will seldom see the Bible in his hands;
or, if he overcome his aversion to religion so
far as occasionally to peruse a chapter, it will
be in the same spirit in which he hears: he
will satisfy himself with having completed his
task, ‘and go his way and straightway forget
what manner of man he was.” If the general
course of the world were as favourable to
religion as it is the contrary; if an intercourse
with mankind were a school of piety, the state
of such persons would be less hopeless, and
there would be'a greater probability of their
being gained without the Word: but while
everything around us conspires to render the
mind earthly and sensual, and the world is
continually moulding and transforming its
votaries, the situation of such as attend the
means of grace in a careless manner, ia
unspeakably dangerous, since they are con-
tinualiy exposing themselves to influences
which corrupt, while they render themselves
inaccessible to such as are of a salutary
operation, What can be expected but the
death of that patient who takes a course which
is continually inflaming his disease, while he
despises and neglects the remedy ? When we
see men attentive under the ministry of the
Word, and evidently anxious to comprehend
its truths, we cannot but entertain hopes of
their salvation; for “faith cometh by
hearing, and hearing by the Word of God.”—
Robert Hall, A.M.

Hear the Word with altention. Not to
listen with attention is the same thing as to
have ears which hear not, and eyes which see
not. While you are hearing, whatever traina
of thought of a foreign and extraneous
nature obtrude themselves, should be resolutely
repelled. In the power of fixing the attention,
the most precious of the intellectual habits,
maukind differ greatly, but every man possesses
gure, aud it will increase the more it is exerted.
He who exercises no discipline over himself
in this respect, acquires such a volatility of
mind, such # vagrancy of a i |


CHAP. XXII


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





dooms him to be the sport of every mental
vanity: it is impossible such a man should
attain to true wisdom. If we cultivate, on
the contrary, a habit of attention, it will
become natural, thought will strike its roots
deep, and we shall, by degrees, experience no
difficulty in following the track of the longest
connected discourse. As we find it easy to


attend to what interests the heart, and the
thoughts naturally follow the course of the
affections, the best antidote to habitual in-
attention to religious instruction is the love of
the truth. ‘ Let the Word of Christ dwell in
you richly,” and to hear it attentively will be
a pleasure, not a task.—Jbid,


Bataak’s SECOND PARABLE: THE CONSTITUENTS AND THE IRREVERSIBLENESS
OF THE BLESSEDNESS OF ISRAEL


(Verses 19-24.)


Notice—

I. The constituents of the blessed-
ness of Israel.

Balaam pronounced the Israelites
blessed because of —

1. Their covenant relation with God.
“He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob,
neither hath He seen distress in Israel.”
See Critical and Explanatory Notes on
this verse. God cannot curse His
chosen people. He must bless them
with His favour and with all covenant
blessings. So long as they do not
utterly forsake Him He will protect
and bless them. (a)

2. The presence of God with them.
““The Lord his God is with him, and
the shout of a King is among them.”
Here are two ideas:—(1) God was
present with them as their King. The
government of Israel was a theocracy.
Jehovah Himself was their sovereign.
(2) His presence produced exultation.
‘“‘The shout of a King” is the jubilant
celebration by Israel of the presence of
Jehovah in their midst as their King.
His presence was @ guarantee of suc-
cess in their great enterprise, of victory
over their enemies, &. God is still
with His people as their King and
their God. (6)

3. The doings of Gud for them, “God
brought them out of Egypt.” Keil
and Del. translate: “God brings them
out of Egypt ;” and remark that “the
participle is not used for the preterite,
but designates the leading out as still
going nu, and lasting till the introdue-
tion into Canaan.” Looked at in this
light, heen before us refers to the


whole of God’s doings for them, by
means of which they were led forth from
Egypt, and ultimately brought into
the Promised Land. It includes :—(1)
Emancipation from Egypt. (2) Direc-
tion in their journeys. (3) Protection
from their enemies. (4) Provision
in the wilderness. (5) Possession of
Canaan. And in this Christian dis-
pensation God works graciously and
gloriously in and for His people. He
delivers from a bondage far worse than
that of Israel in Egypt, &o.

4. The revelation of His will to them.
‘“‘Surely there is no enchantment
against Jacob,” &c. (ver. 23). Margin:
“in Jacob.” See the translation and
note by Keil and Del. in Critical and
Explanatory Notes. We take the verse
to mean that the art of the sooth-
sayer was not practised amongst the
Israelites ; but God Himself, by means
of His own appointment, and in due
season, revealed to them His own de-
signs and doings. He communicated
with them through the high priest by
means of the Urim and Thummim;
He spake by Moses, and afterwards
by the Prophets and the sacred poets.
“We have a more sure word of pro-
phecy.” The teachings of Christ and
His apostles, and the guidance of the
Holy Spirit, are granted to the spiritual
Israel] in this age.

5. The victorious power He bestows
upon them. ‘He hath as it were the
strength of a buffalo,” or a wild bull.
“ Behold, the people shall rise up as a
great lion, and lift up himeelf as a
young lion: he shall not lie down


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS. OHAP, XXIII.
Ce


until he eat of the prey, and drink the
blood of the slain.” Because Jehovah
was with them as their King and
Leader, they went forward with the
strength of a wild ox—an indomitable
animal, and terrible by reason of its
horns (comp. Deut. xxxiii. 17; Psa.
xxii. 21). And when they arose to
battle they would not retreat until
they had obtained complete victory.
They would conquer their enemies, and
take possession of the Promised Land.
Let Balak, then, be warned, and aban-
don the vain hope of vanquishing this
victorious and blessed people. And
God’s spiritual Israel shall conquer all
their spiritual enemies, and take pos-
session of that inheritance of which
Canaan, even at best, was but a poor
type. ‘ We are more than conquerors,
through Him that loved us.”

IL, The irreversibleness of the bles-
sedness of Israel.

The blessedness of the people of God
cannot be reversed because—


1. It rests upon the unchangeablenes:
of God. “God is not a man, that He
should lie; neither the son of man,
that He should repent,” &o. (c)

2. It ts beyond the power of their
enemies, ‘Behold, I have received to
bless: and He hath blessed; and 1
cannot reverse it.” All the sacrifices
which Balak the king could offer, and
all the arts which Balaam the sooth-
sayer could exercise, would not turn
aside the blessing of God from His
people. No power either in earth or in
hell can effectually curse those whom
God hath blessed.

Conclusion.

1, Are we members of the spiritual
Israel of God?

2. Let us, then, be faithful to our
covenant engagements, and rejoice tn our
privileges.

3. Let those who are aliens from the
sptritual Israel believe in Christ Jesus
and share tts blessedness (Eph. ii. 12).


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) The new covenant exacts not of us, as
@ necessary condition, the perfection of obedi-
ence, but the sincerity of obedience ; an up-
rightness in our intention, not an unspotted-
ness in our action ; an integrity in our aims,
and an industry in our compiiance with Divine
precepts: “Walk before Me, and be thou
perfect” (Gen. xvii. 1), te, sincere. What
is hearty in our actions, is accepted; and
what is defective, is overlooked, and not
charged upon us, because of the obedience and
righteousness of our Surety. The first cove-
nant rejected all our services after sin ; the
asrvices of a person under sentence of death,
are but dead services: this accepts our imper-
fect services, after faith in it; that adminis-
tered no strength to obey, but supposed it;
this supposeth our inability to obey, and con-
fers some strength for it: “I will put my
Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in
My statu'es” (Ezek. xxxvi. 27). Again, in re-
gard of the promises: the old covenant had
ood, but the new hath “better promises ”
Heb. viii. 6), of justification after guilt, and
sanctification after filth, and glorification at
last of the whole man. In the first, there was
provision against guilt, but none for the re-
moval of it; provision against filth, but none
for the cleansing of it ; promise of happiness
implied, but not so great a one as that “life
and immortality” im heaven, “brought to
light by the Gospel” (2 Tim. i, 10). Life


indeed was implied to be promised upon his
standing, but not so glorious an immortality
disclosed, to be reserved for him, if he stood.
As it is a covenant of better promises, 50 a
covenant of sweeter comforts ; comforts more
choice, and comforts more durable ; an “ ever-
lasting consolation and a good hope” are
the fruits of “grace,” t.e. the covenant of
grace (2 Thess. ii. 16). In the whole there is
such a love disclosed, as cannot be expressed ;
the Apostle leaves it to every man’s mind to
conceive it, if he could, “What manner of
love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that
we should be called the sons of God” (1 John
iii. 1). It instates us in such a manner of the
love of God as He bears to His Son the image
of His Person (John xvii. 23): “That the
world may know that Thou hast loved them,
as Thou hast loved Me.”—Charnocke,

(6) As He gave the blood of His Son toseal
the covenant,so He gave Himself as the bless-
ing of the covenant: “ He is not ashamed to
be called their God” (Heb. xi. 16). He is not
only our God, but our God as He is the God
of Christ: He is not ashamed to be our pro-
priety, and Christ is not ashamed to own His
people in a partnership with Him in this pro-
priety (John xx. 17), “I ascend to My God,
and your God.” This, of God’s being our God,
is the quintessence of the covenant, the soul of
all the promises; in this He hath promised,
whatsoever is infinite in Him, eres ig


OHAP. XXIII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


a eg


the glory and ornament of His nature, for our
use; not a part of Him, or one single perfec-
tion, but the whole vigour and strength of all.
..«..» Thus, God’s being ours, is more than
if all heaven and earth were ours besides ; it
is more than if we were fully our own, and at
our own dispose; it makes “all things that
God hath ours ” (1 Cor. iii. 22); and, there-
fore, not only all things that He hath created,
but all things that He can create ; not only all
things that He hath contrived, but all things
that he can contrive; for in being ours, His
power is ours, His possible power as well as
His active power ; His power, whereby He can
effect more than He hath done, and His wis-
dom, whereby He can contrive more than He
hath done; so that if there were need of em-
ploying His power to create many worlds for
our good, He would not stick at it, for if He
did, He would not be our Gad, in the extent of
His nature, as the promise intimates.—JLbid.

For additional illustrations of the Blessed-
ness of the People of God, see pp. 154, 346,
347,

(c) Independent of all possible beings and
events, Jehovah sits at the head of the uni-
verse, unchanged, and incapable of change,
amid all the successions, tossings and tumults,
by which it is agitated. When empires are
overthrown, or angels fall; when suns are ex-
tinguished, and sysiems return to their original
nothing: He is equally impassive and un-
moved as when sparrows expire, or the hair
falls from our heads. Nothing can happen,


nothing can be done beyond His expectation,
or without His permission. Nothing can frus-
trate His designs, and nothing disappoint or
vary His purposes. All things, beside Him,
change, and fluctuate without ceasing. Events
exist and vanish. Beingsrise and expire. But
His own existence, the thoughts which He
entertains, the desires which He admits, the
purposes which He forms, are “the same yes-
terday, to-day, and for ever.” Throughout
the coming vast of eternity also, and the
boundless tracts of immensity, He sees with
serene complacency His own perfect purposes
daily and invariably advancing, with a regular
fulfilment, towards their absolute completion.
In its own place, in its own time, and in its
own manner, each exists in exact obedience to
His order, and in exact accordance with His
choice ; nothing lingers, nothing hastens; but
His counsel exactly stands, and all His plea-
sure will be precisely accomplished.—Ztmothy
Dwight, DD. ;

“What makes you think that God will
never forsake them that trust in Him?” waa
asked of an aged Christian. ‘ Because He
has promised,” was the reply. ‘“ And what
makes you think that He will keep His word ?”
“Because He never yet broke it.” Here iz
encouragement for us all! Here is cause to
cry aloud, “ Though He slay me, yet will I
trust in Him.” The past dec'ares God’s faith-
fulness, the present confirms it, and the future
will only make more clear His fidelity and
truth.— Anon.


THs UNOHANGEABLENESS OF JEHOVAH.


(Verse 19.)


To unfold the full meaning of these
words, we observe—

I. Some men think that God will lie,

God has told us, with strong and
repeated asseverations, that “we must
be born again” (John iii, 7); but this
is totally disbelieved by—

1, The profane. They persuade
themselves that such strictness in
religion, as is implied in the new birth,
is not necessary ; and that they shall
go to heaven in their own way.

2. The self-righteous. These con-
sider regeneration as a dream of weak
enthusiasts ; and are satisfied with the
‘form of godliness, without” ever ex-
periencing “the power” of it.

3. The hypocritical professors of re-
ligion. These, having changed their
ereed, together with their outward
conduct, iia themselves Christians,

46


notwithstanding their faith neither
‘overcomes the world,” nor “ works by
love,” nor “ purifies their hearts.”

That all these persons think God
will lie, is evident beyond a doubt ; for
if they really believed that old things
must pass away and all things become
new (2 Cor. v. 17), before they can
enter into the kingdom of heaven, they
would feel concerned to know whether
any such change had taken place in
them ; nor would they be satisfied till
they had a Scriptural evidence that
they were indeed “new creatures in
Christ Jesus.” But as this is in no re-
spect the case with them, it is mani-
fest that they do not believe the
record of God, and, consequently,
however harsh the expression may
seem, they make God a liar (1 Johan
v. 10).


HOMILETIOD COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XXIII.


LLL LLL LLL LL LCOS ELE CC AT EIT ES SEEDS


II, Others fear He may lie.

This is common with persons—

1. Under conviction of sin. When
men are deeply convinced of sin, they
find it exceedingly difficult to rest sim-
ply on the promises of the Gospel;
such as John vi. 37; Isa, i. 18; lv. 1.
This appears too good to be true : they
cannot conceive how God should “ jus-
tify the ungodly” (Rom. iv. 5), and
therefore they seek to become godly
first, in order that they may be
justified: and if they cannot bring
some price in their hands, they keep
back, and give themselves over to des-
ponding fears.

2. Under temptation or desertion.
God has declared that He will not suf-
fer His people to be tempted above
what they are able to bear (1 Cor. x
13). But when they come into temp-
tation, they are apt to say, as David,
“TI shall one day perish,” &c. (1 Sam.
xxvii. 1). They see no way for their
escape ; and therefore they fear that
the very next wave will overwhelm
them utterly. If God at such seasons
hide His face from them, they conclude,
“there is no hope;” they think “ His
mercy clean gone for ever,” &c. (Psa.
lxxvii. 7-9), notwithstanding God has
so frequently and so expressly declared,
that He will never leave them nor for-
sake them.

Now these persons do not, like the
ungodly, deliberately think that God
will lie; but they have many fears lest
He should ; if it were notso, they would
take God at His word, and stay them-
selves on Him when they are in dark-
ness (Isa. 1. 10).

III. But God neither will nor can
lie


1. He will not lie. (1) Let us hear
the testimonies of those who have tried
Him. Moses (Deut. xxxii. 4) ; Joshua
(John xxiii. 14); Samuel (1 Sam. xv.
29\. (2) Let us attend to God’s own
assertions and appeals. Isa. v. 4;
xlix. 19. Would He ever venture to
speak thus strongly on His own behalf,
if His creatures could make good their
accusations against Him’? (3) Let us
look to matter of fact. He threatened


to punish the angels if they should
prove disobedient: He denounced a
curse on Adam if he should eat of the
forbidden tree ; He threatened to de-
stroy the whole world with a deluge ; to
overwhelm Sodom and Gomorrah with
fire and brimstone ; and to scatter His
once chosen people over the face of .
the whole earth. See now whether he
has forborne to execute any of these
threatenings. He also promised to
send His only, dear Son to die for
sinners ; and to make Him great among
the Gentiles, while His own nation
should almost universally reject Him.
Have either of these promises been
forgotten? Or, if such promises and
such threatenings have received their
accomplishment, is there any reason to
doubt respecting any others that are
yet unfulfilled? Are not His past
actions so many types and pledges of
what He will hereafter perform? (2
Pet. ii. 4-9 ; Jude 7.)

2. Hecannot ke. Truth is as essentia!
to the Divine nature as goodness, wis-
dom, power, or any other attribute ;
so that He can as easily cease to be
good, or wise, or powerful, as He can
suffer one jot or tittle of His word to
fail. If for one moment He could di-
vest Himself of truth, He would cease
to be deserving of all confidence or
affection. Let it only be said of any
man— he is great and wise and gene-
rous, but no dependence can be placed
on his word,” would he not on the
whole be deemed a contemptible cha-
racter? How then would Jehovah be
degraded, if any such infirmity could
be laid to His charge! God cannot
lie” (Tit. i. 2) ; “ He cannot deny Him-
self” (2 Tim. ii. 13) ; ‘‘ It is impossible
for God to lie” (Heb. vi. 18). It is
God’s honour that He neither will nor
can lie.

Inter, —~

1. How vain are the expectations of
unconverted men! Men, whatever may
be their state, persuade themselves
that they shall be happy when they
die. But bow delusive must be that
hope, which is built upon the ex-
pectation that God will re Are


CHAP. XXIIz.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


a


a liar! Let us lay aside all such delu-
sive hopes, &c.

2. How groundless are the fears of
the converted / There is a holy fear
that is highly desirable for every one,
however eminent, however established.
But there is a tormenting, slavish fear
that arises from unbelief, and which
greatly retards our progress in the Di-
vine life. Now we ask, Does this fear
arise from an apprehension of our own
unfaithfulness, or of God’s? If it be
God’s faithfulness that we doubt, let
us know that His “ gifts and callings
are without repentance” (Rom. xi. 29,
with the words following the text), and
that where He hath begun a good work,
He will perfect it unto the day of


Christ (Phil. 4. 6). If, on the other
hand, we suspect our own faithfulness,
let us recollect on whom our faithful-
ness depends (2 Cor. iii. 5 ; Zech. iv. 6).
God has promised not only that He
will not depart from us, but that He
will put His fear in our hearts, so that
we shall not depart from Him (Jer.
xxxii. 39, 40).

Let us then “set to our seal that
God is true” (John iii. 33). Let us
commit ourselves to Him, knowing
Whom we have believed (2 Tim. i. 12),
and assured that while we stand on the
foundation of His Word, we are im-
moveably secure (2 Tim. ii. 19).—C.
Simeon, M.A,


Tae Veracity or Gop.


(Verse 19.)


Introduction—

Kemarks on the character of Balaam,
and the circumstances that led to the
utterance of his prophecy.

I. Here is a purpose pre-supposed.

1. He saw Israel as the objects of
the Divine protection, so that all the
devices of their enemies were rendered
vain.

2. The blessedness of their prosperity,
in the face of all opposition.

3. The blessedness of their prosperity,
in the tokens of the Divine presence
and power with which they were ac-
companied,

Il. The ground of this stability
asserted.


1. God Himself is unchangeable.

2. He is so in His will and purpose

3. There is no cause why God should
alter. Three causes of change of mind
in man not applicable to God :—(1)
Want of foreknowledge. (2) Natural
instability. (3) Want of power.

III. Inferences.

1. The perpetual obligation of re-
ligion.

2. Reproof of the incoustancy of man.

8. It directs us where alone we may
safely put our trust.

4, It teaches patience under His
providences.

5. An awful warning to sinners.—
Anon,


Gop’s Busssine IRREVERSIBLE,


(Verse 20.)


The text is connected with three
illustrious orders of persons: Balak,
king of Moab; Balaam, the wicked
prophet ; and the Israelites, who were
journeying to the Land of Promise.
Balak hated the Israelites, and was
anxious to bring evil, &co. Balaam

162


hired himself to curse them ; but God
frustrated his evil design, and out of
the lips hired to curse, God pronounced
a blessing. Here is the wicked prophet’s
confession, ‘* He hath blessed,” &c.
I. God's people are blessed of Him,
So it was with Israel of old. God


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


OHAP. XXIII.


i


blessed them by wonderful deliverances,
and countless tokens of his favour. His
compassionate eye was on them in
Egypt; His arm led them out; His
bounty supplied their wants ; His pre-
sence guided—shielded them, &c. God
has now His Israel in the world: all
the spiritual seed of Abraham ; all those
who have believed in the Messiah ; all
who are travelling to a better country.
On these His blessing rests. ‘ He hath
blessed ”—

1. With pardoning mercy.

2. With delivering grace.

3. With spiritual supplies,

4, Wath all needful good.


Now this applies to every age of tha
world—to every true Israelite,

II. His blessing cannot be reversed.

1. Wicked men would, but cannot.

2. Satan would, but cannot,

3. God does not desire to do so, and
therefore will not.

We may reject the blessing—back-
slide from God; but His “ gifts and
calling are without repentance,”

Application.

1. Are we His people ?

2. Then we have His blessing.

3. And this is all-suficient.—Jabez
Burns, D.D.


Tae Srasiuitry or THE CHURCH, AND THE SxcuRITY oF BELIEVERS.


(Verse 23.)


We cannot but admire the endow-
meuts of this bold, bad man: we envy
him the privilege he enjoyed of behold-
ing the visions of the Almighty, and
being favoured with His express com-
munications ; we look with astonish-
ment at the perseverance which he
manifested, worthy of a better cause ;
and we may allow ourselves to be
charmed with his eloquence and edified
by his prophetic anticipations. But
when we have done this, there remains
an awful contrast of warning: gloomy
shades darken and deform a picture,
some of the features of which appear
clothed in the beauty and brightness of
heaven. We see the loftiest qualifica-
tions of which human nature can boast
—geuius, literature, a great name, aud
even prophetical skill, devoted to the
most execrable purposes, employed in
direct opposition to God and His
Church, and finally recoiling upon their
possessor and drowning his soul in
perdition, like many in our own day,
Balaam zves the good, but prefers the
evil; he pursues the world, and turns
his back upon God, in spite of the ap-
pearance of the Angel, the remonstrance
of conscience, and the immediate voice
of Heaven ; he makes religion the cloak
of the most ambitious purposes; he


numbers himself with those who “love
the wages of unrighteousness,” and upon
whose tombs God Himself has written
the epitaph,—“ Wandering stars, to
whom is reserved,” &.

I. The stability of the church is
distinctly asserted.

What was true 3,000 years ago, is
not worthy of less credit and less
attention now. The times are changed,
but the men are not. There is now as
certain a combination against the
Church of the Living God, as there
was when Balaam took up his parable,
and Balak listened for the curse upon
Israel. But while the enemies remain
the same, the promise remains un-
changed. Every age has heard the
cry, ‘‘Come, curse me Jacob, and come,
defy Israel.” But then every age has
heard the language, “Surely there is
no enchantment against Jacob,” &.
What a confession is this of Balaam!
how humiliating to himself, how in-
structive to us! Trace the particulars.

1. Zhe most base and desperate
measures have always Leen used against
the church. Balaam evidently avows
that the mean arts of diviuation and
enchantmeoi had heen used. He
acknowledges, in fact, taat the church's
enemies could not meet her nee oper


OBAP, XXIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


re


field. Curses are the last resource of
cowards—a confession of weakness.
And so it has always been. Infidelity
is not ashamed to use poisoned weapons
—to stoop to the meanest devices to
harass a cause which it is always
ashamed to face. Some men have so
great a hatred to the cause of Christ,
that they will condescend to seek
help from hell itself rather than fail.
Hence every stratagem is employed ;
all the arts of calumny, and wicked-
ness, and falsehood, are put in re-
quisition to prevent the progress of
truth and poison the mind against it.
How weak that cause must be which
stoops to such wretched devices!
and how triumphant and_ glorious
must that religion be, which, though
unarmed, can defy them all! “The
rains descended . .. . and it fell
not,” &¢.

2. These attacks are utterly fruitless
and vain. “There igs no enchantment
against Jacob,” &c. The enemies of
the truth, however loudly they may
boast at the onset, have always retired
in confusion, and for the most part in
despair. It is like shooting arrows
against the sun: they return upon the
heads of those who aimed them, while
the sun pursues its glorious way
uninjured and undisturbed. It is like
attempting to stem the ocean with a
bulrush: you may perish in the
attempt, but you cannot hope to
succeed, Let those who hate the truth,
consider by whom that truth is
supported—how long that truth has
stood—how often it has been assailed,
and how certain the overthrow of its
enemies. Like Job’s leviathan, “the
sword of him that layeth at him
cannot hold,” &c, “ How shall I curse,
whom God hath not cursed?” &e.
“If this counsel or this work be of
man, it will come to nought,” de,
(Acts v. 38, 39).

3. The source of Israels safety is
directly ascribed to God. ‘ What hath
God wrought!” The world is right in
its estimate of the feebleness of the
Church of Christ in herself. We
wondey not at their boasts. their scorn.

464


We wonder not to hear them say,
“What do these feeble Jews?” We
know she is a bruised reed; but we
also know that she is strong in the
strength of Another. It is delightful
to hear from an enemy—(1) the faith-
fulness of God advanced as the security
of the church (ver. 19). (2) The
impotency of his own arts acknow-
ledged. “I cannot reverse it” (ver.
20). (3) The mercy of God asserted as
the comfort of His people (ver. 21).
(4) The records of antiquity explored
to confirm the position (ver. 22).
Futurity opened up as disclosing their
triumphs (ver. 24).

How is all this confirmed by the
history of that very moment! Israel
was resting in his tents, ignorant of
the plotting of Balak and the prophecy
of Balaam. Moses knew nothing of it
while all this mischief was going on.
But God is both a sure and a secret
friend. He restrains countless evils of
which we know nothing. “He that
keepeth thee will not slumber,” &c.

4 The season of our greatest dangers
becomes the date of our noblest triumphs.
“‘ According to this time it shall be said
of Jacob,” &c. God delays till the
hour of extremity.

5. Our best blessings are frequently
pronounced by our worst enemies. How
cheering is it to observe this—the
enemies with one breath pronouncing
our stability, with the next their own
overthrow. “There sh»!! come a star
out of Jacob,” &c. A volume might
be filled with the coifessions of the
enemy. “Their rock is not as our
Rock, even our enemies themselves
being judges.”

iI. The security of believers follows
on the same principles.

They are exposed to similar attacks,
The world tries its enchantments
False friends and real enemies endea-
vour to hinder,—watch for our halting,
ke. Satan tempts, opposes, &o.

The same promises are our supports.
Condescend to learn of an enemy.
God’s simple word was enough for
Balaam. Apply it to our experieuces
in life, 1o death.— Samuel Thodey.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





CHAP XXIIt.


hansen


Bataam’s Dxcuaration or Israxt’s Szouriry,


(Verse 23.)


How true is the text of Israel of old.
No evil spirit of enchantment could
affect them. No spirit of divination
injure them. The magicians of Egypt
could mimic Moses, but only in adding
to the misery of the Egyptians; but
neither earth nor hell can injure those
who trust in the Lord; “for He is
their help and shield.”

‘ Applying our text to the Church of
God in general, consider—

1, The important truth affirmed

“Surely there is no. enchantment,”
&c. We enter not into the discussion
how far men may have had power to
enchant, to divine, or to curse others,
But we abide by the text, that there is
no such thing against the cause and
people of God. Hell is opposed to the
cause of God, and united with it are
the wicked powers of earth. They have
the disposition, the will, the purpose,
and may make the attempt to injure
the Church ; but their efforts must fail,
their plots must be frustrated, their
attacks must be powerless. Yet some-
times they have been allowed to harass
and vex and torture the people of Ged.
Sometimes they have apparently suc-
ceeded and triumphed ; but really and
eventually, they must be frustrated.
“Surely there is no enchantment,” &o.
Now the certainty of this may be in-
ferred—

1. Because the counsels of God are
more than sufficient to baffle the designs
and plots of hell. We would not array
human skill and tact against the wiles
and stratagems of the devil. But the
security of the Church depends on the
counsels of God—on the influence and
wisdom of the Most High. He knows
bow to frustrate the devices of evil;
and how to deliver those who trust in
Hiis name. Hell has no covering before
Him. He is the watcher and keeper
of Israel, and He neither slumbers nor
sleaps.

2. Because the power of Jehovah ts
swr effectual in resisting the attacks of

EE


the enemies of His people. Divine wis-
dom and omniscience are united with
resistless power. His mundate gave
being to the universe. “He spake,
and it was.” All created power is
mere impotency before Him. How
then can the power of evil ruin the
Church, and overthrow the cause of
the Eternal ¢

3. Because Divine goodness ts more
than enough to counteract the malesolence
of the Church's foes. The wisdorr and
power of God are combined with im-
measurable love. The interests c* the
Church are those of God’s heart. His
people are as the apple of Hiseye. He
has covenanted with them to sus vin,
to keep, to preserve, to deliver, to
glorify.

4. The resources of God are more the
adequate to render ali the means of th:
Church’s enemies abortive. The enem:'
can combine various elements of evil
The craft, subtlety, and power of faller
legions—the wealth and influence o}
the world—the fashions of the earth,
&c. And all these have successively
been employed. But all resources are
Jehovah’s. The angels of His presence,
the stars of heaven, the sun, and the
moon, storms and winds, and tempests,
earthquakes, pestilence, and famine.
Ho often makes the wrath of man to
praise Him. On these grounds we
may say, “Surely there is no enchant-
ment,” do.

II. The triumphant exclamation
uttered.

“‘ According to this time it shall be
said,” &c. Observe :

1. What is to be said. ‘ What hath
God wrought!” All deliverances, &c.,
are to be traced up to God. Agenoy
may be observed ; but God only praised.
God alone is to have the glory, as He
has had the real work of delivering His
people. (1) This is to keep up our de-
pendence on God, (2) To inspire with
admiration and praise. (3) To keep
human nature in its right yee Not


CHAP. XXIII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


SL SSS?


what Moses, or Joshua, or Gideon, or
David, or the apostles, or the martyrs,
or the reformers, or Wesley, or Whit-
field; but “what God hath wrought.”
There is a tendency to lose sight of
God, or to make Him secondary. But
it ought ever to be, “ What hath God
wrought !”

2. Who are to say it. Sometimes
even enemies have said it. Balak was
forced to see it, and the covetous pro-
phet to speak it. (1) But it should be
said especially by the ministers of the
Gospel. They are to draw attention
to the doings of Jehovah—to “speak
of the glory of His kingdom, and talk
of His power,” &e. (2) It should be
said by all the pious. Parents to their
children. Teachers to their pupils.
Christians to one another. Thus the
Psalmist, Ixxvii. 11, &c., Isa. xii. 4, &e.

3. When it should be said. (1) In
times of depression as a means of en-


couragement, (2) In times of great
exertion as an incitement to persever-
ance, (3) In times of great success,
to give tone to our exultings. (4) It
will be reiterated in the world of the
beatified for ever. Then they will
see in one beautiful series the doings
of God,—behold the golden chain en-
tire, &e.

Application.

1. Our text may apply to many as to
their Christian experience before God.
Kemember all the way God hath led
you, &e. What great things He hath
done for you.

2. May tt not apply to this Christian
Church and congregation? What hath
God wrought here for you, in you, by
you? &e.

3. Let God ever be exalted by His
Church and people for the blessings they
enjoy, and all the good done in them, and
by them.—Jabes Burns, D.D.


Tus Busssincs ov Gop, aND THE ACKNOWLEDGMENT WHICH If DrManNDs,


(Verse 23, latter portion.)


“ According to this time it shall be
said of Jacob and of Israel, What hath
God wrought !”

The text directs us to—

I. The source of effectual blessing.

It directs us to the Deity, in His
essential character ; in His active cha-
racter; and in His relative character,
And what is the interference we wish?
Various. Sometimes—

1. Deliverance—from danger internal
and external—“ enchantment.”

2. Blessing. ‘1 have received com-
mandment to bless,” &.

3. Forbearance. “He hath not be-
held iniquity,” é&o,

4, Stability. “The Lord his God is
with him.”

5. Complete success,

II. The time from which His inter-
position is remarked,

“ According to this time it shall be
said.” The time of—

1, Conversion.

2. Renewed devotion,

466


3. Peculiar providential arrangement.

4. Harnestand decisive spirit of prayer.

III. The acknowledgment it de
mands,

“Tt shall be said, What hath God
wrought !”

1. Acknowledgment is implied and
expected. ‘God wrought.”

2. It is spontaneously offered.
shall be said.”

3. Ji is a personal and explicit token.
“Jacob and Israel.”

4. It ts to be recorded and gratefully
renewed. “According to this time it
shall be said,” &.—Samuel Thodey.


(Verses 25 and 26.)


See Critical and Explanatory Notes
on ver. 25, and Homiletical remarks on
vers. 11, 12.


(Verses 27—30.)


See Critical and Explanatory Notes
and Homiletical remarks on vers. 1, 2,
13,14, and Explanatory Note on ver. 2&


és It


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XXIV.





CHAPTER XXIV.


Crrrican anp Expnianatory Norss,


Verse 1. Yo seek for enchantments.
See Notes on chap. xxiii. 3, 23.

He set his face toward the wilderness,
t.c., towards the plains of Moab, where
the Israelites were encamped.

Verse 2. Saw Israel abiding, dc.
Keil and Del.: “ He saw Israel en-
camping according to its tribes.”

The Spirit of God came upon him.
“‘The impression made upon him by
the sight of the tribes of Israel, served
as the subjective preparation for the
reception of the Spirit of God to inspire
him. Of both the earlier utterances it
is stated that ‘ Jehovah put a word into
his mouth’ (chap. xxiii. 5, 16) ; but of
this third it is affirmed that ‘the Spirit
vf God came over him.’ The former
ere communicated to him, where he

_ went out for a Divine revelation, with-
out his being thrown into an ecstatic
state; he heard the voice of God with-
in him telling him what he was to say.
But this time, like the prophets in their
prophesyings, he was placed by the
Spirit of God in a state of ecstatic
sight; so that, with his eyes closed as
in clairvoyance, he saw the substance
of the revelation from God with his
inward mental eye, which had been
opened by the Spirit of God.”—-Kedl
and Del,

Verse 3. Whose eyes are open.
Margin: “ Who had his eyes shut, but
now opened,”” Dr. A. Clarke takes the
latter view: ‘‘I believe the original
BNW, shethum, should be translated
shut, not open; for in the next verse,
where the opening of the eyes is
mentioned, a widely different word is


used my, galah, which signifies to


open or reveal. At first the eyes of
Balaam were shut, and so closely too
that he could not see the angel who
withstood him, till God opened his
eyes; nor could he see the gracious
intentions of God towards Israel, till
the eyes of his understanding were opened
by the Liga of the Diviae Spirit.”
Eu


Ty ONY, “with closed eye.
onw does not mean to open, a mean-


ing in support of which only one pas-
sage of the Mrshnah can be adduced,
but to close, like OND in Dan. viii. 26,


and OW in Lam. iii. 8, with the


W softened into D or Ww. ‘Balaam de-
scribes himself as the man with closed
eye with reference to hisstate of ecstasy,
in which the closing of the outer
senses went hand in hand with the
opening of the inner’ (Hengstenberg).
The cessation of all perception by
means of the outer senses, so far as
self-conscious reflection is concerned,
was a feature that was common to both
the vision and the dream, the two forms
in which the prophetic gift manifested
itself (chap. xii. 6), and followed from
the very nature of the inward intui-
tion. In the case of prophets whose
spiritual life was far advanced, inspirae
tion might take place without any
closing of the outward senses. But
upon men like Balaam, whose inner
religious life was still very impure and
undeveloped, the Spirit of God could
only operate by closing their outward
senses to impressions from the lower
earthly world, and raising them up to
visions of the higher and spiritual
world.” —Keil and Del.

Fuerst however renders wit On,


‘‘ opened of eye, #.¢., with opened eye.”
So also the Speaker's Comm. e al.

Verse 4. Falling, &o. Omit the
“into a trance” of the A.V. Keil
and Del. translate, “ Falling down and
with opened eyes.” Balaam fell beneath
the power of the Spirit of God, who
came upon him (comp. 1 Sam. xix. 24).
In this way the eyes of his spirit were
opened.

Verse 7. He shall pour the water, dc.
Or, “ Water will flow out of his buckets.”
Or, “He shall stream with water out
of his buckets.” An image of great
prosperity; an abundant we of


OmaP, XXIV,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


sspears SS a


water being essential to fertility and
prosperity in the burning East. “The
nation is personified as a man carrying
two pails overflowing with water.”

His seed, t.e., posterity.

“ By many waters,” a metaphor indi-
cative of rich blessings, particularly in
this place, that of a numerous posterity.

Agag, a title common to all the
Amalekite kings, as Pharaoh was to
those of Egypt. ‘ The reason for men-
tioning the king of the Amalekites was,
that he was selected as the impersona-
tion of the enmity of the world against
the kingdom of God, which culminated
in the kings of the heathen; the
Amalekites having been the first heathen
tribe that attacked the Israelites on


their journey to Canaan (Exod. xvii. 8)” _


—Keil and Del.

His king .....hiskingdom. “The
king of Israel, whose greatness was
celebrated by Balaam, was neither the
Messiah exclusively, nor the earthly
kingdom without the Messiah, but the
kingdom of Israel that was established
by David, and was exalted in the
Messiah into an everlasting kingdom,
the enemies of which would all be made
its footstool (Psa. ii, and ox.).”—Jbid,

Verse 8. See chap. xxiii. 22.

Verse 9. See chap. xxiii. 24.

Verse 11. Jehovah hath kept thee back
from honour, “A bitter and impious
sarcasm.”—A,. Clarke, LL.D.

Verse 14, Advertise thee. Keil and
Del. : “‘ Tell thee advisedly.’... An
announcement which includes advice.”

Verse 17. A Star, &c. “In all the
typical language of Scripture stars are
symbols of lordship and authority,
ecclesiastical or civil, Thus a star is
the symbol of the highest dominion of
wl: ‘There shall come a Star out of
Jacob ;’ and the actual birth of Him
whom Balaam prophesied of here, is
announced by a star (Matt. ii, 23 of.
Isa, xiv. 12)."—R. C. Z'rench, DD.

A Sceptre, &. (comp. Gen. xlix. 10).

The corners of Moab. Rather, ‘the
two sides of Moab,” “equivalent to
Moab on both sides, from one end to
the other.”

Destroy ald the children of Sheth.

468


Speaker's Comm. :“ Overthrow the sons
of tumult.” Keil and Del. : “ ‘ Destroy
all the sons of confusion,’ by which the
Moabites are to be understood as being
men of wild, warlike confusion.”

Verse 18. Edom shall be a possession,
&e. “Whilst Edom falls, Israel will
acquire power” (comp. 2 Sam. viii
14; 1 Chron. xviii. 11-13 ; Obad. 17 sqq.

Verse 19. He that shall have domr
nton, t.e., the ruler foretold as Star and
Sceptre. “The Star and Sceptre of
the prophecy, like the ‘Sceptre’ and
‘Lawgiver’ of Gen. xlix. 10, point
naturally rather to a line of princes
than to an individual; or rather are
emblems of the kingdom of Israel
generally. Thus the victories of David
and his successors, generation after
generation, over Edom and Moab, are
unquestionably recurring and progres-
sive accomplishments of what Balaam
foretold; but after all of them the
prophecy yet reaches forward to some
further and culminating accomplish-
ment ; and that too in ‘the latter days’
(ver. 14), the ordinary prophetic desig-
nation for the time of the Messiah
(cf. Dan. x. 14).

“To a Christian, the connection be-
tween the Star and Sceptre of Balaam,
and the Star of the King of the Jews,
which the wise men saw (Matt. ik 2),
is self-evident. As they were ‘wise
men from the east,’ so was Balaam also
a ‘wise man from the east’ (cf, xxiii.
7); and the tradition that they were,
if not descendants, yet fellow country-
men, of Balaam, and occupied in pur-
suits kindred to his, is probable enough.”
—Speaker’s Comm.

Destroy him that remaineth, &o, The
phrase terscly describes a conqueror who
first defeats his enemies in battle, and
then hunts out the fugitives till he has
cut off all of every place (of. 1 Kings
xi. 16).”—Jbid.

Verse 20. Amalek was the first, &o.,
i.¢,, pre-eminent amongst the states or
nations which Balaam then had in view
of his mind’s eye. The sense given by
the marginal rendering is doubtful,

Verse 21. The Kenites, ‘A tribe or
nation whose history is strangely intex-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS. CHAP. XXIV.





woven with that of the chosen people,
Their origin is hidden from us. But
we may fairly infer that they were a
_ branch of the larger nation of Midian
—from the fact that Jethro, the father
of Moses’s wife, who in the records of
Exodus (see ii. 15, 16; iv. 19, &o.), is
represented as dwelling in the land of
Midian, and as priest or prince of that
nation, is in the narrative of Judges
(i. 16; iv. 11), as distinctly said to have
been a Kenite. As Midianites, they
were therefore descended immediately
from Abraham by his wife Keturah,
and in this relationship and their con-
nexion with Moses we find the key to
their continued alliance with Israel.”—
Bible Dict.

Verse 22. The Kenite. Heb.: Kain.
The Speaker's Comm. says that Kain
is “the name of the Kenites abode,”
Keil and Del. : “ Xain, the tribe-father,
is used poetically for the Kenste, the
tribe of which he was the founder.”
And Fuerst regards it as the name of
the tribe. A more faithful rendering
of this verse is, “For Kain shall not
be destroyed until Asshur shall carry


him away captive.” It is a promise of
long-continued safety to the Kenites.

Verse 23, Alas, who shall live, &o.
“ The words, ‘Woe, who will live,’ point
to the fearfulness of the following
judgment, which went deep to the heart
of the seer, because it would fall upon
the sons of his own people. The mean-
ing is, ‘Who will preserve his life in
the universal catastrophe that is com-
ing?’ (Hengstenberg.)”—Keil and Del.

Verse 24. Chattim, “te. Cyprus,
the nearest of the western islands, the
only one visible from Palestine, and so
the representative to Balaam and to
Israel of all those unknown western
regions across the Mediterranean Sea,
from which were at length to come the
conquerors of the mighty empires of
the East (cf. Isa. xxii. 1, 123 Jer. ii.
10).”—Speaker’s Comm,

Eber, “t.e., not as Vulg. and LXX.,
‘the Hebrews,’ but generally the des-
cendants of Shem.”—Joid.

He also, “te. the conqueror of
Asshur and Eber, who should come
across the sea.”—JZbid.


Barsaw’s Tuinp Paraste: ras Giory or THE PEorie or Gop,


(Verses


This paragraph contains two main
divisions :

IL The preparation of the prophet
to declare the divine will (vers. 1-4).

1. Balaam renounces the search for
auguries. “And when Balaam saw
that it pleased the Lord to bless Israel,
he went not, as at other times, to seek
for enchantments.” ‘The sacrifices were
offered as at former times, but Balaam
goes no more apart to look for auguries.
He seems to have despaired of accom-
plishing the desire of Balak by any
exercise of his art.

2. He beholds the encampment of
Israel. “He set his face toward the
wilderness. And Balaam lifted up his
eyes, and he saw Israel encamping
according to their tribes.” He seems

to have gazed on the imposing spectacle


1-9.)


beneath him, and to have allowed it
freely to influence him. Its order,
unity, vastness, and might, seem to
have deeply impressed him. And the
impression produced by that sight
“served as the subjective preparation
for the reception of the Spirit of God
to inspire him.”

3. He is inspired by the Holy Spirit.
“And the Spirit of God came upon
him” (see QOritical and Explanatory
Notes on ver. 2). He had, as Attersoll
remarks, “the Holy Spirit, but not the
spirit of holiness; for wheresoever He
worketh He is holy, but He doth not
always work holiness and sanctification,
which evormore accompany salvation,”
Balaam was inspired to utter the Divine
message; but his heart was perverse
and corrupt, &o,

469


OHAP. XXIV.


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





4. He hears Divine words and sees
Divine visions. “And he took up his
parable, and said, Balaam the son of
Beor hath said, and the man with
closed eye hath said: he hath said
which heard the words of God, which
saw the vision of the Almighty, falling
down and with opened eyes” (see
Critical and Explanatory Notes on vers.
3, 4). The senses of Balaam now
seem to be closed to external im-
pressions, and, for the time being, the
Spirit of God has the mastery of his
nature, and by voice and by vision
reveals the will of God to him. Thus
the Lord prepared him for the
declaration of His holy will. Do not
these words of Balaam display his
egotism and pride in his own privileges
and power? Keil and Del. hold that
they do not. “ This introduction to
his prophecy is not an utterance of
boesting vanity ; but,as Calvin correctly
observes, ‘the whole preface has no
other tendency than to prove that he
was a true prophet of God, and had
received the blessing which he uttered
from a celestial oracle.’” We are
unable to take this view of his preface.
To us it “savours very much of pride
and vain glory, taking all the praise of
this prophecy to himself, and magni-
fying himself as one of the cabinet-
council of heaven. Paul speaks with
humility of his visions and revelations
(2 Cor. xii. 1); but Balaam speaks of
his with pride.” (a)

II. The declaration by the prophet
of Israel’s glory (verses 5-9).

The blessing here pronounced is in
its substance very similar to those in
the preceding chapter. Balaam de-
clares—

1. Their beautiful appearance (vers.
5,6). Here are three ideas (1) Beauty.
The beauty of order, ‘How goodly
are thy tents, O Jacob ; thy tabernacles,
O Israel!” (6) And the beauty of cul-
ture and fertility. ‘As the valleys are
spread forth, as gardens by the river's
side.” To the mind’s eye of the seer,
the dwellings of Israel in Canaan spread
themselves abroad with the loveliness
of fertile valleys, and even as gardens

470


along the banks of a river, “‘ which are
still more lovely than the grassy and
flowery valleys” (comp. Deut. viii. 7, 8).
(c) (2) Fragrance. ‘As the trees of
lign aloes, which the Lord hath planted.”
“The aloe, imported from China and
the far distant east, furnished to the
ancients one of the most fragrant and
precious spices (cf. Psa. xlv. 8), ‘ All
thy garments smell of myrrh, aloes,
and cassia’ (Prov. vii. 17).’” So the
reputation of israel should be fragrant.
Their character and condition should
produce a delightful impression upon
their neighbours. (3) Majesty. “As cedar
trees beside the waters.” “The noblest
of trees branching forth in the fairest
of situations; an image of majestio
beauty.” The beauty of Israel is set
forth in a somewhat similar manner in
Hos. xiv. 5, 7. “The righteous is more
excellent than his neighbour.” ‘ The
precious sons of Zion, comparable to
fine gold.” The truly godly man is
beautiful in his principles and spirit, in
his character and conduct. ‘The
beauty of the Lord our God is upon”
him.

2. Their prosperous condition. Two
aspects of prosperity are probably pre-
sented by the prophet :—(1) A fertile
soil. ‘He shall pour the water out of
his buckets” (see Critical and Ex-
planatory Notes), (2) A numerous pos-
terity. ‘His seed shall be in many
waters.” Abundant and unfailing pros-
perity and increase are thus proclaimed
as the portion of Israel. And very re-
markable was their prosperity at all
times when they were faithful to the
Lord ; and their increase was wonder-
fal.

3. Their exalted position. “ And his
king shall be higher than Agag, and
his kingdom shall be exalted” (see
Critical and Explanatory Notes). The
glories of the xingdom of Israel were
to far exceed those of their heathen
neighbours. We may perhaps find
the fulfilment of this prediction
in the prosperity and power of the
kingdom during the latter part of
the reign of David and the greater part
of that of his successor. But its moet


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS. CHAP, XXIV.


.


SS


spleudid fulfilment is to be looked for
in the spiritual kingdom of the Mes-
siah.

4. Their. conquering power. This is
exhibited in several aspects —(1) Their
great strength. This is seen in what
God had done for them. ‘God leads
him forth out of Egypt.” And in their
present condition, ‘He hath as it
were the strength of a wild bull.” The
people were strong because God was
with them as their leader, &. (see on
chap xxiii. 22). (2) Their great con-
guests. ‘He shall eat up the nations
his enemies, and break their bones, and
pierce them through with his arrows.”
The words point to the complete vic-
tory of Israel over their enemie:, and
their enrichment by means of such
conquests. (d) (3) Their great security.
“He couched, he lay down as a lion,
and as a great lion: who shall stir him
up?’ “They were to overcome their
foes thoroughly, that none of them
would veuture to rise up against them
again.” The prophet’s words present


a striking picture of assured security.
Who shall dare to arouse a sleeping
lion? During a great part of the
reign of David, and during that of
Solomon, Israel was thus secure. When
His people are faithful to Him, God
guarantees their safety. ‘The work of
righteousness shall be peace,” &c. (Isa.
xxxii. 17, 18). (e). (4) Their great in-
Jluence, as a blessing to their friends,
aud as a bane to their enemies. “ Blessed
is he that blesseth thee, and cursed is
he taat curseth thee.” For this cause,
let Balak and all their enemies take
warning. God makes His people’s
cause His own. “He that toucheth
you toucheth the apple of His eye.”
“Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as
ye have done it unto one of the least
of these My brethren, ye have done it
unto Me.” “Saul, Saul, why perse-
cutest thou Me f’

Here is encouragement to the people
of God and to their friends. Here is
warning to their enemies,


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) From first to last one thing appears
uppermost in this history—Balaam’s self ; the
honour of Balaam as a trne prophet—therefore
he will not lie; the wealth of Balaam—there-
fore the Israelites must be sacrificed. Nay
more, even in this sublimest vision his ezotism
breaks out. In the sight of God's Israel he
cries, “ Let me die the death of the righteous :”
in anticipation of the glories of the Eternal
Advent, “ Z shall behold Him, but not nigh.”
He sees the vision of a Kingdom, a Church,
a chosen people, a triumph of righteousness,
In such anticipations, the nobler prophets
broke out into strains in which their own
personality was forgotten. Muses, when he
thought that God would destroy His people,
prays in agony— Yer now, if hou wilt for-
give their sin;—and if not, blot me,I pray
Thee, out of Thy book.” Paul speaks in
impassioned words—‘‘I have continual sorrow
in my heart. For I could wish that myself
were accursed from Christ for my brethren, my
kinsmen according to the flesh, who are
Israelites.’ But Balaam’s chief feeling seems
to be, “ How will all this advance me? And
the magnificence of the prophecy is thus
marred by a chord of melancholy and diseased
egotism. Not for one moment—even in those
moments when uninspived men gladly forget
themselves ; men who have devoted themselves
to a monarchy, or dreamed of a republic in


sublime self-abnegation—can Balaam forget
himself in God’s cause.—F. W. Robertson,
ML.


A,

(4) A charch is not a load of bricks, re-
member: it is a house builded together, A
church is not a bundle of cuttings in the
gardener’s hand : it is a vine, of which we are
the branches. The true church is ar orga-
nised whole; and life, true spiritual life,
wherever it is paramount in the Church,
without roles and rubrics, is quite sure to
create order and arrangement. Order without
life reminds us of the rows of graves in a
cemetery, all numbered and entered in the
register ; order with life reminds us of the
long lines of fruit trees in Italy, festooned
with fruitfal vines, Suiday-school teachers,
bear ye the banner of the folded lamb; sick
visitors, follow the ensign of the open hand ;
preachers, rally to the token of the uplifted
brazen serpent ;-and all of you, according to
your sacred calling, gather to the name of
Jesus, armed for the war.—C. H. Spurgeon.

(c) One flower is very sweet. I smell its
perfume, But I walk into some vast conser-
yatvries, into some gentleman’s garden, acres
in extent, and there are beds of fiowers, the
blue. and scarlet, and yellow. I see the
verbena, the calceolaria, and the geranium,
and many others, all in order, and in ranks
Oh, how glorious this is! a eee


CHAP, XXIV,


MHOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,





lawns, those well-trimmed hedges, those trees
so daintily kept, all growing in such luxuri-
ance. One flower is sweet, but a garden! a
garden! who can tell how sweet this is! So,
one glorified saint is one of God’s flowers,
a glorious Church is Christ's garden.
—- tae

(d) Every age produces a new crop of
heretics and infidels, Just as the current of
the times may run, so doth the stream of
infidelity change its direction, We have lived
long enough, some of us, to see three or four
species of atheists and deists rise and die, for
they are short-lived, an ephemeral generation.
We have seen the Church attacked by wea-
pons borrowed from geology, ethnology, and
anatomy, and then from the schools of criti-
cism fierce warriors have issued, but she
survives all her antagonists. She has been
assailed from almost every quarter, but the
fears that tarry in the Church to-day are blown
to the wind to-morrow ; yea, the Church has
been enriched by the attacks, for her divines
have set to work to study the points that were
dubious, to strengthen the walls that seemed
a littl weak, and so her towers have been


mprnR eae, and her bulwarks consolidated.
——L bid.

(e) As temporal and earthly governments
become more secular, restrictiny their province
to the physical well-being and the external
relationships of mankind, there will be felt,
amongst all who live a life intellectual and
spiritual, the deeper need for the existence of
a society and communion more truly corres-
ponding to the higher and proper social nature
of man than is possible in monarchies or
republics, guilds or clubs. There is no danger
of the world learning to do without the
Church, or of the Church ceasing to exert a
mighty influence over the world. The human
rules and customs and creeds of the Churches
may be modified ; but the Church itself must
remain ; “the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it.” Sooner shall the flames of love
sink into the ashes of oblivion, and the stream
of human thought pause in its eternal flow,
than the Church of Christ shall cease to engage
the warmest affections, to attract and employ
the highest intelligence, and to enlist in her ser-
vice and consecrate with her blessing the noblest
energies of man.—J. R. Thomson, M.A.


Tus BiessepNess OF THE PEOPLE or Gon


(Verse 5.)


We had thought of going to the New
Testament for a text, and taking one
of Paul’s splendid and comprehensive
addresses; but we recollected how
much more powerful the confessions
of an adversary are than the testimony
of a friend. Christianity has in every
age gained more from the reluctant
tributes of homage extorted from the
lips of enemies than from the loftiest
efforts of its friends. The admissions
of infidels in favour of the happiness
and security of a religious life, and the
regrets of worldly and irreligious men,
say more on behalf of the real value of
the Gospel to perishing man than all
the labours of divines and all the
boasted learning of the schools,

Besides, we have another advantage
in the text. The testimony of Balaam
will weigh more with many men than
that of Moses, or Isaiah, or Paul. Paul
gained great advantage with the philo-
sophers of Athens by quoting their own
authorities—“ As certain also of your
own poets have said.” And here we
address intelligent and worldly men in

472


the words of one of their own number
—“ As one of your own prophets hath
said.” Balaam was a man of unques-
tionable genius, whose convictions were
in favour of religion, as yours may be;
but his heart was against it. He was
& lover of this present world ; he was
quite enchanted with the smiles and
flatteries of royalty, and had an open
heart and an oily palm to receive the
base bribes which the world could
bestow. He was quite bent upon ris-
ing in the world, determined that no-
thing should stop him; he had no
small opinion of his own pretentions,
his genius, his knowledge, his acquaint-
ance with Divine things, of which, as
a practised worldling, he knew the full
marketable value ; and is in fact quite
eloquent in portraying his own exalted
advantages,—“The man whose eyes
are open hath said,” &o. Then he
went as far as ever he could in opposing
conscience—the voice of the Angel—
the drawn sword—God, He was bent
upon the thing from first to last:
to curse he came; to curse he was


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.  onap. xxiv.
rr SNA",


determined. When God forbade him to
curse by his prophecies, he cursed by
his counsels ; aud actually died in arms
against the Church of God. Now, this
is the man from whom you are to re-
ceive a lecture on the advantages of
religion. Mark the blessedness of the
righteous as it appears to the eye of
worldly and irreligious men. In proof
of this happiness we appeal—

I. To the reluctant testimony of the
men of this world. They express —

1. Their envy of the happiness of the
righteous. “ Balaam saw that it pleased
the Lord to bless Israel.” He came
prepossessed against them; yet broke
out in their favour,— How goodly are
thy tents, O Jacob,” &o. An acknow-
ledgment that they have nothing to
compare with the privileges of the peo-
ple of God. They secretly bend to a
religion of more comfortable promise.

2. The utter futility of all opposition
against the righteous. ‘Blessed is he
that blesseth thee, and cursed is he that
curseth thee.”


Batak’s ANGER AND


II. To the nature of the blessings
which religion brings.

1. The anaiety tt relieves. Doubt
and uncertainty, fear and guilt; the
disorder and restlessness of spirit,

2. The blessings tt reveals. The
counsels of Deity laid open ; the scheme
of redemption unveiled; pardon and
peace; certainty of Divine favour;
guidance of Divine providence, &c.

3. The progressive advancement ta
holiness and devotion. Moral triumphs
over self, the world, and sin. They
“shall be higher than Agag.”

4. The exalted objects of hope tt reveals,
“‘There shall come a Star,” &e,

III. To the actual experience of
good men in every age. They
have proved that religion gilds pros-
perity — soothes adversity — softens


death, &c.
IV. To the avowed design of Divine
dispensations,


This is to bless men. Acts iii, 35,


26.—Samuel Thodey.


Bauaam’s APOLOGY.


(Verses 10-14.)


I. The anger of Balak,

“And Balak’s anger was kindled
against Balaam, and he smote his hands
together,” &o. See here—

1. His bitter disappointment. “ Balak
said unto Balaam, I called thee to curse
mine enemies, and, behold, thou hast
altogether blessed them these three
times.” All his efforts and hopes had
ended in this. His distinguished
embassies and tempting offers to the
prophet, his numerous victims and
repeated sacrifices to God, his earnest
expectations of ultimately having the
Israelites cursed, have issued ina triple
declaration of their rich and exalted
blessedness. Intense and deep was his
mortification.

2. His severe rebuke of Balaam.
“Therefore now flee thou to thy place :
I thought to promote thee unto great
honour,” &e, What a humiliation fora
man of Balaam’s genius and gifts and


“proud pretensions,” to be thus ad-
dressed! What a reversal of his
cherished purposes and desires as to the
issue of this enterprise! Yet, surely
Balaam deserved this rebuke. He had
pitifully humiliated himself long before
Balak uttered his scornful and angry
rebuke.

3. His impious reflection against God.
“Lo, the Lord hath kept thee back from
honour.” In these words “the irony
with which Balak scoffs at Balaam'’s
confidence in Jehovah is unmistak-
able ;” and their profanity is great.

II, The apology of Balaam.

1. Hts vaunted honesty. ‘And
Balaam said unto Balak, Spake I not
also to thy messengers which thou
sentest unto me, saying, If Balak would
give me,” &c. This statement was true
in the letter, but utterly false in spirit.
Balaam’s whole line of conduct was cal-
culated to encourage in pear ae belief


CHAP. XXIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


eer


that he would probably succeed in
cursing Israel. Balaam’s boast of his
honesty implies a consciousness of his
weakness, if not of his failure in that
quality. “Brave men do not vaunt
their courage, nor honourable men their
honesty, nor do the truly noble boast of
high birth. All who understand the
human heart perceive a secret sense of
weakness in these loud boasts of im-
maculate purity.” (a)

2. The impotence of man when op-
posed to God. “If Balak would give
me his house full of silver and gold, I
cannot go beyond the commandment
of the Lord, to do good or bad of mine
own mind.” “He hath blessed ; and I
cannot reverse it.” Sennacherib would
have destroyed Jerusalem, but the Lord
said unto him, “I will put My hook in
thy nose, and My bridle in thy lips,
and I will turn thee back by the way
which thou comest.” Satan himself in his
hostility against the people of God cannot
go beyond the permission of God, as we
see from Job i. 12; ii. 6. “Surely the
wrath of man shall praise Thee; the re-
mainder of wrath shalt Thou restrain.”

3. The sovereignty of God. Balak
and Balaam could not frustrate His
purposes. His supremacy is real and
effectual. Quaintly and truly says
Trapp, “God lets out the tedder to
wicked men for a time, and then
calls them back with shame enough
to their task; lets them have
the ball on the foot till they come
almost to the goal, and then defeats
them of their great hopes; as he did
this sinful couple. Balak had not his
will, nor Balaam his wages ; God fooled
them both, pulling the morsel out of
their mouths, that they had well-nigh
devoured.” “The Lord reigneth.”

Before Balaam takes his departure
from Balak he declares unto him still
further the blessedness of Israel and
their relations in the future to neigh-
bouring nations. ‘And now, behold,
I go unto my people ; come, I will ad-
vertise thee,” é&c. Some expositors are
of opinion that this refers to the dia-
bolical counsel of Bulaam spoken of in
chap. om 16; and Rev. i 14. We

4


reject this opinion for three reasons :—
(1) No such counsel is recorded or even
further referred to here. (2) The state-
ment of the prophet in this verse is
directly opposed to this opinion. He
advertises Balak what Israel would de
to the Moabites, not what the Moabites
should do to Israel. (3) The advertise-
ment he is about to make to Balak
points on to the distant future. The
events were to take place “in the latter
days,” or “at the end of the days,” an
expression which cannot possibly apply
to transactions which took place almost
immediately afterward.

III. The lessons to be deduced
from this part of the history.

1. That human nature is deeply selfish.
The selfishness of Balaam has been
conspicuous throughout ; and now that
of Balak is clearly revealed. Formerly,
when he hoped to gain his ends by
means of Balaam’s powers, he was
lavish in his courtesies and compliments
to him ; but now he sees that this hope
was vain, he utters to him words of
scornful and stinging rebuke. (0)

2. That evil enterprises hane painful
issues. This enterprise has brought to
Balak loss, bitter disappointment, and
sore annoyance; and to Balaam dis-
appointment equally bitter, painful
humiliation, and heavy guilt. God
frustrates the designs of his enemies.
Even when in the beginning evil courses
seem pleasant and prosperous, the end
thereof will be wretched and perhaps
ruinous. “ There is a way that seemeth
right,” &c. (Prov. xiv. 12). (e)

3. That sin is utterlyimpolitec. Bulaam
brought upon himself the scorn of Balak,
guilt of conscience, aud the anger of God,
for “the wages of unrighteousness,”
which he failed to obtain. Siu is extreme
folly. The sinner is the greatest fool. (d)

4. That worldliness 1s utterly tncom-
patible with obedience to God. Balaam
tried to harmonize them, and miserably
failed in the attempt. He succeeded
in neither his worldly nor his religious
aims. He did not obtajn “the rewards
of divination ;” he incurred the right-
eous anger of the Lord God. “Ye
cannot serve God and mammon.”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; NUMBERS,


CHAP, XXIV,


SSSR. PSG SESSA
eS ee


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) We observe here perfect veracity with
utier want of truth, Balaam was veracious.
He will not deceive Balak. And yet there
was utter truthlessnessof heart. Balaam will
not utter what is not true; but he will blind
himself so that he may not sve the truth, and
go speak a lie, believing it to be the truth. He
will only speak the thing he feels; but he is
not careful to feel all that is true. He goes
to another place, where the whole truth may
not force itself upon his mind—to a hill where
he shall not see the whole of Israel: from hill
to hill for the chance of getting to a place
where the truth may disappear. But there
stands the stubborn fact—lIsrael is blessed ;
aud he will look at the fact in every way, to
see if he cannot get it into a position where it
shall be seen no longer. Ostrich like !

Such a character is not so uncommon as,
perhaps, we think. There is many a lucrative
business which involves misery and wrong to
those who are employed in it, The man would
be too henevolent to put the gold in his purse
if he knew of the misery. But he takes care
not to know. There is many a dishonourable
thing done at an election, and the principal
takes care not to inquire. Many an oppres-
sion is exercised on a tenantry, and the land-
lord receives his rent, and asks no questions.
Or there is some situation which depends upon
the holding of certain religious opinions, and
the candidate has a suspicion that if he were
to examine, he could not conscientiously pro-
fess these opinions, and perchance he takes
care not to examine.

There are men who would not play false,
and yet would wrougly win. There are men
who would not lie, and yet who would bribe
8 poor man to support a cause which he be-
lieves in his soul to be false. There are men
who would resent at the sword’s point the
charge of dishonour, who would yet for sel-
fish gratification entice the weak into sin, and
damn body and soul in hell, There are men
who would be shocked at being called traitors,
who in time of war will yet make a fortune by
selling arms to their country’s foes. There
are men respectable and respected, who give
liberally, and support religious societies, and
go to church, and would not take God’s name
in vain, who have made wealth, in some trade
of opium or spirits, out of the wreck of innu-
merable human lives. Balaam is one of the
accursed spirits now, but he did no more than
these are doing. —F. W. Robertson, M A.

© Remember with yourself how gloriously
Balaam was welcomed and entertained when
he came, and lay it to these words now. Is
not the case much altered ? So ever was it,
and ever will it bein this false world. Men
have their drifts and ends, when they give
grace and countenance to men; they shoot at
a mark, which if they may hit by your means,
you shall be a white son still, and all shall be
well while yon serve their purposes. Bat if


once you fail, and prefer conscience and
honesty before their desire, truth before false-
hood, and God before the devil; then hands
be smitten together, the foot stamps, the brow
frowns, the countenance and heart are changed,
Great things were intended to us in favour and
love, but now allis lost, we must fly to our
place, and be packing. And who hath kept
us from honour but God? The fault must
laid upon Him. This to many falleth out
most unjustly ; but here to Balaam it was due,
whose heart was tainted with desire of wicked
gain, and so lost both God and his gain. An
example to worldly minds if God have any
portion in them.—Babington.

Was there ever a man that was more moral
and cultured than Lord Chesterfield ? and
was there ever a man that was more exqui-
sitely selfish than he ? Men whose tendencies
incline them to the world, come to see that if
they act from motives of economy, it is best
for them to go through life with such and
such graces and prepretve. They are per-
suaded that it is the most profitable way to go
through life. On that ground they are moral;
but that leaves out some of the essential
elements of character. It is not conscience
that controls them ; it is not faith; it is not
hope; it is not spiritual purity ; it is not
aspiration; it is not rectitude in any shape;
it is only a refined form of selfishness. A
man may be a thoroughly moral man
outwardly, and a thoroughly immoral man
inwardly.—. W. Beecher.

(c) It is ill with thee, sinner, because thy
joys all hang upona thread. Let life’s thread
be cut, and where are thy merriments? Th
dainty music and thy costly cups, the mi
that flashes from thy wanton eye, and the
jollity of thy thoughtless soul, where will
these be when death, with bony hand, shall
come and touch thy heart, and make it cease
its beating ? It is ill with you, because when
these joys are over you have no more to come.
You have one bright chapter in the story, but
ah! the never-ending chapter, it is woe, woe,
woe, from the beginning to the end: the woe
of death, and after death the judgment, and
after judgment the woe of condemnation,
and then that woe that rolleth onward
for ever—eternal woe, never coming to a
pause, never knowing an alleviation —C, H.
Spurgeon.

(d) Be not like the foolish drunkard who,
staggering home one night, saw his candle lit
for him. “Two candles,” said he, for his
drunkenness made him see double; “I will
blow out one ;”’ and, as he blew it out, ina
moment he was in the dark. Many a man
sees double through the drunkenness of sin—
he thinks he has one life to sow his wild oats
in, and then the last part of life in which to
turn to God : s0, like a fool, he blows out the
only candle that he has, and in the dark he
will have to lie down coubaiectta er"


CHAP, XXIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


a ep ee


Bataaw’s Fourta Parasna: Tax Stark AND THE SoHPTRE OF TsRaBh.


(Verses 18-19.)


The introduction to this prophecy
(vers, 15, 16) corresponds with that
which the seer used before (vers. 3, 4),
and which we have already noticed.

The predictions recorded in verses
17-19 were partially fulfilled in the reign
of David (comp. 2 Sam. viii. 2, 14;
1 Kings xi. 15, 16; Psa, lx. 8), But it is
historically certain that they were not
fully accomplished in the reign of David
or any of his successors. The Star that
shall come out of Jacob, and the
Sceptre that shall rise out of Israel,
as Canon Liddon observes, “is some-
thing more than an anticipation of the
reign of David: it manifestly points
to the glory and power of a Higher
Royalty.” (a)

It appears to us quite certain that
the prophecy applies to Christ and His
Kingdom. It sets before us—

I. The glory of the Messiah as a


‘There shall come a Star out of
Jacob, and a Sceptre shall rise out of
Israel.” Attersoll thus interprets the
symbol of the Star: “ He is called by
this name—First, because He is the
fountain of all salvation and comfort ;
Secondly, to teach that all men by
nature walk in darkness, and in the
shadow of death; Thirdly, because He
will give those that are His, the light of
knowledge in this life, and the light of
perfect glory in the life to come.” We
are not sure that the figure warrants all
this. But our Lord spake of Himself as
“The bright and morning Star” (Rev.
xxii. 16), and He is frequently spoken
of in the Scriptures as the great Light for
the moral darkness of the world (Luke i.
78, 79; ii 32; John i 49; viii 12;
2 Pet. i. 19). (6)

But the principal idea seems to be
the glory of Christ as the Sovereign of
His people, He is, as M. Stuart (on
Rev. xxii. 16) says, “a King all re-
splendent and glorious, like to the
morning star (comp. 2 Sam. xxi, 17 5
Isa. xiv. 12; Num. xxiv. 17; Dan. xii


476


3). It is the splendour and beauty of
the morning star which makes it here
an object of comparison with the splen-
dour of the King of Zion.” His royal
glory is not material, but moral. It
consists in such things.as these—

1. The benevolence and sublimity of
the objects for which He reigns. He
reigns to save and bless men, Wc.

2. The righteousness of His laws.
These are “holy and just and good.”

3. The wisdom of His methods, He
governs not by force or coercion, but
by persuasion and inspiration.

4, The character and privileges of His
subjects. They are upright and holy
in character. They have the exalted
privileges of sons of God here, and
shall have eternal blessedness and glory
hereafter. The glory of this King is
set forth in language of splendid elo-
quence and power in Psa. Ixxii.

II. The extent of the Messiah’s
conquests.

l. He shall vanquish all His enemies,
“ He shall smite the corners of Moab,
and destroy all the sons of confusion ;
é and shall destroy him that
remaineth of the city.” “Edom and
Moab are named by Balaam, as they
are also by the prophets (cf., eg., Isa.
xi, 14), not for their own sake merely,
but as representatives of the heathen
nations (goyeem, of. xxiv. 8), who were
hostile to the theocracy. As Jacob then
figures as a constant type of the King-
dom of Messiah in the prophets, so too
do Edom and Moab of the enemies of
that Kingdom ; and in the threatened
ruin of Edom and Moab is indicated
the eventual destruction of all that
resist the Kingdom of God in its
power.” But how will the King destroy
the rebellious foes of His Kingdom 1
May we not reply, by transforming
them into loyal subjects. An enemy
is never so completely and gloriously
destroyed as when he is converted into
@ true friend. But if any will not be
vanquished by the kindness of the


—--


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS. GHAP. XXIV.
Se


King, they will be broken by His
power. “'!hou shalt break them with
a rod of iron,” &c. (Psa. ii. 8-12). (c)

2. He shall take to Himself all the
possessions of His vanquished enemies.
“And Edom shall be a_ possession,
Seir also shall be a possession for his
enemies.” All treasure: and possessions
shall surely be ultimately surrendered
to Christ the King. The possessors
of wealth and of power, the sons of
science and the sons of song, the gifted
and the beautiful, all will lay their
treasures at His feet (comp. Psa. Lxxii.
10, 11, 15).


IIL, The prosperity of the Messiah’s
subjects.

“And Israel shall do valiantly.”
“Whilst Edom falls, Israel will acquire
power.” The Church of the living God,
supported from on high, has bravely
repelled the assaults of all its enemies,
and has come forth from every con-
flict, not only victorious, but with in-
creased courage and strength for future
battles.

When Christ shall again appear, and
every eye shall see Him, how shall we
behold Him !—with joy as our Saviour
and King t—or, how? (d)


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(@) Upon whom did the seer look when from
the summit of Peor he beheld afar a mys-
terious personage. and gave as His heraldry the
sceptre and the star? ‘!'his can be none other
than He who arose splendid in the midst of
universal nighc—a night of ignorance ; a night
ef guiit—as “a light to lighten the Gentiles
and the glory of His people Israel ;” this can
be none other than He ':y whose coming the
shadows of ceremonial institutions were dis-
pezsed, and who gave to the world the “means
of grace and the hope of glory;” this can be
none other than He whose setting was in blood,
but that blood the purifier of a polluted earth,
the purchase of such irradiations from the
heaven which is above as shall fina'ly deepen
into a sky without a cloud,a day without a
night; this can be none other than He who
has been invested with all power in heaven
and earth, who must reign till He hath put all
His enemies under His feet, and whose do-
minion is to be established upon the wreck of
all human sovereignty; and this is He—we
know Him, thongh spoken of in parables, and
shadowed by mystic imagery ; He came out of
Jacob, He rose out of Israel; for “‘to the
Jews as concerning the flesh Christ came who
is over all, God blessed for ever.” And if it
were Christ’s day upon which Abraham re-
joicingly gxzed when looking from the summit
of Moriah down the long perspective of many
generations, it was (hrist’s day whicn was be-
held by Balaam, when from Peor’s top he dis-
cerned, amid the mighty darkness of futurity,
a single luminary, the harbinger of morning.
If it were Christ of whom the dying Jacob
foretold when he spoke of the sceptre depart-
ing from Judah, that Shiloh might appear; it
was of Christ that Balaam pronounced when
he predicted that out of the very people whose
sovereignty was then to be destroyed, should
arise a sceptre before which even Moab must
bow; and Balaam might or might not be
sware who the Being was of whom he said,


“T shall see Him, but not now ; I shall behold
Him, but not nigh.” But we who live in the
dawning of that day for which prophets and
righteous men longed—we who see advances
already made towards the glorious consumma-
tion when Jesus as “‘ King of kings and Lord
of lords” shall reign triumphant over every
nation and tribe and tongue,—we know the
Personage whose bright emblazonry was shown
to the seer on the vast gloom of future time,
and we fall before the “one Mediator between
God and man” as the “ Star that should come
out of Jacob, and the Sceptre that should rise
out of Israel.’—Henry Melville, B.D.

(6) Are there reasons to be given why a
star should be selected when the Saviour is to
be figuratively described ? We reply at once
—that everything which has to do with light
may -be fitly taken as an image of Christ.
There is nothing which so fitly represents the
moral condition of the world when Christ
appeared on earth, as darkness. “ Darkness
covered the earth, and gross darkness the
people ;” and since Christ came to diffuse
the knowledge of truth—in other words, to
scatter this darkness—His office cannot be
better represented than when he is exhibited
under figures derived from the nature and
the agency of light. But yet you may say,
why describe Him as a star—a star which
shines with comparatively faint lustre, and
which does little towards radiating a be-
nighted creation ? Why not rather take the
sun as His emblem—the sun which “cometh
forth in his strength as a bridegroom from his
chamber ;” before which the shadows of the
night immediately flee, and which pours
lavishly its glorious radiance over earth, sea,
and sky ? Certainly it would seem at first
sight, as though the sun were @ more appro-
priate emblem of Christ than a star; and
accordingly, whilst you may often hear Chris-
tians speaking of their Saviour as the “Sun
of righteousness,” you will bard a” hear


OHAP. XXIV.


HOMiLSTIC COMMENTARY:


NUMBERS.





them speak of Him as the bright and morning
star. They have indeed scriptural warrant in
calling Him the “Sun of righteousness,”
seeing that the words occur in the prophecy of
Malachi, and evidently are used of the Re-
deemer. But this is the single passage in
which the emblem of the Sun is employed ;
whilst that of the star is not of unfrequent
occurrence. And if you examine attentively
the passage in Malachi, you will find cause to
think that it refers specially to a yet future
time: for the prophet has just been speaking
of that day of the Lord which seems in scrip-
ture to denote the second advent of Christ ;
and it is after describing the fearful desola-
tion which that day will bring upon the wicked,
that he is commissioned to say for the com-
fort, of the godly—“ But unto you that fear
My name, shall the Sun of righteousness arise
with healing in His wings.” The titlR—“ Sun
of righteousness,” as thus given to Christ,
would appear to mark with how much fuller
and more glorious manifestations the Saviour
will show Himself upon His return to this
earth, than are vouchsafed to us under the
present dispensation. He will be a sun to His
Church throughout the millennial and hea-
venly states ; but He is only as a star till those
states shall come. The night is yet upon us
and around us, though that night may be far
spent, and the day may be at hand. “ We see
only through a glass darkly,” as we can “ know
but in part.” Still it is no longer the starless
night which it was ere the Redeemer brought
life and immortality to light by His gospel.
A Star—a morning Star has crossed the hori-
zon, and a tempest-tossed world, in danger of
everlasting shipwreck, may steer itself by the
light of that Star to the haven where it would
be, and where there is to be no more night,
though no more sun. And thus, if an emblem
is to be found which shall at one and the same
time pourtray the Saviour as the source of
moral illumination to the world, and yet show
that this illumination is that of the dawn,
rather than that of the noon-tide, such an
emblem must be astar—a morning star, rather
than that of the great luminary of the heavens.
Christianity, as set up in the world, is but in
its twilight ; the night is still unbroken over a
vast portion of our globe; and even where
revelation has been received and rejoiced in,
we must rather speak of streaks like those on
the eastern sky, whose gold and purple pro-
paces of morning, rather than those rich full
ustres which flood creation when the sun has
reached the zenith. On every account, there-
fore—on account of what He is to the world,
and on account of what (as yet, at least) He is
not—is our Redeemer aptly figured by the em-
blem which He applied to Himself—the em-
blem of our text—the emblem of the bright
and morning star.—Jbid.

(c) The sign of the Son of Man is yet to
be seen in the heavens, where it was beheld by
Balaam, from the summit of Peor. I know
not what that sign shall be; perhaps again
the star—fearful meteor!—like that which


478


hung over the fated Jerusalem, boding its
destruction ; perhaps again the sceptre—
brilliant constellation !—burning with majesty
and betokening the extinction of all meaner
royalty ; perhaps the Cross as it appeared to
the Koman’s eye, when he was taught to know
the God of battles, and to place Christianity
upon the throne of the Cesars. But what-
ever the sign, the Being whose emblazonry it
exhibits, shall come to deal out a long delayed
vengeance on tribes that have refused to walk
in His light and submit to His rule. ‘“ Asso-
ciate yourselves, O ye people,” saith Isaiah,
“and ye shall be broken in pieces; and give
ear all ye of far countries ; gird yourselves,
and ye shall be broken in pieces.” Yes! Edom,
and Moab, and Seir, and Sheth, literally the
foes of Israel in earlier days, and figuratively
those enemies of the Church who shall league
for its overthrow at the time of the end—
against you shall that Mighty One arise,
whose type in the person of David trampled
down the nations who first bore your names.
And, therefore, do we feel that the future was
indeed giving up its secrets to Balaam, as he
stood upon Peor, with Israel encamped in the
valley beneath. We place ourselves at his
side. What seeth he? Dim and mystic things
are coming up to his view; a lonely yet a
splendid star is rising out of Jacob, and from
Israel is proceeding a sceptre, but it looks not
like that which a mortal king wields. What
mean these hieroglyphics ? Whose is this
strange yet beautiful heraldry ? ‘The answer
is easy. Yonder star is the image of Christ,
the enlightener of the world; and yonder
sceptre is His, for the whole world shall do
Him homage, Yes, you say, but ere Christ
can shine upon the nations and reign gloriously
over them, there is to be battle, and tumult,
and earthquake, and destruction. Prophecy is
express on this, that there will be a great
banding of the powers of earth against “ the
Lord and His Christ,” and these powers must
be beaten down ere the reign of righteousness
can begin. Beholdest thou, O Seer, aught in
the distance which seems to tell thee of foes
met and overthrown by Him who hath for His
sigu the sceptre and the star? We pause for
our answer, that we may be certified that it is
indeed the Christ on whom the seer looks; and
we feel that the prediction is complete when
the prophet exclaims, “He shall smite the
corners of Moab, and destroy all the children
of Sheth. And Edom shall be a possession ;
Ea on shall be a possession for his enemies.”
— Va fe

(d) It has been said by some commentators,
that the words of our text have reference to
his own final doom, as though Balaam was
made aware that he should be banished from
the presence of the Being whose coming he
was commissioned to predict—“I shall see
Him, but not now; I shall behold Him, but
not nigh.” He shall be compelled to look on
the Mediator ; every eye shall see Him ; but
in place of being allowed to approach Him, he
shall be amongat those who ahi be bidden te


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; NUMBERS,


CHAP, XXIV.


i neces


depart. Oh! behold Him now by faith as
“the lamb of God that taketh away the sins
of the world.” Then, when He shall come in
power and great majesty, you shall tehold Him,
not at a distance, as a stranger, but nigh to
you as a deliverer, an advocate, a friend. The


“Star” shall light up “the valley of the

shadow of death ;” the “Sceptre” shall be

extended to you in token of favour and

acceptance ; though as with a rod of iron He

es in pieces the hosts of the wicked.—
id,


Curist THE STaR sPOKEN OF BY BALAAM.


(Verses 15-17.)


_ It has pleased God on various occa-
sions to make known His will to per-
sons of a very unworthy character ;
and to show that His ways and thoughts
are not regulated by the vain maxims
of human wisdom. He proclaimed to
Ahaz the conception of our Emmanuel
in the womb of a virgin. To Nebu-
chadnezzar He revealed the successive
destruction of the four great monarchies,
and the erection of the Messiah’s king-
dom on the ruin of them all. Thus,
in the passage before us, we are in-
formed that He declared to Balaam
not only His purposes respecting Israel
and the nations that surrounded them,
but the advent of that glorious Person,
who, as a star should enlighten, and as
a prince should govern, the whole
world.

L The introduction to the prophecy.

1. It seems very strongly to charac-
terize the person who delivered tt. When
prophecies have been delivered by pious
men, they have either been introduced
with a plain declaration, “Thus saith
the Lord ;” or the prefatory observa-
tions have been calculated to exalt and
glorify God. But Balaam’s prediction
is nshered in with a pompous exhibition
of his own attainments, intended, as it
should seem, to wrest from Balak that
respect and honour which he had failed
to procure by his preceding prophecies.

2. It shows us how much knowledge
we may possess, while yet we are utterly
destitute of converting grace. The most
highly favoured of God’s servants, from
the beginning of the world, had not de-
livered a clearer prophecy of Christ
than that which was uttered by Balaam
on this occasion. Yet where shall we


find a baser character than Balaam’s ?
Having considerable knowledge of the
true God, he still continues to use
enchantments asa mayician. He was
80 covetous that he preferred “ the wages
of unrighteousness” to every consi-
deration, either of duty to God or of
love to man (2 Pet. ii. 15, 16), His
hypocrisy was conspicuous from first tu
last ; for in the midst of all his high
professions of regard to the will and
word of God, he laboured to the ut-
most to counteract the desigus of God
and to reverse His decrees, More
murderous purposes never were enter-
tained in the heart of man; for it was
his most earnest desire to curse all the
people of God, and to consign them
over to destruction by the sword of
their enemies. His last act especially
was truly diabolical: when he found
he could not prevail to destroy their
bodies, he taught their enemies how
to tempt them and to destroy their
souls (Rev. ii. 14). After comparing
his character with his professions and
attainments in divine knowledge, what
shall we say? Let us never value our-
selves on any discoveries of divine
truth, unless we have suitable affec-
tions and a correspondent practice (1
Cor. xiii. 1-3; Matt. vii. 22, 23),

Il. The prophecy itself,

1. Jn tts primary sense it must be
understood in reference to David. Thea
immediate intention of Balaam was to
inform Balak what the Israelites should
“do to his people in the latter days.”
Accordingly he declares that one, like a
star for brightness, should arise from
among the Jews at a distant period, to
sway the Jewish sceptre, ten destroy


CHAP. X XIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS. ~


eee


the Kingdoms of Edom and Moab. This
was fulfilled in David (2 Sam. viii. 2, 14 ;
Psa, lx. 8; 1 Kings xi. 15, 16).

2. But there can be no doubt of tts
ultimately referring to Christ Himself.
He is called in Scripture “the Day-
star,” “the bright and morning star ;”
nor did ever any one arise with
splendour comparable to His. He-too
sat upon the throne of His father
David, and exercised unlimited domi-
nion. The children of Edom and
Moab may be justly considered as re-
presenting the enemies of His Church
and People. These He subdues and
will fiaally destroy. “He must reign
till He hath put all enemies under His
feet,” ..... Him thendid Balaam see,
as Abraham also had seen four hun-
dred years before ; but not, alas! with
Abraham’s joyful hope.

Improvement.

1. Should not wx then reoice who have


seen this prophecy accomplished? The
star is risen, &c. We have only to
yield ourselves up to Jesus, and we
shall enjoy all the peace and glory of
His Kingdom. Let us improve our
privileges: let us pray that this “ Day-
star may arise in our hearts:” and let
this Monarch so captivate our souls,
as to lead us to a willing and unreserved
obedience.

2. Should we not bethankful too that we
have One engaged to vanquish all our
enemies? This is the work and office
of the Lord Jesus; nor will He ever
fail in the execution of it. The
Promised Land is before us, and in vain
shall our enemies conspire against us.
“ Be strong and very courageous.” Let
the weakest rejoice in a confident ex-
pectation of victory ; for “God-is not
a man, that He should lie; neither the
gon of man, that He should repent.”—
C. Simeon, M.A,


Baraam’s Frvat Parasites: Nationa, REVOLUTIONS,


(Verses 20-24.)


These prophetic parables teach—

I. That national revolutions exhibit
the instability of earthly greatness and
temporal power.

See this in the destruction of the
Amalekites, which was commenced
under Saul and completed under Heze-
kiah (1 Sam. xv. ; xxvii. 8 ; xxx. 1-19 ;
1 Chron. iv. 43), The Kenites, too,
though for a long time secure, were at
length oppressed and carried into cap-
tivity by the Assyrians. Assyria and
Eber also, descendants of Shem, were
conquered by powers from the (to
Balaam) unknown western regions.
And finally these western powers “shall
perish for ever.” The greatest and
mightiest empires of ancient days have
passed away. All earthly things are
transient. (a)

II. That national revolutions mani-
fest the principles of Divine retribue
tion.

In the revolutions predicted by Ba-
laam we have clear and striking illus-

480


trations of the great truth that the
Divine retribuiton corresponds to human
character and conduct. The Amalekites
were a warlike people ; and by battles
they were destroyed. ‘They that take
the sword shall perish with the sword.”
Again, we see that empires obtained
by conquest shall be lost by conquest.
By force the Assyrian empire had
chiefly been formed, and by force it
passed away. We have another illus-
tration of this retributive law in the
history of the Kenites. They had been
kind to Israel (Exod. xviii.) ; Moses had
promised them that they should share
in the goodness of God to Israel (chap.
x. 32); Balaam here predicts for them
long continued safety ; and, as a matter
of fact, they shared the fortunes of the
Israelites until the captivity of the ten
tribes. As v. Hofmann observes: “Kain,
which had left its inaccessible moun-
tain home in Horeb, enclosed asit was
by the desert, to join a people who were
only wandering in search of a home,


upon a still safer rock.”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP, XXIV.


a


by that very act really placed its nest
They had
aided Israel, and, in turn, they were
aided by Israel. In the revolutions of
history the kindnesses which have been
shown to the cause and people of God
are remembered and recompensed by
Him. ‘Whosoever shall give you a
cup of water to drink in My Name,
because ye belong to Christ, verily I
say unto you, he shall not lose his
reward.” Thus these historical revo-
lutions teach us that, “ With what
measure we mete, it shall be measured
to us again” ; and, “ whatsoever a man
soweth, that shall he also reap,” &c. (6)

Ill. That national revolutions are
ordered by God.

“God doeth this ” (ver. 23). “ Who-
ever are the instruments, He is the
supreme director.” “ The Lord bringeth


low, and lifteth up,” &c. (1 Sam. ii. 7,
8). “That bringeth the princes to
nothing; He maketh the judges of
the earth as vanity,” d&c, (Isa. xl. 23,
24). “Thus saith the Lord God; Re-
move the ‘diadem, and take off the
crow,” &c. (Ezek. xxi. 26, 27). (c)

Learn—

1. The great duty and interest of na-
ttons to seek for and to embody truth and
righteousness in their governments, insti-
tutions, &c. Prov. xiv. 34; xxv. 5;
xxix. 14; Isa. lx. 12.

2. The duty and interest of all men to
set their “affections on things above, not
on things on the earth.” The latter are
mutable and transient, the former are
immutable and permanent. Truth, ho-
liness, love, are abiding things; seek
after these. (d)


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) Earthly inheritances are but of brief
continuance. The possession of them is limited
and uncertain. To every one, they are but at
most for term of life. As one of the kings of
Spain answered to one of his courtiers, who,
thinking to please his master, wished that
kings were immortal: “{f that had been,”
said he, “I should never have reigned.”-
Leighton.

All earthly things last and endure but for a
season; men are mortal, riches are uncertain,
favour is vanity, honour is changeable, trea-
sures sre transitory, pleasures are unstable,
profits are corruptible, friends are fading, and
oftentimes turn to be enemies: only the trea-
sures of heaven, the favour of God, the plea-
sures of eternal glory, the riches of the world
to come, are immortal, ani never decay.—
Aitersoll.

th) God’s rewards and God's punishments
are all natural, Distinguish between arbitrary
and natural, Death is an arbitrary punish-
ment for forgery: it might be changed for
transportation. It is not naturally connected.
It depends upon the will of the law-maker.
But trembling nerves are the direct and natu-
ral results of intemperance. They are in the
order of nature the resulis of wrong-doing.
The man reaps what he has sown. Similarly
in rewards. If God gave riches in return for
humbleness, that would be an arbitrary con-
nection. He did give such a reward to Solo-
mon. But when He gives Life Eternal,
meaning by Life Eternal not duration of
existence, but heavenly quality of existence,
it ia all natural, The seed sown in the
ground contains in itself the future har-
vest. The harvest is but the development

It


of the germ of life in the seed. A holy
act strengthens the inward holiness. It
is a seed of life growing into more life.
“ Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he reap.”
He that sows much, thereby becomes more
conformed to God than he was betore—in
heart and spirit. That is his reward and har-
vest, And just as among the apvstles, there
was one whose spirit, attuned to love, made
him emphatically the disciple whom Jesus
loved, so shall there be some who, by previous
discipline ot the Holy Ghost, shall have more
of His mind, and understand more of His love,
and drink deeper of His joy than others.
They that have sowed bountifully—F. W.
Robertson, M.A,

For another illustration on this point, see
p. 89,

(c) God increaseth the nations and des-
troyeth them. He enlargeth the nations and
straiteneth them avain. Weasee only the in-
termediate agents, we are prone to forget that
God is the Creator and Controller as well of
the moral as of physical volcanoes, and, con-
sequently, are led to imagine, in the day of
panic, that sovereignty is engulfed in con-
fusion, and that the garments of battle ard
the shroud of government. It is thus that the
devoutest of us may not unfrequently alarm
ourselves into temporary Atheism, and hasten
for refuge to the mud-fortresses of mechanical
power, when we should fly straight to the

avilion of God. “ The Lord reigneth,” &¢

is throne is established of old; He is from
everlasting. Kings are His servants, princes
are His menials, the universe in His footstool,
and heaven itself but a flash of His benignant


eye. 481


CHAP. XXIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS


eI EaEnEIEnnEInEnnSE ent aa aaa


We shall have but a shallow knowledge of
history if we study it merely in the faint light
reflected by victorious thrones, or by the
troubled glare of oft-recurring battles. God
iz the central fact in all history. Growing
nations are but his expand‘ng smile, dwind-
ling empires are but His darkening frown.
Nebuchadnezzar was only the menial servant
of the Most High when he built the “great
Babylon ” which he idolized, and all the con-
querers of proud Chaldea, from Cyrus to
Tamerlane, were the hirelings of the Infinite
King. The Ptolemies and the Pharaohs of
Egypt held their lease of power from the Most
High : and the pompous march of the Cexsars
was but as the dance of the ephemera over the
summer stream. “ He bringeth the princes to
nothing,” &c. (Isa. xl. 23, 24). Can it be
right, or wise, to ignore His existence when
we open the archives of history? Can he have
a true conception of the magnitude and

andeur of the landscape who has examined


t only by the feeble glimmer of a wasting


rushlight ? Foolish man! Even an atom
would not reveal its beauties in such a mock-
ing light ; how much less, then, the mountain,
wood, and stream of nature’s palaces. No,
no! he sun must reveal it, And so with
history: let the Sun of heaven bl«ze upon it,
and every pinnacle becomes a glorified pur-
pose—every want kindles into sublime signifi-
cance.—Joseph Parker, D.D.

(d) Oh, that I could pour in upon the young
the majesty ond sanctity of living for the in-
visible ; that is to say, for honour, and truth,
and fidelity 1 Oh, that I could make you feel
how essentially brittle, how friable, how
perishable, are all material sources of strength!
God is the centre of life, and spiritual realities
are the only things that will endure. Stone
and iron, and silver and gold, and timber, and
cities, and nations, and outward things, are
but pictures, painted soon to fade away;
while truth and love, and fidelity, and purity,
shall last for ever asd for evr—H W
Beecher,


Daats, tHE Crows or Lim


(Verse 23.)


“ Alas, who ehall live when God
doeth this *”

Our text may be considered either as
a plaint, a sigh, or a song—a dirge
winding to a march. There are, in
reality, three questions interlinked in
this passage. [t isa question of studious
curiosity. What kind of a race will
then inhabit the earth! Men are
naturally inquisitive to know who are
to be their successors. Why not? They
are to be the heirs in turn of our
heritage ; the tenants who are to move
in as we move out ; to enjoy our repairs,
and to do, in turn, their own repairing,
for those who shall follow them.

Who are they # The question deepens
into a sigh. Here we go! just as we
begin to take in the meaning of things
about us ; scarce sooner found than lost.
Death! what is it? It must be a
mystery full of meaning. It seems as
natural as to be born, Has Heaven
hid the happiness of death, that man
may dare to livet And what is life?
It is not so much one grand event as a
conjunction of grand events, All are
more or less alive to the activities that
surround them, Alj are more or less


482


sensitive to the links that unite us to
coming time.

The futare is full of suggestion. The
poet loves to forecast it for its own sake,
and fill the atmosphere with sunshine,
or with shade, as suits his fancy best.
The poet is an artist too. He paints
for us the landscape of the future, and
interprets to our strange surprise the
distant scenes embodied there. The
philosopher listens eagerly for hints
that shall confirm his airy schemes
and idle speculations. The statesman
is sealously intent on discovering
the wedge that shall cleave the knots
of craggy policies. The saint is anxious
to learn of God and Heaven, and
solve the awful mystery of our being.

But what of that which is to tran-
spire long after all these are past1
What will go on here when i am gone?
Some one will tread the path that I
am treading! Some one will saunter
in the grove where I now linger! .. .
Some one will cry out with unutterable
longing, as we now cry, “ Alas, who
shall live when God doeth this?”

We are bafiled at the grave. We
pat our eyes close to the bars, but we


~~ ah a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS, GHAP, XXIV,
ee


cannot see. Death ¢s the crown of
life; and yet it is not the triumph of
man over time, but of time over man.
- «+e Do lasting slumbers hold us?
Is there no more of us when we are
gone? Oh! the melancholy ring of
those words—“ When Iam gone!” I
admit it tsa solemn thing to die. It
is a dread passage ; and what may hap-
pen after it? There is an eternity to
this side the grave; the world shall be
moving on when I am gone—and shall
I then be put out for ever? The em-
phasis is on this wise—this world as ¢
ts to be. Where are those who, in the
times past, have been dreaming of
rapid propulsion as they plodded slowly
on? Where are those whose genius
had almost wrested from nature the
longed-for secret, but died without the
sight? Know they now of swift-going
ships and dashing railway trains that
traverse mountain and valley like things
of life? Where are those who dreamed
of messages borne on the wings ef the
wind? Do they read the swift-flying
signals from telegraph wires, leaving
the winds lagging languidly behind #
Verily, what hath God wrought! Yet
these are but the meagre preliminaries
to what shall be. When the redupli-
cated forces of the earth shall be put
under command; when man shall sit
in plumed victory over the opposing
energies of nature; when the sword
shall be beaten into a ploughshare, and
the spear into a pruning hook; when
health shall mantle the cheek, and
happiness shall festoon the fireside ;
when man shall keep faith with his
fellow-man, and worship and adore his
Maker. ‘Alas, who shall live when
God doeth this?” Shall J live then?
The thought gladdens, but it maddens
as well. The scepticism that would
console me with the thought that death
is but a momentary pang; that I shall
sleep in death’s dateless night; that
all these struggles shall have come to
their rest ; ah! this scepticism is but
a miserable comforter after all. I cry
out and complain with all the sadness
of my rational nature. I am full of long-
ing to apr when this world shall have
ak


penter,


been finished ; then, where shall J be4

When geology shall cease to tamper
with the rock; when disease shall be
no longer necessary ; when Death shall
lie on his death-bed; “Alas! who
shall live when God doeth this?” The
Great Omnipotent does not weary.
Every age becomes impatient; but
His doings, as well as His revelation,
assure us that with Him “a thousand
years are as one day.” .... When
we have fought our brave round, the
Great Captain will order us to the rear
and bring upfresh recruits. But what
of the battle? Shall we know nothing
of its sequel? ‘Alas! who shall live
when God doeth this?” It is a question
of sublime importance to us,

It is voiced in another shape—“ If
a man die, shall he live again?’ God
has provided a way by which His people
may be’ released, and yet view this
earth in all its perfect beauty and
glory. The resurrection solves this
mighty problem. All who labour shall
see the reward of their labour. Every
husbandman whose time is due to toil
shall be gladdened by the sight of the
harvest. The sower shall be partaker
of the fruit. “I heard a voice from
heaven,” &o, (Rev. xiv. 13). God
works in the shadow of time. Even
while we sleep he toils on ; His agencies
are ever on the alert.

Presently time shall have halted from
its confused scramble, and God’s fin-
ished workmanship shall have been
taken from the loom, and the tapestry
shall be revealed in all its beauty and
perfectibility—the pattern will be com-
plete. Zhen shall we learn that when
we die we do not die out; that death
is not death ; that to die is not to die,
but to blossom into life. We say good
night to earth, but not good-bye. And
all this we shall know when sin has
perished ; when death is dead; when
tears are dried; when earth ia im-
mortal—we may then be alive, and
never die again. Blessed reality close
at hand! Shall we, every one, live
when God doeth thist—H. S. Car-
D.D, (Abridged from The
Christian World Pulpit.)


CHAP, XXIV.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


THz Partine oF BaLaAaM AND Bawag.


(Verse 25.)


Instead of “Balaam returned to his
place,” it is better to translate,
‘“‘turned towards his place.” “That
he really returned home is not implied
in the words themselves; and the
question, whether he did so, must be
determined from other circumstances.
In the further course of the history,
we learn that Balaam went to the
Midianites, and advised them to seduce
the Israelites to unfaithfulness to
Jehovah, by tempting them to join in
the worship of Peor (chap. xxxi. 16).
He was still with them at the time
when the Israelites engaged in the war
of vengeance against that people, and
was slain by the Israelites along with
the five. princes of Midian (chap. xxxi.
8; Josh. xiii. 22), At the time when
he fell into the hands of the Israelites,
he no doubt made a full communica-
tion to the Israelitish general, or to
Phinehas, who accompanied the army
as priest, concerning his blessings and
prophecies, probably in the hope of
saving his life, though he failed to ac-
complish his end.” Such is the opin-
ion of Keil and Del. Hengstenberg,
however, suggests ‘“‘that after Balaam’s
departure from Balak, he took his way
into the camp of the Israelites, and
there made known his prophecies to
Moses, or to the elders of Israel, in
the hope of obtaining from them the
reward which Balak had withheld, and
that it was not till after his failure to
obtain full satisfaction to his ambition
and covetousness here that he went to
the Midianites, to avenge himself upon
the Israelites, by the proposals that
he made to them.”

I, Balaam and Balak parted, having
utterly failed in their designs,

Balak had not obtained what he de-
sired. His repeated sacrifices to Je-
hovah, his tempting offers of large
rewards and splendid honours to Ba-
laam, and all his other efforts, had
proved fruitless and vain: Israel was
not cursed but repeatedly and richly

484


blessed. Balaam, too, had not obtained
what he so eagerly longed for. He
had found himself utterly unable to
curse the chosen people, and had not
gained “the rewards of divination.”
The coveted wealth and honours, for
which he had risked and dared so
much, he had not secured. The pro-
phet and the king were both bitterly
disappointed and vexed; and during
all their plottings and endeavours to
curse them, the Israelites were peace-
fully and securely encamped in the
neighbouring plains.

Learn: the devices and deeds of the
wicked against the cause and people of
God are ever foiled by Him. He that
keepeth Israel can neither be surprised,
nor circumvented, nor overpowered
(Psa. cxxxi.). (a)

II. They parted with characters
considerably modified by their asso-
ciation with each other,

The solicitations and temptations of
Balak had influenced the character of
Balaam ; and the character and con-
duct of Balaam had exercised no slight
influence upon Balak. What was the
result of these influences? We know
that the character of Balaam had sadly
deteriorated since the first embassage
from Balak had visited him; he had
also incurred the wrath of God by
reason of his sins; and he went for-
ward to deeper and more diabolical
wickedness, and to a doom of appalling
darkness. And it is impossible to con-
clude that Balak was not injured by
the influence of Balaam. His heinous
designs had been encouraged, his hopes
allowed and then blighted, and his tem-
per irritated and embittered by the seer.
They had mutually influenced each other
for evil ; they parted worse men than
they were when first they met.

Learn: that in our assocvations with our
fellowmen we are ever exerting a most im-
portant influence upon their character and
destiny. We meet and part; but in
our intercourse we have contributed


ase


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XXIV.


SS ss passant


something to the development of each
other’s character either for good or for
evil. We shall never be the same
beings as we should have been if we had
never met. (5

III. They parted, but not for ever.

Balaam and Balak will meet again.
They will both see Him of whom Balaam
prophesied, “They shall see Him, but
not now: they shall behold Him, but
not nigh.” ‘Behold, He cometh with
clouds ; and every eye shall see Him.”
Then, if not before, these two who


parted upon Peor will meet again ; and
then each of them will receive the just re-
tribution of his character and conduct.

Learn.—That those who have been
associated in this present life will meet
again in the great hereafter. Tempter
and tempted, oppressor and oppressed,
companions in evil designs and deeds,
and companions in noble aims and en-
terprises, all will meet again.

Let the thought of that future meet-
ing have its due weight in regulating our
present associations. (c)


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) Sooner would God forget some planets
that He had hurled into the firmament than for-
get the feeblest of His saints. “ Behold, I have
graven thee on the palms of My hands, thy
walls are continually before Me.” “The very
hairs of your head are numbered.” “‘“ As the
mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the
Lord is round about His people.” God has
pledged His power on our behalf. He has
sworn by His existence that we are dear to
Him throngh the infinite merits of His Son,
Who shall tell the limits of our security? If
God keeps all worlds in motion —if the eyes of
the universe are directed to Him for help—if
all things are under His benignant control,
we may content ourselves in the plenitude of
our safety. Say not, brother, that thy solitude
is hidden from God, or that in the time of
affliction He will forget thee; perish the
thought! The mother may forget her suck-
ing child ; but God will hold thee in everlast-
ing remembrance; for “the Lord taketh
pleasure in His people” (Psa. cxlix. 4). God
looks at the individual, not at the agyregate.
The Christian cannot be lost in the world’s
crowd. ‘The Koh-i-noor may be taken for a
piece of valueless glass, but the Christian gem
cannot be mistaken of God. They who love
God shall be accounted jewels in “ that day.”
Each is a part of the whole, and unity must
be perfected in heaven.—.Joseph Parker, D.D.

(6) No human being can come into this
world without increasing or diminishing the
sum total of human happiness, not only of the
present, but of every subsequent age of hu-
manity. No one can detach himself from this
connection. There is no sequestered spot in
the universe, no dark niche along the disk of
non-existence, to which he can retreat from
his relations to others, where he can withdraw
the influence of his existence upon the moral
destiny of the world. Everywhere his pre-
sence or absence will be felt. Everywhere he
will have companions, who will be better or
worse for his influence.

It is an old saying, and one of fearful and
fathomless import, we are here


characters foreternity. Forming characters !
—whose ? our own ? or others ? Both; and in
that momentous fact lie the peril and respon-
sibility of our existence. Who is sufficient
for the thought! thousands of my fellow-
beings will yearly, and till years shall end,
enter eternity with characters differing from
those they would have carried thither had I
never lived. The sunlight of that world will
reveal my finger-marks in their primary for-
mations, and in all their successive strata of
thought and life. And they too will form
other characters for eternity, until the influ-
ence of my existence shall be diffused through
all the future generations of this world, and
through all that shall be future to a certain
point in the world to come. As the little
silvery, circular ripple, set in motion by the
falling pebble, expands from its inch of radius
to the whole compass of the pool; so there is
not a child, not an infant Moses placed, how-
ever softly, in his bulrush ark upon the sea of
time, whose existence does not stir a ripple,
gyrating outwards and on, until it shall have
moved across and spanned the whole ocean
of God’s eternity, stirring even the river of
life, and the fountains at which His tall angels
drink.— Elihu Burritt.

(c) It is said that among the high Alps at
certain seasons the traveller is told to proceed
very quiet'y, for on the steep slopes overhead
the snow hangs so evenly balanced that the
sound of a voice or the report of a gun may
destroy the equilibrium, and bring down an
immense avalanche, that will overwhelm every-
thing in ruin in its downward course. And
so about our way there may be a soul in the
very crisis of its moral history, trembling be-
tween life and death, and a mere touch or
shadow may determine its destiny. A young
lady who was deeply impressed with the
trath, and was ready, under a conviction of
sin, to ask, “ What must I do to be saved ?”
had all her solemn impressions rege gn by
the unseemly jesting and laughter of a mem-
ber ot the Church by her side as she passed
out of the sanctuary. Her irreverent


CHAP. XXV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





worldly spirit cast a shadow on that young
lady “not far from the kingdom of God.”
How important that we should always and
everywhere walk worthy of our high calling as
Christians! Let us remember that we are
always casting the shadow of our real life
upon some one; that somebody is following
us as John followed Peter into the sepulchre.


Happy if, when all the influences of life flow
back and meet at the judgment, we can lift
up cleau hands and spotless robes, and say,
“T am free from the blood of all men!”
Happy then, to hear even one soul sayiug to
us out of the great multitude, that, following
the shadow of our Christian life and devotion
he found Jesus and heaven.—Dr. Store.


CHAPTER XXvV.,


Crrrican anp Expianatory Norges.


Verse 1. Shittim. An abbreviation
of Abel-Shittim, “the meadow of the
acacias.” It was situated in the plains
of Moab, at the northern extremity of
the camp of Israel.


Verse 2. And they called, &o.; ‘i.e.
‘the daughters of Moab called’: the
verb, and the ensuing ‘ their,’ being in
Hebrew, feminine.”— Speaker's Comm.


Verse 3. Baal-Peor is the Baal of
Peor, who was worshipped in the city
of Beth-Peor (Deut. iii, 29; iv. 46;
shap. xxiii. 28), a Moabitish Priapus, in
nonour of whom women and virgins
prostituted themselves. As the god of
war, he was called Chemosh (chap. xxi.
29), Keil and Del.

Verse 4. Take all the heads, &c., t.e.,
assemble them together.

Hang them. The “them” does not
refer to “ the heads of the people,” but
to the guilty persons: these were to
be first put to death (verse 5), and
then, as an aggravation of their punish-
ment, and as a warning to others, they
were to be publicly hung up, which was
done by impaling the body upon a stake
or fastening it upon a cross,

The fierce anger of the Lord was
manifested in the plague with which he
visited the camp of Israel (verse 9),

Verse 6, One of the children of Israel,
&o This was Zimri (verse 14).

A Midianitish woman,—“ Cozbi, the
daughter of Zur” (verse 15, and chap.
xxxi. 8).


Weeping, &o. On account of the


436


wrath of God which had smitten the
camp with the plague,
Verse 8. T'he tent, MAPpT » not the


ordinary tent. The word is only found
here in the Hebrew Scriptures; it
signifies arched or dome-shaped. From
the Hebrew word, through the Arabic,
the Spaniards derive their alcova, and
we our alcove. Here the word denotes,
the inner division of the tent, which
was used as the sleeping room and
apartment for the women in the larger
tents of the upper classes.

Verse 9. Twenty and four thousand.
Tn 1 Cor. x. 8, St. Paul gives the number
as “three and twenty thousand.” In
this he probably follows a tradition of
the scribes, according to which, of the
twenty-four thousand mentioned here,
one thousand were put to death by
the judges, leaving twenty-three thou-
sand as the number of those who fell
victims to the plague.

Verse 11. Zealous for My sake.
Rather, as in the margin, “Zealous with
My zeal.”

Verse 13. Made an atonement. The
vengeance inflicted by Phinehas upon
two of the most flagrant offenders was
accepted by God as a propitiation (lit.,
a covering) for the sin of the people.

Verse 17. Vew the Midianites. The
Midianitish women seem to have been
most active in tempting the Israelites.
Moreover their wickedness “ culminated
in the shameless wantonness of Cosbi,
the Midianitish princess,”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XXV.


nn
Tus Sus or Isragn at Sairriu, anp Taw JupGMENT oF Gop,
(Verses 1-5, 9.)


Consider—

I. The sin of the Israelites at Shit-
tim.

“And Israel abode in Shittim, and
the people,” &o. (vers. 1-3).

1. The sin ttself. Many of the people
accepted the invitation of the daugh-
ters of Moab and Midian to a sacrificial
festival, and then engaged in the wor-
ship of Baal-peor, which was associated
with, and partly consisted in, the most
licentious rites. Their sin was two-fold :
(1) Spiritual fornication, or idolatry
(Hos. ii.). (2) Physical fornication.

2. The origin of their sin. ‘The coun-
sel of Balaam was the accursed root
from whence it sprang (chap. xxxi. 16 ;
Rev. ii. 14). Having found himsejf
utterly powerless to curse them as &
prophet or a magician, with hellish
cunning he advised that others should
seduce them to curse themselves by
theirsins (a)

3. The instruments of their sin. The
daughters of Moab (ver. 2), and the
daughters of Midian (vers. 17, 18), were
employed to tempt the Israelites. The
Moabites and Midianites could not have
vanquished the Israelites by the sword,
but they speedily overcame them by
the fascinations of their daughters.

4. The occasion of their sin. Two
circumstances seem to us to have con-
tributed to the success of the tempta-
tion, (1) Their abode at Shittim.
They were in the neighbourhood of
sinful associations and corrupting in-
fluences. “ Near a fire, a serpent, and
a wicked woman, no man can long be
in safety.” (6) (2) Their lack of oc-
cupation. The Israelites were com-
paratively unemployed. Idleness leads
to vice and mischief. (ec)

II. The judgment of God upon the
Israelites on account of their sin.

1. The judgment inflicted immediately
by God. “Those that died in the
plague were twenty and four thousand.”
“They joined themselves unto Baal-
Peor, and ate the sacrifices of the dead.
Thus they provoked Him to anger with


their inventions, and the plague brake
in upon them” (Psa. evi. 28, 29), As
® punishment for their sin, the Lord
sent among them this terrible pesti-
lence. In some form or other, punish-
ment ever follows close upon the heels
of sin.

2. The judgment inflicted by Moses

and the judges, by the command of God.
“ And the Lord said unto Moses, Take
all the heads of the people,” &o. (vers.
4, 5). Concerning this punishment
notice—(1) Its nature—death. “ Slay
ye every one his men that were joined
unto Baal-Peor.” (2) Its publicity.
“Hang them up before the Lord
against the sun.” After death their
bodies were to be made a public
spectacle—a warning to others by indi-
cating the evil of the sin and the se-
verity of the wrath of God against the
sinners. (3) Its executioners. These
are called “the heads of the people”
ea 4), and “the judges of Israel”
ver. 5, and Exod, xviii. 25, 26). It
was their duty to maintain law and
order, and to punish wicked doers, each
one in his own jurisdiction (comp.
Rom. xiii. 1-4).

III. The lessons which we should
learn from this portion of Israel’s
history.

l. The secret of the security of the
people of God. While Israel was faith-
ful to Jehovah their God, they were
perfectly safe. Neither the subtlety
nor the strength of their enemies,
neither earth nor hell, could hurt them,
while they were true to their covenant
with Him. “ Who is he that will harm
you, if ye be followers of that which is
good.” Their sins deprived them of
the Divine protection, and brought
down upon them the Divine anger.
“ None can prevail against the servants
of God, except by tempting them to
sin.” “By our own sins we are over-
come.” Faith in God is the great con-
dition of our strength and safety.
Cleaving to Him by faith, we are inviol-
ably secure,

487


CHAP. ZXY,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


NUMBERS.





2. The danger of those temptations
which appeal to our self-indulgence or
love of pleasure. In most cases ease and
pleasure are more perilous to the
spiritual life than toil and pain. The
pleasures of sense are very prone to
grow into the pleasures of sin. Many
have been ‘‘allured through the lusts
of the flesh” into the most grievous
sins. (d)

3. The terrtbleness of the Divine anger.
Calm, righteous, constant, and intense
is the wrath of God against sin. Let
no one deceive himself or dishonour
God by imagining that, like some weak-
natured man, He is too kind and in-
dulgent to His creatures to be angry


with them. With implacable hatred
He hates sin. ‘The wrath of the
Lamb” is unspeakally, inconceivably,
terrible. ‘Because there is wrath,
beware lest He take thee away with
his stroke,” &c. (e

4, The solicitude with which we should
guard against arousing this anger to-
wards us. Sin calls it forth, therefore
shun sin.

5. The carnestness with which we
should seek the mercy and the protection
of God. We need His mercy for the
forgiveness of sins in the past, and His
protection to keep us from sin in the
future. ‘Hold thou me up, and I
shall be safe,”


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) Among the people who knew and dis-
cussed the evenis which befell the Israelites
since their migvation from Egypt, it must have
been notorious that there had been signal
punishments inflicted upon them for breaches
of fealty to their King. Pondering this in
his mind, the infernal sagacity of Balxam led
him to conclude, that if they could but be se-
duced from their allegiance to their Divine
King, the protection which rendered them
invincible would be withdrawn, and they would
be easily subdued by their enemies. This
discovery he made known to the King of
Moab before his departure, and it illustrates
the character of the man, that he could form
this device, and counsel the King to act upon
it, just after his mouth had poured forth, even
by constraint, eloqnert blessings upon the
people whose rnin he now devises. And all
this was purely gratuitous; for his business
with Moab was ended. He could not curse
Israel ; and he had incurred the anver, rather
than secured the honours, of the King of Moab,
He seems to have retired among the neigh-
bouring people of Midian, close allies with
Moab, until he should behold the results of
the course which he had thus suggested, and
in which he seems to have induced the Midian-
ites to co-operate. However dissatisfied with
the result of their sending for him, the Moab-
ites were still too deeply impressed with the
notion of his superhuman sagacity not to pay the
most heedful attention to his advice. This
was in effect that the women should be ren-
dered instrumental in seducing the Israclites
to take part in the obscene rites of Baal-Peor.
—John Kitto, DD.

(6) As the Hebrews lay encamped in the

lains of Moab, unsuspicious of the bad feel-

ing of the Moabites and Midianites towards

them, an intercourse gradually, and seemingly

fn due course, sprang up between the kindred
488


nations. The daughters of Moab and Midian
came to visit the women of Israel, and thus
fell under the notice of the men. he men of
Israel, also, new to a peopled country, and
strange to a friendly intercourse with strangers,
amused themselves and gratified their curiosi
by visiting the towns and villages in the vi-
cinity. This intercourse was perilous for
them. Dazzled and bewildered by magnifi-
cent and seductive appliances of vice,to which
in their simple wandering life they had been
all unused, although their fathers had seen the
like things in Egypt, they were prevailed upon
by the idolators of Moab and Midian to take
part in the riotous and lustful orgies of their
gods. It does not appear to us that they
meant to abjure their faith in Jehovah, or so
much as adopted a belief in Baal-Peor along
with it. What they did was to participate in
the licentious acts by which his votaries pro-
fessed to honour him.— bid.

Albeit we cannot at all times forsake the
familiarity of the unfaithful, yet we must ever
abandon and abjure their unfuithfulness and
ungodliness: we cannot ever refuse their
company, but we must evermore renounce
their impiety. Let us take heed that we em-
brace none of their sins. He that standeth
farthest from a raging flame, is freest and
farthest off from burning ; he that walketh a
great distance from the bank of the river, is
safest from drowning. He that cometh not
near places of infection, is surest to escape the
danger. And as we are to beware of all their
sins, so especially it behoveth us to be sus-
picious and fearful of those sins, unto which
we know ourselves most prone and inclined,
For they do most of all delight us, and those
are they which will soonest overturn us, and
bring upon us destruction of soul and body.—
W. Attersoll.

(¢) And was idleness think you nothing?


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERy





Yes, yes, assure yourself, it is ever a chief
agent in this business. Had our first mother
been busy, she had not tattled with the ser-
pent ; and had they not been idle in Sodom,
they had never fallen to that abomination ;
for idleness is mentioned as a means by the
prophet (Wzek. xvi. 49). Take idleness away,
and Cupid’s bow casts the string: he will
never do harm with all his arrows. Dost thou
ask the question, how dgistus became an
adulterer? He was idle. David was idle on
the top of the palace; and what followed ?
These Israelites are idle, and idle they tattle,
and tattling they are invited to their sacrifice,
invited, they go, and both spiritually and cor-
porally they commit whoredom. A fearful
fall in men sotaught. But this is man’s weak-
ness and woman's strength.— Babington.

(d) Pleasures are of two sorts: some are
simply unlawful, and not to be used at all,
being directly contrary to the Word of God:
such are the pleasures that carnal men take in
eating till they surfeit, and in drinking till
they are drunken ; such are the pleasures that
whoremongers take in adultery, fornication,
and uncleanness. Others are of themselves
indifferent, and in their own nature neither
good nor evil, but according as they are used,
as hunting, hawking, and other lawful recrea-
tions; and even these when they take up all
our thoughts, and thrust better things out of


CHAP. XXV





—


the doors, are called thorns in the parable of
the sower, as well as unlawful pleasures (Luke
viii. 14), There is nothing doth so much
choke the Word of God as the pleasures of
the flesh; nothing causeth us so soon to for-
get it ; nothing maketh us so soon weary and
loath to hear it, as the desire to follow and
pursue after our delights; so that it standeth
us upon to cut them up, and pull them out of
the ground of our hearts... .. We see many
by experience, who in the days of tribulation
have not given over their hold. but endured
slanders, revilings, imprisonment, hunger, and
thirst in a necessitous estate; yet have been
overcome with peace, drowned with sensuality,
and lulled asleep in carnal security......
Whilst David wandered in the wilderness, was
hunted out of holes by Saul, into which he
was glad to escape to hide himself, and was
trained up in the school of afflictions, he com-
forted himself in the Lord his God, he made
Him his rock and refuge, he asked counsel of
Him and followed His direction ; but when he
had rest from enemies, safety from dangers,
deliverance from troubles, comfort from sor-
rows, and freedom from afflictions, he fell into
horrible sins, both in the matter of Uriah, and
in numbering of the people.—Attersoll,

(e) For illustrations on this point, see pp.
220, 221.


Tur FuacRant WIcKEDNESS OF ZIMRI, AND THE Fervent ZeaL ov PHINEHAS,


(Verses 6-15.)


Notice—

I. The flagrant wickedness of Zimri.

“‘And, behold, one of the children
of Israel came,” &c. (ver. 6).

1. The heinousness of his sin. For-
nication in any one is a great and
grievous sin, but in one of the chosen
people its enormity is far greater than
in others. They had a clearer revela-
tion of God's will; they enjoyed su-
perior privileges; they were called to
a higher and purer moral life than
their heathen neighbours ; hence forni-
cation in them was far more heinous
than in their neighbours (comp. 1 Cor.
vi. 15-20).

2. The aggravations of his sin. His
guilt was aggravated by—(1) The
position which he occupied. “ The
name of the Israelite that was slain
with the Midianitish woman was Zimri,
the son of Salu, a prince of a chief


house among the Simeonites.” It was.


incumbent upon him to set an example
of order and purity and loyalty to
Jehovah. His partner in guilt, too,
was a princess. Her name was “ Cozbi,
the daughter of Zur; he was head
over a people, and of a chief house in
Midian” (comp. chap. xxxi. 8). (2)
The effrontery with which he sinned.
Not content with sinning amongst the
Midianites, he brought the woman
into the camp of Israel, which Jehovah
had commanded to be kept pure (chap.
v. 1-3). And this he did “in the sight
of Moses, and in the sight of all the
congregation of the children of Israel.”
An utter absence of shame marked his
vile conduct; he seems rather to
parade than to hide his wickedness,
(3) The daring and defiant character
of his sin. ‘The wrath of God had
gone forth and was smiting the people
with the deadly pestilence: by his
conduct he bids it gir The


CHAP. XXV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


an


judges had been commanded to put to
death the sinners: by his action he
dares them to deal with him. He
sinned presumptuously—“ with a high
hand” (comp. chap. xv. 30, 31). (a)

3. The infamy of the sinners. ‘ Now
the name of the Israelite that was
slain,” &c. (vers. 14, 15). Thus the
names, the families, and.the rank of
the evil-doers are perpetuated. An
immortality of infamy is theirs.

II. The fervent zeal of Phinehas.

“And when Phinehas, the son of
Eleazar,” é&c. (vers. 7, 8).

1. /ts character, ‘“ He was zealous
with My zeal” (ver. 11); “he was
zealous for his God” (ver. 13). “He
abborred the presumptuous wickedness
of Zimri, as God abhorred it.” He was
filled with holy indignation against one
who so flagrantly sinned and so greatly
dishonoured God. His holy zeal burned
to arrest the progress of the sin, and
to vindicate the honour of Jehovah,
b
A Its expression. On seeing the con-
duct of Zimri, he promptly seized aspear,
and following the guilty pair into the
inner apartment of the tent, he “thrust
both of them through.” The authority
of Phinehas to execute summary ven-
geance on Zimri and Cozbi has been
challenged. The case presents itself to
us thus: the outrageous sin of Zimri
imperatively demanded stern and im-
mediate punishment; and the nature
of that punishment was already de-
clared (ver. 5). But they who should
have inflicted it seem to have been
sorrow-stricken, and made no attempt
to deal with the offenders. Tears of
grief and shame were natural; but
surely at such a time stern and decisive
action was the great need. The indul-
gence of sorrow should have been firmly
repressed until the judgment of God
had been executed. With rare dis-
cernment Phinehas perceived the treat-
ment which should be dealt out to
those atrocious sinners, and with zeal
and courage equally rare he at once
applied that treatment. The case was
of exceptional flagrancy and enormity,
and demanded exceptional treatment,

490


and Phinehas administered that treat-
ment. The “deed was its own justifi-
cation, Its merit consisted in the evi-
dence it gave that his heart was right
before God. He risked his own life by
dealing according to their deserts with
two influential and defiant evil-doers.”
(c) If his conduct needed apology we
may well give it in the words of Bishop
Hall: “‘God pardoneth the errors of
our fervency, rather than the indiffer-
ences of our lukewarmness.” Moreover
this act of Phinehas cannot without ex-
treme unfairness be said to afford any
countenance to “acts of private revenge,
of religious persecution, or even of irre-
gular public vengeance.” (d)

3. Its effect. ‘So the plague was
stayed from the children of Israel... .
Phinehas hath turned My wrath away
from the children of Israel; ....
and made an atonement for the chil-
dren of Israel.” The act of Phinehas
was accepted by God as a national
“atonement,” “covering,” or “ propi-
tiation.” By this act he publicly mani-
fested—(1) a right estimate of the sin ;
(2) right feelings in relation to it ; (3)
right action in relation to it—he endea-
voured to make an end of it. It ap-
pears to us probable that it was because
of these qualities in the action of Phine-
has that God accepted it as “an
atonement for the children of Israel.”
The due administration of justice by
magistrates and judges tends to prevent
the judgments of God. If they are lax
in dealing with vice and crime, God
will sternly deal with them Himself.

4, Its reward. For this zealous
action Phinehas was—(1) Divinely com-
mended. “ The Lord spake unto Moses,
saying, Phinehas, the son of Eleazar,”
&c. (vers. 10, 11, and Psa. cvi. 30,
31). (2) Divinely rewarded. ‘ Be-
hold, I give unto Him My covenant of
peace,” &c. (vers. 12, 13). The cove-
nant bestowed upon Phinehas was the
confirmation to him and his posterity
after him of the possession of the priest-
hood. “In accordance with this pro-
mise, the high-priesthood which passed
from Eleazar to Phinehas (Judges xx.
28) continued in his family, with the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XKV


SS ensspnnsasutnsnnssvenasenssstsnssene=


exception of a brief interruption in Eli’s
days, until the time of the last gradual
dissolution of the Jewish state through
the tyranny of Herod and his succes-
sors.” Thus for his zealous action
Phinehas was himself rewarded, and his
posterity was blessed for his sake,

“ Brave works for God win crowns.


There is no merit in them. But the
grace, which gives the will, and nerves
the arm, and brings success, awards a
recompense. Among earth’s happiest
sons and heaven’s most shining saints,
devoted labourers hold foremost place.”

“It is good to be zealously affected
always in a good thing.” (e)


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) For an illustration on this point, see pp.
280, 281.

(6) Zeal may be defined as the heat or fer-
vour of the mind, by which its vehemence of
indignation goes out against anything which
it conceives to be evil, and its vehemence of
desire towards anything which it conceives to
be good. In itself it has no moral character
at ail, It is the simple instinct of energetic
nature, never wholly divested of a sori of rude
nobility, and never destitute of influence upon
the lives and upon the characters of othera.—

W. M. Punshon, LL.D.

“He that is not zealous, doth not love.”
Now right zeal acts, like fire, to its utmost
power, yet ever keeping its place and sphere.
If it be confined to the breast of a private
Christian, whence it may not flame forth in
punishing Truth’s enemies, then it burns in-
wardly the more for being pent up ; and preys,
like a fire in his bones, upon the Christian’s
own spirits, consuming them, yea, eating him
up for grief; to see Truth trodden under the
feet of error and profaneness, and he not able
to help it up—W. Gurnall,

(c) I think I could give my own life, if
called to do so, for the cause of Christ and
the welfare of men. Why, then, should I
hesitate to denounce anything that is opposed
to the cause of Christ? Why should I hesi-
tate to inveigh against anything, however
sacred it may be to others, which is injurious
to the welfare of men? I will not fear to con-
demn any organisation, or any institution, that
seems to me to stand in the way of God’s glory
or man’s redemption. It is not personal bit-


terness that leada me to use severiiy It is for
men, and not against men, that I am inflamed
and aroused. And my indignation is strong
just in proportion as those for whom it is called
out are weak and unable to defend themselves.
—H. W. Beecher.

(d) Zeal is*indeed a wonder-working grace.
It scales the heavens in agonizing prayer. It
wrestles with Omnipotence, and takes not
denial. Who can conceive what countries,
districts, cities, families, and men have sprung
to life, because Zeal prayed! It also lives
in energetic toil. It is the moving spring
in hearts of apostles, martyrs, reformers,
missionaries, and burning preachers of the
Word. What hindrances it overleaps. What
chains it breaks! What land it traverses !
It girdles earth with efforts for the truth:
and pyramids of saved souls are trophies
to its praise —H. Law, D.D.

(¢) I know that the most of you are diligent
in business, You never hear the ring of a
guinea without being on the alert to earn it 1f
possible. Your coats are off, and very likely
your shirt sleeves are turned up when there is
a chance of driving trade. That I ommend ;
but oh! do let us have something like it in
the service of Jesus Christ. Do not let us be
drudging in the world, and drawling in the
church ; lively in the service of mammon, and
then laggard in the service of Christ. Heart
and soul, mauliness, vigour, vehemence—let the
utmost strain of all our powers be put forth in
the service of Him who was never supine o1
dilatory in the service of our souls when they
had to be redeemed.—C. Hl. Spurgeon.


ZEAL.
(Ortline of an Address.)
(Verses 11-13.)


We can lay no claim to saintship
without zeal. When wickedness grows
defiant, as in the case of Zimri and
Cozbi, then zeal, as in the example of
Phinehas, must be bold and daring.

I. The source of godly zeal.

It is from the indwelling of the Holy


Ghost. It draws its vital force from
the constant operations of the Spirit in
the soul. Zeal is holy fire kindled in
the heart. Coldness is barrenness, and
endsin death. Jeremiah said: “I will
speak no more in His name.” But
silence was impossible. He Pre


CHAP, XXV,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


a


“But His word was in my heart as a
burning fire shut up in my bones. I
was weary with forbearing, and I could
not stay.” Grace in the heart must
break forth. “I believed, therefore
have I spoken.”

IL, Godly zeal has its seat in tne
heart.

When David penned that beautiful
Psalm relating to the majesty and grace
of Christ’s kingdom, he began by say-
ing: “My heart is inditing a good
matter.” The ideas of fullness and fer-
your are both expressed. My heart is
hot as if it had holy fire within. Zeal
is nct a mere thing of the brain or of
intellectual power, but a reality from a
sanctified heart. The indwelling of
the Holy Spirit makes us like John,
who was a burning and shining light.

III. Mark the object of holy zeal.

We are to be “zealous of good
works.” Men are often deceived in this
matter. There is a great deal of party
spirit, and deadly persecution, which
often goes under the name of Christian
zeal. Zeal is a mixed passion of grief
and anger, fervent love and holy desire,
all fused together in one holy emotion
of the soul, spending itself for the glory
of Christ. It is the fervour of heavenly
benevolence. It thirsts for Divine
knowledge, seeks for fellowship with
Christ, and labours with self-denial for
His sake, Zeal travails in birth for


the salvation of souls; is ready for
every good work ; creates opportunities
of usefulness.

IV. True zeal is blended with
knowledge.

Zeal without knowledge is like @
blind man running on a narrow plank.
This was the case with John (Luke ix.
54-56). The zeal of Paul was wrong
before his conversion. The Jews had
zeal without knowledge when they re-
jected the righteousness of Christ in
order to establish their own. Moses
was rash when he broke the two tables
on which the Law was written, because
Israel had broken one. Minerva put a
golden bridle upon Pegasus that he
should not fly too fast. Blind zeal, as
well as au offering without an eye, will
both be rejected by God. To enlighten
others we must have light ourselves.

V. Zeal is forgetful of itself.

Self-denial is an element of true
greatness. Every grace must be strong
for Jesus “and do exploits,” but this
must be so especially with zeal. Paul
in his perils, and Barnabas in the sale
of his land, Bunyan in prison, and mar-
tyrs at the stake, Carey in India, Pierce
in the pulpit, and Fuller in his travels
for missions, are all worthy of imitation.
Each of these men manifested forget-
fulness of self. What more shall we
say? ‘Woe unto them that are at
ease in Zion” (Amos vi.l).—The Study.


Tas Circumstances wHiod Movep THE Z#aL OF ‘PHINEHAS,
(Verse 13.)


“He was zealous for his God.”

I. There was the enormity of their sin.

Tt included false doctrine and sinful
practices, between which there is a
closer connection than is always recog-
nised.

II. There was the character of the
instigator to the sin,

Balaam, “a strange mixture of a
man,” whose character has been ably
analyzed by Butler, Pye Smith, Arnold,
and many others.

III. There was the extent to which
the sin prevailed,

493


Among all classes.
Social Evil.

IV. There was the misery occa-
sioned by the sin.

To the guilty, to their connections,
to the community.

V. There was the dishonour done
to God. )

1. We should be zealous in reli-

ion.

9. Our zeal in contending against
the sins of others should begin in zeal
in contending against our own.—Georgs
Brooks.


Logan on the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XXxV.


ee


Tas PUNISHMENT OF THE TEMPTERS,


(Verses 16-18.;


The Lord here commands Moses to
avenge the wrongs which the Midian-
ites had done to the Israelites. It is
not private revenge which is here en-
joined, but the avenging of a great
injury inflicted by one people upon
another, The carrying out of this
command is given in chap, xxxi. In
that place the subject will be more
fully considered: at present it will be
sufficient to notice the following ob-
servations, which the text suggests :—

I. Sin, whether in the people of
God or in His enemies, cannot go un-
punished,

The Israelites, who had been seduced
into sin, had been severely punished by
God. And now, as was surely just,
the Midianites who had been most
active in seducing them, are to be
punished also, ‘And the Lord spake
unto Moses, saying, Vex the Midian-
ites,” &c. Tempter and tempted, both
had sinned, and both must be punished
for their sin. When the child is
punished for his sins, the stranger who
has also sinned caunot hope to escape.
“Judgment must begin at the house
of God,” &c. (1 Pet. iv. 17). (a)

1. Here is warning to those who tempt
others to sin. (6)

2. Here is warning also to those who
yield to temptation. Tempters and
temptations, howsvever seductive, can-


not compel you to sin. If you yield
to them, you will surely suffer loss, or
chastisement, or judgment. (¢) (1)
Avoid scenes of temptation and the
society of tempters. (2) Seek con-
firmation in the knowledge of the right
and true, so that you be not deceived
by temptations. (3) Seek establish-
ment in the practice of the right and
true, so that you may the more
successfully withstand and overcome
temptations. (4) Above all and in
all look to God for help. (d)

II, Whatever tends to lead into sin
should be viewed by the godly as an
enemy to be contended against.

“Vex the Midianites, and smite
them; for they vex you with their
wiles.” Tempters and temptations
often present themselves in very win-
ning aspects; the most perilous influ-
ences are the most plausible; “Satan
himself is transformed into an angel
of light;” but whatsoever would lead
us astray must be resisted as an enemy.
“Tf thy right eye offend thee, pluck it
out,” &c. (Matt. v. 29, 30). (e)

III. Under certain circumstances
war is justifiable.

It is here commanded by God. “The
Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Vex
the Midianites, and smite them ;” d&o,

For notes and illustrations on this


point, see pp. 18-20,


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) For illustrations on The certainty of the
punishment of sin, see pp. 89, 225, 318, 374.

(6) The art of seduction from the ways of
truth and holiness, discovers the man to be
both the child and scholar of the devil. And
as wise and painful ministers of Christ, who
turn many to righteousness, shall have double
glory in heaven; so these subtle and more
active agents of the devil, who turn many from
the ways of righteousness, will have a double
portion of misery in hell —J. Flavel.

The drunkard enkindles bis neighbour's
Tues “ puiting ws bottle to him.” O! what a
base work are such men empioy24 about! By
the law it is death for any to set fire to ns


neighbour's howse; what then do they deserve
that set fire to the soul's of men. and that no
less than hell-fire ?— W, Gurnall.

For another illustration on this point, see
p. 265.

(c) For an illustration on this point, see pp.


, 93.

(d) There are temptations in life—tempta-
tions at every turning of the strect—tempta-
tions in all the evolutions of daily circum-
stances, temptations that come suddenly,
temptations tnat come unexpectedly, tempta-
tions that come flatteringly. here is no true,
all-couquering, all-triumphant, answer to the
temptations of the devil but catry Be


GHAP. XXVL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





deep in your religion, have foundations that
are reliable, know your calling, and God will
protect you when the time of battle and storm
and flood shall come. He will do it, if so be
we put our trust in Him.—Joseph Parker, D.D.

(¢) In carrying out his tempting designs,
Satan chooses such instruments as by relation
or affection have deep interest in the persons
he would gain. Some will kiss the child for
his nurse’s sake, and like the present for the
hand that brings it. It is not likely David
would have received that from Nabal which
he took from Abigail, and thanked her.
Satan sent the apple by Eve’s hand to Adam.
Delilah doth more with Samson than all the
Philistines’ bands. Job’s wife brings him
the poison: “Curse God and die.” Some
think Satan spared her life, when he slew his
children and servants,—though she was also
within his commission,—as the most likely
instrument, by reason of her relation and his
affection, to lead him into temptation. Satan
employs Peter the disciple to tempt Christ ;
at another time His friends and kinfolk, Some
m have confessed, the hardest work
they met with was to overcome the prayers
and tears of their friends and relations. Paul
himself could not get off this anare without


heart-breaking: “ What mean ye to weep and
to break mine heart ?”—W. Gurnall.

And now, if it shall be allowed to stand for
our excusing, that temptation came to us cir-
cuitously, veiled with the mask of virtue, then
history has recorded few crimes that can be
condemned. The business of our moral vigi-
lance, and the test of our moral strength, is
to penetrate the delusion, to tear off the mask,
to recognize Satan even through his transfor-
mations. We should know our tempters as
the sure instincts of innocent hearts know
hypocrites, “ through the disguise they wear.”
Perhaps no tyrant, traitor, debauchee, or rob-
ber ever lived, who chose depravity for its own
sake, or loved sin for its ugliness. If we are
to be exculpated because temptation is cun-
ning, oblique, crafty, then Herod was inno-
cent, and Judas has been harshly judged ;
Nero is an injured man ; Benedict Arnold has
been misrepresented ; and Jeffries and Roches-
ter were rather sinned against than sinning.
All our sins creep on us under concealment,
creep on us circuitously. Our first lesson of
resistance is to learn that Satan is a deceiver,
transforms himself, looks an angel.—F’, D
Huntingdon, D.D.


CHAPTER XXVI.


Onirican aND Expianatory Nores.


Verse 1. The plague. See chap.
xxv. 9.

Verse 4. Take the sum of the people.
These words are supplied in the A, V.
to fill up an ellipsis ; and it seems to us
that they are correctly supplied. Or
the verse might be read thus: “ From
twenty years old and upward” (shall
ye take the number of the children of
Israel) “as the Lord commanded,” &.

Verses 1-4. See pp. 3-7, 10, 11,

Verses 9-11. See pp. 289-312.

Verses 12-14, The tribe of Simeon
shows the greatest decrease, as com-
pared with the number taken at Sinai.
Then the tribe numbered 59,300 ; now
it numbers only 22,200; which is a
decrease of 37,100. Zimri, who was
so disgracefully conspicuousin the recent


and terrible transgressions, was a prince
of this tribe (chap. xxv. 14). It is
probable that his pernicious example
was largely followed in the tribe, and
consequently that many perished by
the plague ; hence, the great decrease.

Verse 51. The total number of adult
male Israelites, exclusive of Levites, was
601,730; being a decrease of 1,820
from the number taken at Sinai 38
years before. But had it not been for
the recent plague, there would havebeen
an increase of more than 22,000.

This chapter does not offer many
homiletical suggestions ; and some of
those which it does offer we have
noticed in the numbering of the people
at Sinai; our treatment of it will,
therefore, be necessarily brief.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS. OHAP, XXVI,
eee


Tas Divins Commanp ayD Directions rok NUMBERING THR PRoPie.


(Verses 1-4.)


On this subject little need be added
to what was said concerning the num-
bering in the desert of Sinai (see pp.
3-7, 10, 11). The chief differences in
the two censuses refer—

i. To the place in which the census
was taken. That was “in the wilder-
ness of Sinai ;” with the Promised Land
far away; this was “in the plains of
Moab, by Jordan, near Jericho.” Now
their wanderings are over ; the land of
their destiny and their desire was
clearly in view, &c.

ii. To the time at which the census
was taken. Thirty-eight years have
elapsed since the last was taken. Dur-
ing those years many thousands have
found their graves in the desert; an
entire generation has passed away; a
truer and braver generation has arisen.


During those years in several very im-
portant respects the history of the na-
tion had been arrested by reason of the
sins of the generation which died in
the wilderness.

iii, To the design with which ths
census was taken. Several of the pur-
poses which the former numbering
served (see pp. 5, 6) would be served
by this also. But in addition to those
this was intended—(1) asa preparation
for the war against Midian, which the
Lord had commanded ; (2) as a prepara-
tion for the conquest of Canaan; and
(3) as a preparation for a wise and
equitable division of that land amongst
the tribes and families of Israel. For
the accomplishment of the last-named
object this census was absolutely neces-


sary.


THe APPARENT INSIGNIFICANCE AND THE ReaL Importance or Human Lira


(Verses 5-51.)


These uninteresting verses suggest—

I. The apparent insignificance of
human life.

How dull are the details, and how
wearisome the repetitions of this
chapter! What a number of obscure
names of unknown persons it contains !
Most of them were without doubt very
ordinary, common-place people; few
were remarkable for intellectual activity
or power; many were mean in soul;
some were selfish and cowardly ; others
were base and wicked. Scarcely half
a dozen persons can we find mentioned
here who were brave or brilliant, noble
or noteworthy, great or gifted. Asa
rule human life, as it appears here, is an
ordinary and apparently insignificant
thing. And this is a fair representation
of human life in our own age and coun-
try. In the great majority of instances
human lives seem obscure, insignificant,
mean; in many instances they seem
wicked and worthless, (a)


fee The real importance of human
e.

This will appear if we consider that—

1. Every man has his own indivi-
duality of being and circumstances. No
two souls are exactly alike ; neither do
the circumstances of any two persons
correspond in every respect. How
interesting does the poorest and dullest
life become when we realise that, at
least in some respects, it is a unique
thing in the universe. (6)

2. Lvery man has his own possibilities.
In the most unpromising life great
possibilities slumber. “ There is a spirit
in man; and the inspiration of the
Almighty giveth them understanding.”
As a spiritual being every man is capa-
ble of eternal progress and blessedness,
or of endless loss and ruin. (¢)

$.. Huery man has his own influence.
There is no life in the universe which
does not affect others for good or for
evil. “ You cannot live,” Ee

5


CHAP. XXVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMDERS.


a


says, “without exerting influence. The
doors of your soul are open on others,
and theirs on you. You inhabit a
house which is well-nigh transparent ;
and what you are within, you are ever
showing yourself to be without, by
signs that have no ambiguous expres-
sion. If you had the seeds of a pesti-
lence in your body, you would not have
a more active contagion than you have
in your tempers, tastes, and principles.
Simply to be in this world, whatever
you are, is to exert an influence—an
influence, too, compared with which
mere language and persuasion are
feeble.” (d)

4. Every man has his own account-
ability. The man who has but one
talent, is as certainly responsible for the
use of that one, as the man of five
tulents is for the use of his five (Matt.
xxv. 14-30). ‘We must all appear be-
fore the judgment-seat of Christ ; that
every one,” &c. ‘ Every one of us shall
give account of himself to God.”

5. Every man ts an object of deep tn-
terest to God. To Him nothing is mean,
nothing unimportant. He taught His
apostles that they “should not call any
man common or unclean.” He knows
what human nature is, and He has
evinced the deepest and tenderest con-
cern for its well-being. The poorest
and obscurest hurnan life—(1) was
created by Him. “ Have we not all one


Father? hath not one God create? us?”
“God hath made of one blood all na-
tions of men,” &c. (2) Is sustained by
Him. “ He giveth to all life, and breath.
and all things. ... In Him we live,
and move, and have our being.” (3)
Was redeemed by Him. Christ “ died
for all” (2 Cor. v. 15). “That who-
soever believeth in Him should not
perish, but have everlasting life.” ‘Go
ye into all the world, and preach the
Gospel to every creature.” No crea-
ture is too insignificant for the Divine
interest, or too obscure for the Divine
regard; and His interest and regard
attest the importance of every one to
whom they are extended. Mark the
deep and gracious interest which our
Lord manifested in the timid and long-
afflicted woman who “ touched the hem
of His garment” (Mark v. 25-34), and
in little children (Matt. xix. 13-15), and
in the woman of Samaria (John iv. 4-
42), and in many others who would
commonly be deemed unimportant, in-
significant, and of little worth. (e)

Let us learn never to slight even the
lowliest and obscurest of our fellow-
creatures. Let us respect human
nature, as such, because it is a Divine
creation; because it is Divinely re-
deemed, and because it was the medium
of the supreme manifestation of God
(comp. Phil. ii. 5-9). (f)

“ Honour all men.”


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) You must have already noticed that this
chapter is as true as any chapter in human
history, especia'ly a» it shows so clearly what
we ourselves have found out, that the most of
people are extremely uninteresting. They are
names. and nothing more, They are pro-
ducers and cousumers, tenants and tax-
payers, and that is all; they are without wit,
music, piquancy, enterprise, or keenness of
sympathy. They listen to your best anecdotes,
and say, “’m’’; they hear of Livingstone
with a shudder ; they suppose there must be a
great nvise at Nivyara. Such people were
Seth and Enos, Mahalaleel and Jared; re-
spectable, quiet, plodding ; said “ Good night”
to one another regularly, and remarked briefly
upon the weather, and died. Just what many
now-a-days seem todo. Put down on paper
everything that has passed between you and


some people, and yor will find how very little
paper is needed. Now [| want to show you
that such people are uften unjustly estimated,
and to remind you that if ail stars were of the
same size the sky would look very odd, much
like a vast chess-board with circles instead of
aquares.—Joseph Parker, D.D.

(6) We are all men, and yet no two men
are alike. In every history you find the great
man and the little man ; the poetic dreamer and
the prosaic clown ; the daring adventurer and
the self-regarding coward ; the child of yenius
and the creature of darkness ; yet all claim to
be men, and all may theoretically ackuowledge
the same God and Redeemer. ‘These are facts
with which we have to deal, whether we open
the Bible or not, whether we acknowledge a
system of Divine Providence or not, whether
we are atheists or saints.—Jbid,


—————_


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS, . cmap. XxVi


i


(ce) Even the worst man has the seal of God
upon him somewhere. We must not forget
that man ts man, whatever be his creed or his
status, and that his very manhood should be
the guarantee of some excellence. The men
of the world and the men of the Church are
God’s ; the barren rock is His, as is the glow-
ing garden of the sunniest summer; the worm
crawling on the outermost edge of life, and the
angel shining above the stars, are both under
the care of God. Do not, then, speak of one
man as if he were created by the devil, and
another as if descended from heaven. Let us
even in the worst expect to find some broken
ray of former glory, as in the best we shall
find some evil which makes us mourn that he
is not better still. - £bid,

(d) For illustrations on this point see pp.
485, 486.

(e) The play and interplay of everything
that is within man, and the products of this
play and interplay, are all before the mind of
God. And He contemplates man, not merely
asa creature that is subject to the laws of
gravity, of light, of hunger and thirst, and to
the wants that the body bevets ; but asa crea-
ture that carries within him a soul-force that
is prolific, vastly productive, and full of little
unregerded points of history. God sees and


sympathises with all the things that relate to
the welfare of man; though they be infini-
tesimal, though they be fugitive, and though
they be unthought of even by the subject of
them. There is nothing that can transpire,
which has any connection with the moral bene-
fit of His creatures, that God is indifferent to.
—H. W. Beecher.
) Thy Maker has become like thyself.
Is that too strong a word to use? He without
whom was not an\ thing made that was made,
is that same Word which tabernacled among
us and was made flesh, made flesh in such a
way that He was tempted in all points like as
we are, yet without sin. O manhood, was
there ever such news as this for thee! Poor
manhood, thou weak worm of the dust, far
lower than the angels, }ift up thy head, and be
not afraid ! Poor manhood, born in weakness,
living in toil, covered with sweat, and dying at
last to be eaten by the worms, be not thou
abashed, even in the presence of seraphs, for
next to God is man, and not even an archangel
can come in between; nay, not next to God,
there is scarcely that to be said, for Jesus, who
is God, is man also; Jesus Christ, eternally
, was born, and lived and died as wo also
do.—C. H. Spurgeon.


Tus IntTeRestING HippEN IN THB COMMONPLACE,


(Verses 5-51.)


I. Here is the commonplace.

The forty-seven verses before us are
prosaic and dull reading. They tell
us that the sons of Reuben were
Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi;
they give us similar details concerning
the other sons of Jacob; they tell us
that the families of the respective
tribes numbered so many, and s0
many; and they further inform us
that certain personsdied. And in this
long list of names there are very few
that have any history connected with
them to awaken our interest; and so
it certainly seems @ monotonous and
tedious chapter. But in this respect
it resembles human life in all ages and
countries. How commonplace, and
even humdrum, is the life of by far
the greater part of mankind! how un-
eventful, ordinary, &c. (a)

II. Here is the interesting in the
commonplace.

If we look into this chapter care-
fully we shall discover certain words

K&


which are suggestive of deep and ten-
der interests, Sons is a word of fre-
quent occurrence, so also is the word
children; we also read of daughters
(ver. 33), and of a daughter (ver. 46).
A profound human interest attaches
to words like these. They imply
other words of an interest equaily deep
and sacred; ¢g., father, mother. Un-
speakable and unfathomable solicitudes
were awakened in the parents’ hearts
by each child named in this chapter or
included in this census. What hopes
and fears, what desires and prayers,
what wealth of holiest love, gathered
round the infancy and childhood of
every one of the “six hundred thou-
sand and a thousand seven hundred
and thirty” who were “able to go to
war in Israel!” The humblest, dullest,
most commonplace life has its rela-
tions. The least regarded person in
all the thousands of Israel was “ some-
body’s bairn.”

We also read of death Ye 19);


CHAP. XXVI.





most of the names which are here
recorded belonged to men who were
gathered to their fathers; from the
time of the twelve sons of Jacob here
mentioned to the time of this census
in the plains of Moab, many thousands
of Israelites had died, of all ranks and
of all ages. Reflection upon these
facts awakens a mournful interest in
the mind. Some had died in infancy,
beauteous buds of rich promise, leav-
ing bereaved parents to mourn in pain
and sore disappointment. And some
had died in ycung and vigorous man-
hood, workers smitten down just as
they were setting resolutely to work ;
they passed away leaving many a
gentle maiden desolate and __heart-
stricken, And others had died in
life’s prime, leaving widows and orphans
to mourn their irreparable loss. _ Lov-
ing mothers, too, had heard the home-
call, and must needs resign their dear
children to the care of other hearts
and the tendance of other hands.

Again, frequent mention is made in
this chapter of the family and of fami-
lies; end these words are suggestive
of pure and beautiful associations.
Family life involves and promotes mu-
tual affection, and forbearance, and
helpfulness; it enshrines and fosters
some of the holiest experiences and exer-
cises of which human nature is capable.

Thus in this commonplace census-
record we discover themes of profound
and perennial interest.


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


cn nG RRR SS


III. Theimportance of thecommon.
place.

Impatience of the ordinary and the
prosaic is an evidence of an unsound
judgment and an unhealthy moral life.

1. Most of life’s duties are common-
place. The duties of our trade or pro-
fession, and the duties of our family and
social relations, are, for the most part,
unromantic, monotonous, and, many
would say, dull. Yet, how important
it is that these duties be faithfully
fulfilled ! (6)

2. The greater number of persons are
commonplace. Persons characterised
by extraordinary endowments, or bril-
liant abilities, or other marked dis-
tinctions, are very rare. The great
majority of mankind are plain, prosaic
people. (e)

3. The greater part of life +s common-
place. To say that extraordinary scenes,
circumstances, and deeds are very
exceptional, isa manifest truism; and
yet many persons, in whom the craving
for the exciting and the sensational is
deep and frequent, need to be reminded
of the truism. If the ordinary and
common-place be sound and true, all
will be well; but if these be corrupt
and false, all will be ill. (a)

Be it ours to give the charm of
poetry to prosaic duties, by doing them
heartily ; and to ennoble our common-
place lives, by living them faithfully
and holily. (¢)


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(3) For an illustration on this point, see


p. 496.

(6) The best part of human history is never
written at all, Family life, patient service,
quiet endurance, the training of children, the
resistance of temptation——these things are
never mentioned by the historian. The man
who burns down an abbey or a minster is im-
mortalised in history; the poor honse-wife
who makes a pound go as far as thirty shil-
lings, and pinches herself that sve may give
her boy a quarter’s more schooling, is not
known even to have lived. Guy Fawkes is
known all over the world; but your honest
father, who has given you a good example and
a good training, is hardly known tx. doors

498


away from his own residences. If we remem-
ber these things we shall mitigate the con-
tempt with which we are apt to speak of so-
called nobodies. Because we admire brilliance
we need not despise usefulness. When your
little child is ill, he needs kindness more than
genius, and it will be of small service to him
it his mother is good at epigrams, but bad at
wringing out a wet cloth for his burning brow.
—Joseph Parker, D.D,

(c) It is wonderful how oddly and whimsi-
cally fame is gained: Methuselah is famed
because he was the oldest man, and Sampson
because he was the strongest man; another is
known because he can walk upon a tight rope,
and another because he san swim across 8


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





channel. If it were in my power to preach
the most splendid sermon ever uttered by
mortal lips, not a newspaper in the world
would take the slightest notice of it; but if I
put up an umbrella in the pulpit or tore the
pulpit Bible in two, many a paragraph would
report the eccentricity. A splendid sermon
would be thought of as interesting only to the
few, but an act of folly would be regarded as
of universal interest. Thus it is (though &
may not seem so) that things get into history,
Robertson, of Brighton, was hardly known in
his own town during his life-time, whereas
another clergyman in Brighton dressed him-
self in a coat of many colours, and made quite
a figure in the principal newspapers. Any
man living can have a world-wide notoriety
to-morrow, can have his name telegraphed
throughout the whole range of civilisation,
and be the subject of editorial comment
throughout Christendom. Shoot any member
of the royal family, and see if this be not so.
Everybody knows that Methuselah lived nine
hundred and sixty-nine years, but nobody
knows that but for you two orphan boys
would never have had a chance in life. No
preacher has a really world-wide name, known
in slums and garrets, backwoods, steamboats,
thoroughfares and palaces, who did not in
some way get it through “contemptible
speech.” — Jbid.

(d) The circumstances which have most
influence upon the happiness of mankind,
the changes of manners and morals, the
transition of communities from poverty to
wealth, from knowledge to ignorance, from
ferocity to humanity—these are, for the most


CHAP. XXVI.





part, noiseless revolutions. Their progress is
rarely indicated by what historians are pleased
to call important events. They are not
achieved by armies, or enacted by senates.
They are sanctioned by no treaties, and
recoded in no archives. They are carried on
in every school, in every church, behind ten
thousand counters, at ten thousand firesides.
The upper current of society presents no
certain criterion by which we can judge of
the direction in which the under-current flows.
We read of defeats and victories, but we
know that nations may be miserable amidst
victories and prosperous amidst defeats. We
read of the fall of wise ministers and of the
rise of profligate favourites. But we must
remember how small a proportion the good or
evil affected by a single statesman can bear, to
the good or evil of a great social system.—
Lord Macaulay,

(e) The hour will be dark in which we pine
for things romantic at the expense of a quiet
and deep life. Christianity teaches us that
no child is to be despised, no work is to be
considered mean, and that suffering may have
all the honour of service. Woe to us when
we can live only on stimulants! When the
house is accounted dull, when only sensational
books can be endured, when music and drama
and painted show are essential to our
happiness, life has gone down to a low ebb
and death is at the door. Let us do our quiet
work as if we were preparing for kings, and
watch attentively at the door, for the next
comer may be the Lord Himself.—Joseph
Parker, D.D.


Tus DistinauisHeD Risine out oF THB COMMONPLACE


(Verse 9.)


* Famous in the congregation.”

There are several persons mentioned
m this chapter to whom these words
may be applied; some of them being
famous for their gifts and virtues, and
others, alas! for their failings and
vices. Here are—

L Distinguished rebels.

“This Dathan and Abiram, famous
in the congregation, strove against
Moses,” &c. (vers, 9, 10, and chap.
xvi. 1-35 ; and see pp. 289-301, 305-
307, 311, 312). Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram were notorious by reason of—

1. Their sin, which comprised envy,
rebellion, presumption, and profanity.

2. Their punishment. Korah was
eonsumed by fire from Jehovah (see p.

KK 3


290), and the earth opened and swal-
lowed up Dathan and Abiram.

Let us regard these prominent sin-
ners a8 beacons, and shun the sins
which ruined them.

IL Distinguished profaners of sa-
cred ordinances.

“ Nadab and Abihu died, when they
offered,” &o. (ver. 61; Lev. x 1-11;
and see pp. 45, 46).

1. Their sin.

2. Their punishment. (On both these
points see pp. 45, 46.) ‘These profane
persons also should be regarded as


beacons. Shun profanity ; be reverent.
Ill. Distinguished 1 and
rulers.


“ Moses and Aaron” Hee 64),


CHAP. XXVI,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; NUMBERS.





‘Moses and Eleazar the priest” (ver.
63). Here are three persons honour-
ably distinguished ; and Moses espe-
cially so.

Moses was famous for—

1. His great abilities and attainments,
He was eminently gifted and learned.
g ae was learned,” &c. (Acts vii.
22).

2. His saintly character. Very re-
markable is the testimony to this in
chap. xii. 3-8. See pp. 219-220. (a)
Aaron also was @ good man (see pp.
385, 386), and so was Eleazar.

3. His great mission. Under the
Lord God Moses was the emancipator,
the leader, the law-giver, and the ruler
of Israel. Aaron, too, had rendered
signal and invaluable services to the
people. And Eleazar was a useful
man,

4. His extensive influence. Perhaps
no man in any age of the world’s his-
tory has exercised a more extensive
influence than Moses, both as regards
time and space. (b)

These honourably distinguished men
let us look up to as examples, and imi-
tate their excellencies.

IV. Distinguished heroes,

“Caleb the son of Jephunneh, and
Joshua the son of Nun” (ver. 65).
These men were “famous in the con-
gregation” by reason of—

1. Their faith in God. See chap. xiii.
30; xiv. 8,9; and pp. 237, 238.

2. Their courage in duty. See pp.
247, 248.

3. Their faithfulness to God. Strik-
ing testimony is borne concerning Caleb
in this respect in chap. xiv. 24 (and see
pp. 260-262). And “Joshua’s life has
been noted as one of the very few which


are recorded in history with some ful-
ness of detail, yet without any stain
upon them.”

4. Thetr eminent services. Caleb, as
one of the spies and as a brave man,
and Joshua as a spy, asa general, and
as the successor of Moses, rendered
illustrious and priceless service to the
nation.

5. Their honourable destiny. Of all
those who were numbered at Sinai, from
twenty years old and upwards, Joshua
and Caleb were the only ones who were
permitted to enter and possess the
Promised Land (vers. 64, 65). This
was the reward of their faithfulness, &c.

In them also we have examples wor-
thy of imitation in many respects.

Lessons.

1. Mere distinction ts not a thing to
be coveted. The character of the dis-
tinction is a question of vital impor-
tance. (c)

2. Men may rise to the highest dis-
tinctions from the common ranks of their
fellow men. With the exception of the
education which Moses received, noue
of these illustrious men had any advan-
tages of birth, training, or social status ;
but the reverse. (d)

3. The highest spiritual distinctions
may be attained by every man through
Jesus Christ. By the grace of God
eminent goodness is possible to each of
us. We may be “made kings and
A unto God” by Jesus Christ.

é)

4. The supreme importance of per-
sonal character and conduct. We are
making our reputation now. A destiny
of glory or of shame we are day by day
preparing ourselves for.


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(2) To do a good thing or a great thing
occasionally is not enough to constitute true
nobility of character. At the basis of all such
character there must be some diviner elements,
and just as those clements are allowed to pre-
dominate within do they lend grandeur to
all that we do. Just as Jesus taught His dis-
ciples that the childlike disposition was es-
sential "00. having a place in the kingdom,


so the Great Man must think nothing of his
own sacrifices, but do everything in the spirit
of perfect seMf-oblivion. This condition of
soul is inseparable from those profounder vir-
tues whose moral force can be determined only
by their moral fitness, and which shed the
truest glory on every form of human greatness.

Such virtues shone brightly in the man


Moses, in whose character we lack no attri-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XXVI.





bute—no excellence. It was the rich and rare
combination of these higher qualities which
gave strength and completeness to his whole
man. Had he been less virtuous he would
have been less illustrious. His graces gave
lustre and glory to his actions. Pure in the
last and lowest recess of his heart, he Jeft the
impression of his moral perfection on all that
he did. If it be the virtuous soul that truly
lives—lives “ though the whole world turn to
coal,” and burn to ashes, then what must have
been the force and the fulness of Moses’s vir-
tue! It was purged from all that is sickly
and sentimental, and had in it a strength and
a robustness indicative of the man.—Robert
Fer, IL.D.

(6) His is indeed a noble character that lives
through all time ; though formed and built up
within the limits of an earthly life, it suffers
not from the waste of years; and after the
sweep of ages multiplied by ages it retains
its integrity and glory,and like some first and
fixed star, shines with undiminished light and
lustre. Itis, in a certain sense, true that all
character is deathless—that it is something
which survives all the changes and the disso-
lutions of this lower world, and is destined to
come out as an abiding and immutable reality
in the future; but they are the few whuse
principles and whose doings can be recom-
mended as a deeper study, or whose life can
be held up as a model for universal imitation.
They must be men of rare composition, and
in whom meet all the higher and the richer

ualities of both the mind and the heart.

“heirs must be a sublime consecration to the
common good, and they must have no other
idea of life than to fulfil the purposes of Hea-
ven and to add to the sum of humzn happi-
ness. They must not pass their days in any
dreamy, visionary sentimentalism ; but watch-
ing the course of events, must brace themselves
up for corresponding action. Catching the
inspiration of a higher world, they must be
heroic for God and for truth. Here Moses
stands first and most conspicuous. In no man
did the force of principle reach a higher
ascendancy, and in no man can we discover a
truer majesty of character. From the ve
first the conduct of his people had been suc
as might have ruffled the most placid bosom,
and provoked the meekest spirit, but he was
pacitic when he might have been militant, pa-
tient when he might have been indignant, and
even heart-loving when he might have invoked
the wrath of Heaven on their heads. His was
a nobie heart : one purer or truer never beat
within a human breast. Noble by nature, he
was nobler still in the height and the force of
his virtue. Not only is his name hewn out on
Time as on a rock, but he “stands on Time
as on a pedestal,” with the eyes of all nations


fixed upon him, and with the people of every
land offering to him the incense of a loftier
praise. His is a name greater than that of
the Pharaohs, and a monument his which will
outlive the years of the pyramids.—Jbid,

(c) For an illustration on this point, see
p. 498. (¢)

(d) More true greatness comes from the
cottage than the palace. Socrates worked
with his father as a statuary; and with chisel]
in hand had Jearned to touch the stone into a
figure, ere he knew how to reason with philo-
sophers in the schools. Luther came up from
the dark deep mines at Mansfield to be the
head aud the leader of a movement only second
fin importance to the introduction of Chris-
tianity. Richardson, in the bumble capacity
of a printer’s apprentice, was wont to buy his
own candle, that his master might not be
defrauded and steal an hour from sleep to
improve his mind and lay the foundation for
future literary fame. The author of Lorenzo
de Medici, surrounded by the dry dust of a
lawyer’s office, and with nothing more than
the rudiments of a common education, rose to
the hiyhest eminence; while Morrison, the
Chinese scholar and missionary, laboured at
the trade of a last and boot-maker, and kept
his lamp from being blown out by so placing
a volume of Matthew Henry’s Commentary,
as at once to guard the flame, avd make it
easy for him to lay up its contents in his mind
and memory. Genius and greatness are the
property of no one class. Heaven bestows
His gifts according to His own will, but that
will is supremely gracious to every order and
every rank. While a Moses is taken from
the court of Pharaoh, an Elisha is found fol-
lowing the plough: there is a David tending
sheep, as well as a Daniel mingling with
princes. If Milton is qualified to be the
secretary of the Protector of England, at a
crisis in England’s history, Bunyan is
Divinely taught to be the guide and the
ere of hig race on their way to glory.
—Abid.

(e) The child-spirit is true greatness.
“ Whoso abaseth himself shall be exalted.”
“ Let this mind be in you which was also in
Christ Jesus.” ‘Pigmies are pigmies still,
though perched on Alps, and pyramids are
pyramids in vales.” A man may be great in
grace, By the very necessity of the case all
outward distinctions must become lesa and
less, but spiritwal attributes endure as long as
the being of the soul —Joseph Parker, DD.

It seems to me
'Tis only noble to he good.
Kind hearts are more than coronets,
And simple faith than Norman blooa
— Tennyson.


601


GHAP, XXVI,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





Ruxes vor THe DistrisutTion oF THt Promisep Lanp,


(Verses 52-56.)


In these directions concerning the
division of the land, two rules are laid
down :—

i. The extent of each inheritance
must be in proportion tothe number of
persons in each tribe and family. “ And
the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
Unto these the land shall be divided
for an inheritance according to the
number of names,” dc. (verses 52-54).
Note, the entire equitableness of this rule,
and see in tt an sllustration of all God's
dealings with men in this respect. “The
works of His hands are verity and
judgment,” &c. (Psalm cxi. 7, 8). “ Just
and true are Thy ways, Thou King of
saints.”

ii, The situation of each inheritance
must be determined by lot. ‘“ Not-
withstanding the land shall be divided
by lot,” &o. (verses 55, 56), It seems
that first, lots were to be drawn for the
determination of the general situation
of the territory of each tribe, and then
these territories were to be divided ac-
cording to the number of persons in the
respective tribes and families. Note,
the wisdom of this arrangement. It
would tend—(1) to prevent dissatisfac-
tion, jealousies, and strife ; (2) to inspire
in each tribe the persuasion that their
inheritance was appointed them by God
Himself. The result of the lot was re-
garded by most nations as determined
by God (comp. Prov, xvi. 33 ; xviii. 18).
So its use was appointed in this case
that the Israelities “ might rest in that
division no less than if it had been done


by the immediate voice of God from


heaven.”


We may further consider these ar
rangements as an ilicstration of —

I, The sovereignty of God in bestow-
ing His gifts.

1. The manifestation of this sove-
reignty. It is exhibited (1) in His
appointment of the rules for the
division of the land; and (2) in His
determination of the locality of the
territory of each tribe. (a)

2. The righteousness of His sovereignty.
The rules which He gave to Moses for
this important business were conspicu-
ously equitable. (0)

II. The truth that in the arrange-
ments of God provision is made for
all His creatures.

By the commands here given to
Moses adequate provision is made for
every family of Israel. In the order of
creation He provided for the supply of
human needs before He created man.
He makes constant provision for beasts,
birds, and all the inferior orders of
creation (Psa. civ. 27, 28; oxlv. 15,
16 ; cxlvii. 9); and shall He not much
more regard man and his needs? And as
a matter of fact, in return for man’s ja-
bour, the earth bringsforth an abundant
supply for the necessities of all men. (¢)

Our subject presents to us—

1. A reason for contentment. Since
God appoints our lot, let us be content
with it, and make the best of it. ‘“‘ My
times are in Thy hand.” “ He shall
choose our inheritance for us.” (d

2. A reason for thankfulness. Let
God’s provision for us awaken our
gratitude to Him. “ Bless the Lord,
O my soul,” &c. (Psa, cili. 1-5).


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(2) His sovereignty fs manifest in the
bestowing much wealth and honour upon
some, and not vouchsafing it to the more
industrious labours and attempts of others.
Some are abased, and others are elevated;
some are enriched, and others impoverished ;
some scarce feel any cross, and others scarce
feel any comfort in their whole lives; some

502


sweat and toil, and what they labour for rons
out of their reach; others sit still, and what
they wish for falls into their lap. One of the
same clay hath a diadem to beautify his head,
and another wants a covering to protect him
from the weather. One hath a stately palace
to lodge in, and another is scarce master of a
eotiage where to lay his head. A scepire is


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XXVL





put into one man’s hand, and a spade into
another’s; a rich purple garnisheth one man’s
body, while another wraps himself in dung-
hill rags. The poverty of some, and the
wealth of others, is an effect of the Divine
sovereignty, whence God is said to be the
Maker of the poor as well as the rich (Prov.
Xxii. 2), not only of their persons, but of their
conditions. The earth and the fulness thereof
is His propriety; and He hath as much a
right as Joseph had to bestow changes of
raiment upon what Benjamins He please.—
Charnocke.

(6) This dominion, though it be absolute, is
not tyrannical, but it is managed by the rules
of wisdom, righteousness, and goodness. If
His throne be in the heavens, it is pure and
good ; because the heavens are the purest parts
of the creation, and influence by their goodness
the lower earth. Since He is His own rule,
and His nature is infinitely wise, holy, and
righteous, He cannot do a thing but what is
unquestionably agreeable with wisdom, justice,
and purity. In all the exercises of His
sovereign right, He is never unattended with
those perfections of his nature. Might not
God by his absolute power have pardoned
men’s guilt, and thrown the invading sin out
of His creatures? but in regard of His truth
pawned in His threatening, and in regard of
His justice, which demanded satisfaction, He
would not. Might not God by His absolute
sovereignty admit a man into His friendship,
without giving him any giace? but in regard
of the incongruity of such an act to His
wisdom and holiness, He will not. May He
not by His absolute power refuse to accept a


Tus NoumBrRine


man that desires to please Him, and reject a
purely innocent creature? but in regard of
His goodness and righteousness, He will not.
Though innocence be amiable in its own
nature, yet it is not necessary in regard of
God’s sovereignty, that He should love it;
but in regard of His goodness it is necessary,
and He will never do otherwise. As God
never acts to the utmost of His power, so He
never exerts the utmost of His sovereignty ;
because it would be inconsistent with those
other properties which render Him perfectly
adorable to the creature.—Jbid.

(c) For illustrations on this point, see p.

02


(d) Are you labouring in a village, and
does it ever enter into your head that you
would like to labour in London? You had
better not, you had better not entertain that
notion ; it hath driven some men almost crazy,
and it is a very perilous thing to play with—
a notion of that kind, that a man is adapted
to metropolitan life when probably he is
adapted to nothing of the sort. “To fill up
the sphere we have” should be our duty and
our joy. “Itis only a nutshell.” Well, then,
it will take less filling. “It is only a little
village.” Well, then, you will make your work
the more manifest and the more speedy. I do
not say that every man is to abide just where
he is. Nothing of the kind; but whilst he is
there, he is bound by every consideration that
can stir a true man’s heart and strength, to
make the very best of his position.—.Joseph
Parker, DD.

For another illustration on this point, see p.
166.


or THE L&VITES.


(Verses 57-62.)


On this subject, comp. chap. iii. 14-
22; and see pp. 53-55.

On ver. 61 comp. Lev. x. 1-11; and
see pp. 45, 46.


On ver. 62, the last clause, com-
are chap. xviii, 20; and see pp.
839-347.


Arriiction : 17s TRIALS AND CoNSOLATIONS,


(Verse 61.)


These words refer to one of the most
interesting of the narratives of the Old
Testament. It is contained in the
tenth chap. of Leviticus. . . . .

Alas for Aaron, the father of these
young men! His was a bitter portion
—to see his sons on whom he had just
looked with delight, as set apart for
the most honourable of offices, stretched


suddenly at his feet! Not only slain ;
but slain under circumstances so appal-
ling. They fell not merely in corsse-
quence of sin, but whilst in the very
act of its commission, without a moment
for repentance ; so that hope, always
ready in such cases to fasten even on
straws, could scarcely have found place
in Aaron’s breast. Could Aaron feel
503


CHAP, XXVI,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





too deeply, or lament too bitterly the
slaughter of his children? Alas! for
Aaron, he has more to do than to bear
the grievous trial! He must bear it
without a sigh, without a tear, as
though he felt it not ; but sternly ac-
quiesced in the righteousness of the
visitation. For no sooner had Nadab
and Abihu fallen than Moses delivered
the message from God to Aaron—“ I
will be sanctified in them that come
nigh Me; and before all the people I
will be glorified.” This was nothing
but to announce authoritatively to the
afflicted father that his sons had died
for their sin; and must have added to
the anguish which came climbing up
for vent. But the message, moreover,
required submission, And Aaron ex-
hibited this submission: “ Aaron held
his peace.”

But, surely, he may weep! Surely
he and his surviving children may ob-
tain at least that relief which sorrow
finds in the being expressed. No! even
this is denied him. It would be incon-
sistent with the sanctity of the priestly
office that those who bear it should
display any grief at occurrences by
which that sanctity has been defended
and demonstrated. ‘And Moses said
unto Aaron, and unto Eleazar and
Ithamar, his sons, Uncover not your
heads, neither rend your clothes ; lest
ye die, and lest wrath come upon all
the people.” Others, as Moses went
on to say, may bewail the dead; but
not those who had loved them best,
and must feel their loss most. Indeed,
it were not easy to exaggerate the
greatness of the trial thus allotted to
Aaron. It is a beautiful thing in the
Christian religion that it is so con-
structed with a due regard to our
natural sensibilities that it neither sup-
poses us stoics, nor seeks to make us
such; not demanding of us that we
should not sorrow, but only that we
should not sorrow even as those who
have no hope. Indeed, tears are
nature’s relief—nature’s balm; and,
through a mysterious power, they ease
the pain by which they are produced.
We have cause, then, to be thankful,

504


not only for the consolation which the
Gospel offers so abundantly to the
mourning, but for the power and the
privilege of weeping. And when ye
feel how much of love there is, not only
in the chastisement which causes the
tears, but in the allowance to shed
them, then you may estimate the
heaviness of the trial which Aaron had
to bear, and you will look at once with
comnmiseration and admiration on the
high priest of Israel, as he bends by his
dead children, and yet obeys to the
letter the rigid command which pre-
vented him showing any of the ordinary
indications of grief.

It appears clear, from the remainder
of the history, that Aaron, though he
suppressed the signs of sorrow, was dis-
quieted at heart, and so overpowered
and overcome as scarcely to be master
of his actions . . . Not only
was Aaron forbidden to mourn ; it was
required of him that he should proceed
with the business of a complicated
ritual—that ritual, of the peril of
swerving from which had just been
given so tremendous a proof. No won-
der, then, if, in his agitation and per-
plexity, the high priest omit on so try-
ing a day certain prescribed forms, or
make mistakes in the performance of
his office. This seems to have been
exactly what took place. A goat had
been offered as & sin-offering, and, ac-
cording to the Levitical law, the flesh
of the sin offering cught to be eaten by
the priest in the holy place. When,
however, Moses came to inquire, he
found the goat had been burnt without
the tabernacle, in place of being eaten
according to the law. Then Moses ex-
postulated ; fearing, in all likelihood,
that this act of disobedience would
produce a repetition of the awful scene
of the morning. ‘“ Wherefore have ye
not eaten the sin-offering in the holy
place? Ye should, indeed, have eaten
it in the holy place as I commanded.”
And then Aaron, though not immedi-
ately addressed, but knowing that the
blame was with him, if with any—
Aaron took on himself to reply. And
we do not think that, in the whole


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





range of Scripture, there are more
plaintive or more pathetic words than
his reply. He begins by stating that
thore had on the whole been due atten-
tion to the services of the ministry.
“ Behold this day have they offered
their sin-offering and their burnt-offer-
ing before the Lord.” . . . . He
felt, notwithstanding what had been
duly done, that there had been a de-
parture from the law, and that it be-
came him to say something to account
for it, or to excuse it. But must he
enlarge on his affliction, and, by dwell-
ing on its greatness, seek to extenuate
his omission # He could not do this.
His heart was overflowing ; and, if he
had once given veut to his feelings, he
would have been completely unmanned,
and thus would have transgressed the
commandment, which forbad his show-
ing grief. He, therefore, trusted him-
self to give only, as it were, a hint of
his sufferings, believing that an affec-
tionate brother could not need more,
He only said, ‘Such things have be-
fallen me!” Oh! what a vast amount
of suppressed anguish, of hidden, but
agonised feeling, seems gathered into
these few syllables, uttered, we may
believe, with an almost choked voice—
“Such things have befallen me.” And
then he‘just ventures a doubt, which
would seem to show that he had not
acted altogether through inadvertency,
but partly from a feeling that he was
not in a fit temper to partake of the


sacrifice—“If I had eaten the sin-.


offering to-day, should it have been
accepted in the sight of the Lord?’
Moses has nothing to say against this
touching reply from his brother. It
seems to have satisfied him. And for-
asmuch as we must regard him as
guided through the whole transaction
by the immediate direction of God, we
may consider that the answer of Aaron
was such as found acceptance with the
Almighty himself. Moses was the in-
strument in making known the Divine
will; and he was “ content”—that is
the expression in Scripture.

Now, it is upon this OONTENTMENT
of Moses, considered as expressive of


CHAP. XXVI.





the approval of God, that we design to
ground the remainder of our discourse.

The case with which we are presented
is simply this, There is a man who is
suffering beneath the oppression of ex-
traordinary affliction. His grief causes
him to neglect some portion of religious
duty, or incapacitates him, as he im-
agines, for its discharge. Undoubtedly
he is to blame; but God, who know-
eth our frailty, remembering we are
but dust, accepts in excuse the great-
ness of his sorrow; and restrains the
vengeance which the fault might have
otherwise provoked.

Let us separate the case from its
original circumstances; and let us see
whether we may not expect, whenever
there is a similar case, that there will
be a similar acceptance of the severity
of sorrow in excuse for some failure of
duty... .. Grief tends to unfit us
for religious duties, while it makes
more essential their unwearied dis-
charge. We can never have greater
need to study the Bible, never greater
to offer petitions to God, than when
visited with trouble ; and yet it is often
more than commonly hard, when trou-
ble is upon us, to fix attention on
Scripture, or be instant in prayer. The
Christian will, on that very account,
write bitter things against himself, and
aggravate his suffering by self-reproach
and condemnation.

It not unfrequently happens that
cases such as this fall within the ob-
servation of the minister. He visits
ap individual, perhaps the mother of a
family, from whom there has been sud-
denly snatched away an object of deep
love. He finds her scarcely able to
exert any control over her feelings. She
can do little but weep and utter com-
plaints to show the anguish of her soul.
And it is no part of the Christian
minister’s office to upbraid the mourner,
as though it were not lawful to sorrow
thus bitterly. He will rather show by
his expressions of sympathy that he is
fully sensible of the greatness of her
affliction, and will mingle his tears with
hers in just tribute to the dead. But
then it will be his endeavour ay impress


GHAP, XXVI,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


ee


on the sufferer the duties of affliction,
urge to the striving to be resigned to
God’s will, and to the finding consola-
tion in God’s Word. And this will
bring out fresh complaint; the sufferer
will lament that she cannot pray ; that
the heart seems turned to stone, so that
when she has most need of religion, she
has become altogether incapacitated for
its duties. What should bind her to
her Maker seems only to estrange her
more from Him. Indeed, this would
be a perplexing case for the minister, if
he were not warranted in replying, that
great grief, by its very nature, stupefies
the mind, and that God is too gracious
to impute to His children omissions or
failures which such grief may occasion.
He may say to the sufferer that she is
not to try her religion by what it is
when stunned by the blow; and that
her Creator, who can accurately dis-
tinguish between wilful neglect, and
that produced by the bewilderment of
an overwrought spirit, will assuredly
not be extreme in marking what he
knows anguish has kept her from per-
forming. He will never be warranted
in telling an offender that he might
safely neglect religious duties; but when
he finds that affliction has caused cer-
tain duties to be neglected, and that the
neglect was one of the things which
pressed on the conscience, he is war-
ranted, we believe, in referring to the
contentment of Moses, when he had
heard Aaron’s answer, and endeavouring
so to soothe the agitated parent. And
this does not less hold good under cir-
cumstances of sickness, It is beyond
all dispute, that bodily pain is a most
engrossing thing; so that whilst it is
being endured, the soul, in general, can
do little more than sympathise with its
suffering tenement, Even the righteous,
when dread sickness is on them, feel
disabled for spiritual exercises, though
conscious that they were never more in
need of communion with God. Accord-
ingly, one continually hears complaints
from pious persons, as disease bears them
down, that they cannot fix their minds
as they desire on heavenly things ; that
they ered pray with fervency, much


less rejoice in tribulation. The just way
of dealing with these persons, seems to
be that of requiring them to take their
difficulties into accowat when they would
estimate their spiritual condition. They
do utterly wrong in judging of what they
are on 8 sick bed, by what they do on a
sick bed, and feel, as they toss to and
fro, that they cannot find rest. I never
ask how a Christian died; but how a
Christian lived.

We have a few words to say on
another supposition—namely, that it
was not through inadvertence, but
rather through design, as feeling him-
self but ill-prepared to eat the sin-
offering, that Aaron did not exactly
conform to the prescriptions of the law.
If you consider the words which Aaron
uses— And if I had eaten the sin-
offering to-day, should it have been
accepted in the sight of the Lord?”
you may judge that Aaron had probably
imagined that it would be better for
him to burn the sin-offering, though
contrary to law, than to eat it with
heaviness of heart. There was perhaps
a feeling in him that he was not in a
fit temper to partake of the sacrifice.
And if this were the case, we must
gather from the contentment which
Moses expressed—not perhaps that he
acquiesced in the reasons which Aaron
alleged—but that even a mistake, when
caused by a reverential fear of the
mysteries of religion, will be looked
upon compassionately by God, who reads
the heart.

Now we would imitate Moses in this
particular, and not deal harshly with
those who, from the same reason as
Aaron, neglected to feed on the sin-
offering, in and through the sacrament
of the Lord’s Supper. It may be true
that the majority of those who absent
themselves from the sacrament, absent
themselves in contempt of so awful a
mystery, or in assumed respect for,
which is but a cloak for determination
not to separate from the world. But
there are some who are tremblingly
alive to the sacredness of the ordinance;
who would receive it if they dared, but
who are withheld by a consciousness of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. AXVI.


SS i SP


their sinfulness, a sinfulness which they
deplore and long to remove. This was
Aaron’s case, and God forbid that this
should be harshly dealt with! They
are under a mistake ; but their mistake
is in one sense only an excellence,
We would teach them that their feel-
ing of unfitness constitutes their fitness
for the sacrament or “ means of grace,”
which is not for those (if such there
are) who have no sins to struggle with
and lament. We would thus not up-
braid them with their mistake, but
endeavour to show that it was only to
be proved in order to its being cor-
rected. We do not suppose that Moses
would have been “content,” had he


found on successive days that the sin-
offering had not been eaten. He had
said enough to show that Aaron was
wrong ; but whilst abstaining from re-
proviag for the past, he undoubtedly
expected that he would obey the law
for the future. It is the same with
those whom an habitual sense of un-
worthiness has withheld from the sacra-
ment. They may plead their excuse
whilst they have not been duly taught
what the sacrament requires from its
recipients ; but it partakes of the nature
of sin, if they continue abseut when
they know that a feeling of unworthi-
ness is the very thing required.—ZJ.
Melville, B.D.


THe FairoHrotyess or Gop,


(Verses 63-65.)


In these verses we havea triple illus-
tration of the Divine faithfulness :—

I. The faithfulness of God to His
threatenings.

“These are they that were number-
ed,” &c. (vers. 63-65). The judgment
which God pronounced thirty-eight
years previous He has now completely
fulfilled (comp. chap. xiv. 11-39; and
see pp. 250—252, 257, 258, 263-265).

a

. The immense number of the con-
demned does not avail for the escape
of any one of them. Sentence was
passed upon upwards of six hundred
thousand men; “and there was not
left a man of them.” ‘ Though hand
join in hand,” &c. (Prov. xi. 21).

2. The lapse of time before the com-
plete execution of the sentence does not
avail for the escape of any one. Thirty-
eight years passed away before the
judgment pronounced was fully car-
ried out; but ultimately not one upon
whom it was passed escaped. “ Because
sentence against an evil work is not,”


&o. (Eccles, viii. 11; 2 Pet. fli. 3-10).
(6)
IL The faithfulness of God to His


purposes.

Though God completely cut off that
rebellious generation; yet for the
carrying out of His own plans He raised
up another and far superior generation
(comp. chap. xiv. 12, 31; and see pp.
251, 264). (c)

III. The faithfulness of God to His
promises.

He promised to spare Caleb and
Joshua, and to bring them unto the
Promised Land (chap. xiv. 23, 30) ; and
He spared them, and in due season
brought them into that land (see pp.
258, 264). (d)

Here is encouragement to trust Him.

Conclusion.

The great lesson of the subject is a
solemn warning against unbelief. This
warning is urgently enforced in Heb.
iii, 7—iv. 2, Let us give earnest heed
unto it, so that at last we may enter
into the perfect and heavenly rest.


CHAP. XXVII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


oe ee ee a  ————eeu05Qeee


ILLUSTRATIONS,


(a) For illustrations on this point, see pp.
225, 874.

(5) Gud says, “ To-day I will work a won-
der in your eyes; ye shall see marvellous
things ; I will beat down the proud throne
and the great mountain.” He says that, and
then leaves us there. Anda thousand years
go by ; the proud throne is still there, and the
great mountain rears its shoulders through a
thousand summers and a thousand wiuters.
Men say, “‘The word has been forgotten.”
But the word is there. It is a factor in human
history, and is working, and will work. It
may be in ten thousand years the word comes
up, and the men of the day say to one another,
“All this is done that it might be fulfilled
which was spoken by the prophet.”"—Joseph
Parker, D.D.

For another illustration on this point, see p.
312.

(e) It is necessary to our conception of an
infinitely perfect Being, that we admit an
eternal purpose regarding all that He has done
or said. The idea of experiments undertaken
and abandoned is, so far as He is concerned,
utterly untenable. So is that of a change of
purpose. ‘*He is of one mind.” He has pur-
posed all He does, and He does or will do all
He has purposed. Whether He create a world,
or redcem a man, it is in pursuance of His
ae will that it should be so.—W. Leask,


(d) If He enters into engagements, promises,
‘and covenants, He acts with perfect freedom.
These are acts of grace to which He is under
no compulsion ; and they can never, therefore,
be reluctant engagements which He would
wish to violate, because they flow from a
ceaseless and changeless inclination to bestow
benefits, and a delight in the exercise of good-
ness. They can never be made in haste or
unadvisedly ; for the whole case of Ilis crea-
tures to the end of time is before Him, and
no circumstances can arise which to Him are
new or unforeseen. He cannot want the power
to fulfil His promises, because He is omnipo-
tent; He cannot promise beyond His ability
to make good, because Bis fu'ness is infinite ;
finally, “He cannot deny Himself,” because
He is “not a man that He should lie, nor the
son of man that He should repent ;" and thus
every promise which He has made is guaran-
teed, ss well by His natural attributes of wis-
dom, power, and sufficiency, as by His perfect
moral rectitude.— Richard Watson.

Every promise is built upon four pillars :—
God’s justice or holiness, which will not suffer
Him to deceive ; His grace or goodness, which
will not suffer Him to forget; His truth, which
will not suffer Him to change; and His power,
which makes Him able to accomplish.—JH. G.
Salter.

For additional illustrations on God's faith-
JSulness, see p. 460.


CHAPTER XXVIL


Critica, anp Exrianatory Nortss,


The request made by the daughters
of Zelophehad arose naturally out of
the census, which was taken with a
view to the distribution of the land
amongst the people, and the Divine
directions for the distribution, both of
which are recorded in the previous
chapter.

Verse 1 (comp. chap. xxvi, 29, 33).

Verse 2. All thecongregation “ denotes
the college of elders, which represented
the congregation and administered its
affairs.”

The door of the tabernacle, i.e, where
the elders met in solemn assembly.

Verse 3. Died in his own sin. Zelo-
phehad had not taken part in any of
the rebellions which had been avenged
by special judgments, but had died
“under the general sentence of ex-


clusion from the land of promise passed
on all the older generation.”

Verse 12. This mount Abarim (see
notes on chap. xxi. 20).

Verse 13 (see chap. xx, 23-29.

Verse 14 pe chap. xx. 7-13).

Verse 16 (comp. chap. xvi. 22).

Verse 18. In whom ta the spirit, ¢.¢.,
“The spiritual endowment requisite
for the office he was called to fill.”

Verse 20. Of thine honour; “te. of
thy dignity and authority. Joshua was
constituted forthwith vice-leader under
Moses, by way of introduction to his
becoming chief after Moses’s death.”—
Speaker's Comm.

Verse 21. He shall stand before
Eleazar, &c. In this respect Joshua did
not enjoy the exalted privilege of Moses
(oomp. chap. xii. 6-8 ; Deut. xxxiv. 10).


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; NUMBERS.


CHAP, XXVII,





The judgment of Urim, &o. Rather,
“the judgment of the Urim before
Jehovah.” “ Urim is an abbreviation
for Urim and Thummim, and denotes
the means with which the high priest
was instructed of ascertaining the
Divine will and counsel in all the im-
portant business of the congregation.”


—Keil and Del. What these means
were we do not know. “ ‘Light and
perfection ’ would probably be the best
English equivalent” for the words
Urim and Thummim. See an excellent
article on the subject by Professor
ee in Dr. Smith’s Dict. of the
ible.


Toe ReQuest oF THB DavuGHTERS OF ZELOPHEHAD: THB RicHTs or Women,


¢ Verses 1-11.)


Consider —

I. The request of the daughters of
Zelophehad.

1. Was presented in an orderly and
becoming manner, ‘‘ They stood before
Moses and before Eleazar the nriest,”
&c. (verse 2). They made their request
in a regular manner, and to the proper
authorities.

2. Was eminently fair and reason-
able. While their father, by reason of
sin, was in common, with the genera-
tion to which he belonged, excluded
from the Promised Land, yet he had
not done anything for which his
children should be deprived of an
inheritance therein. And it cer-
tainly does not seem reasonable that
they. should be so deprived because
they were all daughters—that they
should be disqualified because of their
sex. (a)

3. Indicated becoming respect for
their father, They vindicate him from
the guilt of sharing in any of the re-
bellions except the general one; and
they evince an earnest desire for the
perpetuation of his name and family.
If no inheritance were granted to them
as his heirs, then his name would cease
from among his family. But if a pos
session among the brethren of their
father were granted to them, then his
name would be preserved: for when an
heiress of landed property became a
wife, her husband married into her
family rather than she into his, and
“the sons who inherited the maternal
property were received through this
inheritance into the family of their
mother, %.¢., of their grandfather on


the mother’s side.” We have examples
of this in the case of Jair, who was
reckoned a Manassite, though his father
was a descendant of Judah (chapter
xxxii. 41 ; Deut. iii, 14; 1 Chron. ii.
21, 22), and in the case of Jarha and
his wife, the daughter of Sheshan (1
Chron. ii. 34, 35).

4. Implied faith tn the promise of
God to give Canaan to the Israelites.
Though the Canaanites were in full
possession of the land, and the Israel-
ites had not even entered therein, yet
they ask for their portion as if the land
were already possessed by their people.

5. Implied an earnest desire for a por-
tion in the Promised Land.

II. The Divine answer to their
request.

1. Was given by Jehovah to Moses in
response to his enquiries. ‘ And Moseg
brought their cause before the Lord
And the Lord spake unto Moses,” &. _
Notice here—(1) The humility of
Moses. He does not presume to de-
cide the case himself, do. (2) The
direction which God grants to the
humble. “The meek will He guide
in judgment,” &c.

2. Commended the cause of the
daughters of Zelophehad, “The daugh-
ters of Zelophehad speak right.”

3. Granted the request of the daugh-
ters of Zelophehad. “Thou shalt surely
give them a possession, &c.”’(ver. 7). (b)

4. Included a general law of sn-
heritance. “And thou shalt speak
unto the children of Israel,” &o. (vers.
8-11). Thus a great benefit accrued
to the nation from the request of the
daughters of Zelophehad.


cuar.xxvu. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.
rc NE
ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) Some disabilities still accrue to woman,
especially in respect to property, and just pay-
ment for her labour. Tasks that she is fully
competent to every way, public opinion and
false custom will not let her do, cruelly telling
her she shall sooner starve; and for work
that she actually does as well and as rapidly
as her companion, man, she receives only a


quarter of his wages; both of which are |


wrongs that Christianity rebukes as clearly as
it does slavery or defalcation, and wrongs that
Christian men must speedily remedy, or else
cease to be Christians, and well-nigh cease to
be men.

For the wrongs that remain to her position,
and the disabilities that man’s too selfish and
partially Christianized nature bas not yet re-
moved, let her not, in the name of all that is
lovely and all that is skilful, go to separatist
conventions, nor to the platform, nor to the
novel schemes of political economy, or social
re-organization ; but to that moral tribunal,
where she is as sure to win her cause at last
as the sunlight is tocompel a summer. Let
her take up and wield the spiritual sovereignty
that is her everlasting birthright. Let her
understand—what so few of her sex have
been willing to learn to this hour—the power
lodged in her whole spirit and voice and look
and action for or against the kingdom of
Heaven. Let her be content with the posses-
sion and exercise of power, in all its higher
forms, without that appendage which unhal-
lowed pride is for ever insisting on—the name
of it. Let her unfold every nobler faculty that
our imperfect social state invites; and then be
sure that the social state will ripen into more

erfect humanities, and full justice come at
last, Let her be the brave domestic advocate
of every virtue, the silent but effeciua! re-
former of every vice, the unflinching destroyer
of falsehood, the generous patroness of intel-
ligence, the watcher by slandered innocence,
the guardian of childhood, the minister of
Heaven to home, the guide of orphans, the
sister of the poor, the disciple of Christ's holy
Church. On Jesus of Nazareth,—all fails
except for this,—on the Saviour’s heart, let
her rest her unchangeable and unassailable
hope, her unquestioning trust, her unconquer-
able love-—F. D. Huntington, D.D.

(6) Isit nothing for woman to remember,
when her sex is made the type and tabernacle
of Love, that we have ascribed the loftiest
glory even tothe Almighty Father when we
have said that His name is Love? Is it
nothing to her that her place im society and


620


her powers in the world correspond to her
character ? That while she shares with man,
in honourable and often equal measure, cer-
tainly in these modern times, every intellec-
tual privilege, literary accomplishment, and
public function—authorship, the chair of
science, the throne of state—she yet has a
realm all her own, sacred to her peculiar
ministry, where she reigns by a still diviner
right ? Is it nothing that it is her face which
first bends over the breathing child, looks
into his eyes, welcomes him to life, steadies
his uncertain feet until they walk firmly on
the planet ? Suppose man were the natural
enemy of woman; consider that from his
birth, for the first ten years of his life, he is
put into her hands, with scarcely a reservation
or exception, to be impressed, moulded,
fashioned into what she will,--so that, if he
were born a wild tiger, her benignity would
have its opportunity to tame him; consider
that it has been historically demonstrated that
scarcely a single hero, reformer statesman,
saint, or sage, has ever come to influence or
adorn his age, from Jacob to Washington,
who was not reared by a remarkable mother
that shaped his mind; and then ask whether
it is not equal folly for woman to claim the
name of power, and for man to deny her the
possession.

There is hardly a walk of public or private
life where female talent is not heartily
honoured, and does not command its deserved
success. ‘Ihe fine arts, the sciences, claseicai
learning, social reform, philosophy, educa-
tion, empire,—all are represented at this day
by accomplished women. Do they suffer
detriment, or loss of influence, because they
are women? Is Mrs. Somerville, or Miss
Mitchell, less esteemed ameng the scientific
minds of the age for her sex ? Does not the
whole British kingdom learn a heightened
regard for woman from the womanly cha-
racter it beholds in its Queen? Isthere a |
department of knowledge from which woman
is now, by our modern systems of education,
shut out ? Must it not be very soon true that
her power shall be proportioned to her energy,
and her influence be measured only by her
merit ? Probably the larger proportion of
scholarship and public enterprise will still be
with men —the provideutial constitution of
the sexvs justifics that expectation ; but when
abs tie Se pow the demand of Christian

iberty is, that they be welcomed. recognised
and rewarded —Jbsd.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP, XXVII.


ee
THe Servant or Gop Summonep Houm


(Verses 12-14.)


The intimation here given to Moses
of his approaching death suggests the
following yhservations :—

I, That sin is an evil of the great-
est sravity.

The Lord here informs the great
leader of Israel that he must shortly
relinquish his charge and lay down his
bodily life. But why must Moses die
‘at this time? Not because he was
worn vut either physically or mentally :
“his eye was not dim, nor his natural
force abated ;” and his splendid valedic-
tory charge to the people shows that his
mind had lost nothing either of force or
of fire. Nor has he to die at this time
because he has outlived his usefulness .
he is still the most useful man of all
the thousands of Israel, He has to
die because of his sin ‘‘at the water
of Meribah.” “Ye rebelled against
my commandment in the desert of
Zin, in the strife of the congregation,
to sanctify Me at the water before their
eyes” (comp. chap. xx. 2-13, and see
pp. 372, 373). Moses besought the
Lord that he might be permitted to
enter “the good land that is beyond
Jordan ;” but the Lord “would not
hear” him (Deut. iii. 23-27). Thue
God manifests His abhorrence of sia,
and testifies to its heinousness. (a)

II. That Gcd is the absolute So-
vereign of human life.

This great truth is strikingly illus-
trated in the death of Moses. Neither
from disease, nor from the exhaustion
of the vital forces, nor from accident,
nor from external violence, does the
great and good man die; but because
God wills hisdeath. To the man who
recognises and obeys God’s laws, and
seeks to live in harmony with His will,
death cannot come either prematurely
or accidentally. ‘Is there not an ap-
pointed time to man upon earth?”
“ His days are determined, the number
of bis months are with Thee, Thou
hast appointed hia bounds that he can-
aot pass.” “All the days of my ap-


pointed time will I wait till my change
come.” “Thou prevailest for ever
against him, and he passeth,” &e.
“Thou hast made my days as an hand-


breath.” ‘Thou turnest man _ to
destruction,” &c. “My times are in
Thy hand.” (6)


This sovereignty of God over our
life should—

1. Lead us to seck for conformity to
His will. Manifestly it is both our
duty and interest so to do.

2. Encourage us in the prosecution of
worthy aims. “ Man is immortal till
his work is done.”

ITI. That inspiring visions are often
granted to the good as they approach
the close of their carthly career.

“The Lord said unto Moses, Get
thee up into this mount Abarim, and
see the land which I have given unto
the children of Israel.” It was in
mercy that God permitted him to sur-
vey the goodly land. Vast and splendid
was the prospect from the heights of
Nebo. “Even the city of Heshbon
itself, stood upon so commanding an
eminence, that the view extended at
least thirty English miles in all direc-
tions, and towards the south probably
sm far as sixty miles.” As to Moses it
wae granted to behold the extent and
beauty of the Promised Land before
his death (Deut. xxxiv. 1-4), so the
most glorious spiritual prospects are
often vouchsafed to godly souls as they
draw near the close of their pilgrimage.
This was the case with Stephen: “ he
being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up
steadfastly into heaven,” &c. (Acts vii.
55-60). And with Paul: “I am now
ready to be offered,” &o. (2 Tim. iv.
6-8). Seep. 419. (ec)

IV That through the gates of death
the good enter upon scenes of con-
genial social life.

“And when thou hast seen it, thou
also shalt be gathered unto thy people,
as Aaron thy brother was gathered.”


See p. 379. (d) Pr


CHAP. XXVIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


SS


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) When Moses, instead of giving prompt
and cheerful obedience to the command of
God, yielded in an evil moment to the peevish=
ness and the peitishness of his own \emper,
not only did he come short of the Divine
purpose, and fail to glorify God in the sight
of His people, but He became subject to serivus
privation and peculiar loss. As the punish-
ment of his dis .bedience, he was precluded
from entering the Promised Land. Though
permitted to come to its very border, and
though, from Pisgah’s proud and lofty height,
he was allowed to cast his eye over its fair and
enchanting scenery, his feet never pressed its
sacred soil, and ere his favoured nation had
taken possession of the long-looked-for in-
heritance, his eyes were closed in death.
Nothing is more natural than to suppose that
after the toils and the strifes—the struggles
and the sufferings of an arduous and devoted
life, his heart thrilled with delight in the
prospect of the earthly Canaan, and that it
would have added much to the happiness of
his old age had he been suffered to enter the
good land, and there to have found a home
and agrave. But this was denied to Him —
R. Ferguson, LL.D,

It seems certain that this death on Pisgah,
and this sight of the Promised Land, was
designed partly to humble and partly to
gratify Moses; partly as e mortification, and
partly as au honour; partly as a punishment
and partly as a pleasure. It must have
mo: tified him somewhat to be brought to the
verge of the object of hie long ambition and
deep-felt desire, and then te have it removed
out of his sight; to say to himself, “ Not a
child in all that camp, but is more favoured
than I: never shall I cross that Jordan, or
visit those sacred spots where my fathers lived,
worshipped and died: I alone, amongst these
millions, am denied this privilege.” But, on
the other hand, while Aaron was not permitted
to behold that land, but died with the great
and terrible wilderness around him, Moses saw
its beauty, felt a breeze wafted from its balmy
air upon his dying brow, and expired while
embracing it, as it were in the arms of his
love and admiration. He saw, too, on the other
hand, his people compacted into a powertul
community, girt and armed for the contest ;
pawing like a lion ere setting their terrible feet
upon the enemies’ soil, ted by a man and
warrior after his own heart, with the tabernacle
of God in their midst, and the cloud of the
pillar hovering over them, and this sight
serves to give an additional consolation and
joy to his departing spirit. What an honour,
too, to be watched over and tended so carefully
by the Most High! Moses stripped off Aaron's
garmenta, and Kleazar assisted him; but the


Sia


whole circumstances of the scene at Pisgah
were arranged by the hand of God. He
breathed on His servant aud gave him duath—
G. Gilfillan, M.A,

(6) For an illustration on this point, see op.
881, 382. (6)

(c) Privilege as well as punishment is often
connected wiih the death of God’s people, and
He often proves how precious in His sight is
the death of His saints, by giving them in
their last moments bursts of insight and
glimpses of glory. Moses was alone on the
mount at the time, and perhaps he was the
only man, at all events the only eminent saint
of God, who on the literal Pisgah ever died.
But the path to the spiritual Pisgah is well-
worn, and many a pious soul has found it a
Mount Clear, and seen from it a little of the
“ glory of the land.” ... . Words of rapture,
of calm and sober yet profound and thrilling
joy, have come forth from the lips of the de-
parting children of God. Biography teems
with these. How the martyred reformers and
covenanters died, each of them with some
cheering Scripture word, | ke a scroll of glory,
on his lips, such as, “ Lord Jesus, receive m
spirit ;” “Come, Lord Jesus; come quickly;
“T have a desire to depart, and be with
Christ ; ” “ None but Christ; none but Christ.”
The famous Thomas Halyburton lay for weeks
on his death-bed, and it seemed to have been up-
lifted by the hands of angels nearer to heaven
as he lay upon it, and breathed out his ardent
soul in words of ecstasy. In later times we
find a Payson speaking of the “ Sun of Righ-
teousness becoming larger, brighter, and
broader to his soul as he was drawing nigh
it ;” a Hall crying, “I have a humble hope,
which I would not exchange for all worlds ; ”
the young and lovely Mrs. Shepherd, whose
interest in his salvation almost melted the
heart of Byron himself, saying, as she la
a dying, ‘‘ God’s happiness, God’s happiness,”
words which seemed to mean, “ That is the only
happiness deserving the name, and I am going
to inherit it above ;” and the great Coleridge,
who amidst many aberrations of intellect and
life died at last a meek disciple of Jesus, and
dictated on his death-bed these lines as hia
epitaph :—

“ Mercy for praise—to be forgiven for fame,

He asked and hoped through Christ—do

thou the same,”
These persons were verily in their last hours
exalted to one or other of the peaks of Pis-
gah, and received extraordinary testimonies of
the presence and favour of God.—ZJbid,

For additional illustrations on this pxint,
gee p. 420, (6)

(3) For an illustration on this point, see p
883. (¢)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


NUMBERS, CHAP, XXXVI.


AC SU SEMESTERS,


A Mopet Orprnation


SERVIOR.


(Verses 15-23.)


In this paragraph there are several
things which deserve notice.

i. The solicttude of Moses for the
sarrying on of God's work. This was
his great concern when he knew that
the time of his departure was at hand.
“Moses spake unto the Lord saying,
set the Lord, the God of the spirits,”
we. (vers. 15-17).

ii. The noble unselfishness of Moses.
He does not seek the appointment
of one of his sons as his successor.
Already the high priesthood has been
settled in the family of Aaron, and it
would have been a very natural thing
if Moses had asked that one of his sons
might succeed him in his office ; but he
leaves the appointment entirely with
the Lord.

iii. The directions of the Lord for the
ordination of the successor of Moses (vers.
18-21).

iv. The carrying out of these directions
by Moses (vers. 22, 23).

Although the ordination of Joshua
was to the office of chief magistrate,
yet we may regard it as illustrating a
Model Ordination Service tu the Chris-
tian Ministry. What an interesting
ordination service this was! With
Canaan so near, and the great leader
so soon to pass away, and the recollec-
tions of the sinful strife at Meribah
and of his sin there, which caused his
passing away at this time, so clear—
this service must have been deeply im-
pressive. What a charge Moses would
give! And how solemn would it be to
Joshuaas he pondered on the reason why
Moses was leaving them then! And
how full of instruction and warning to
the congregation !

In our day an ordination is regarded
by some as merely a thing of ecclesias-
tical etiquette ; and by others as a kind
of religious banquet, at which able men
will preach eloquent sermons, and an
intellectual and emotional feast will be
provided. Let us correct such notions

LL


by the consideration of this ordination,
the directions for which were given by
God. This ordination suggests—

I, That the person ordained should
be chosen of God for his work,

Moses asked the Lord to “set a man
over the congregation,” &c. (verses 16,
17). “And the Lord said unto Moses,
Take thee Joshua,” &c. So now the
Christian minister should be—

1, Called by God to His work, (a)

2. Appointed by God to his sphere of
work, As the Head of the Church,
Christ is deeply concerned in the selec-
tion and appointment of its ministers.
He both calls His under-shepherds, and
appoints them their spheres. The
minister himself should feel that he
holds his commission and appointment
from the Lord. Such a conviction
will be to Him an inspiration and
strength, &c.

There is one distinguishing charac-
teristic in every man whom God calls ;
they are all, like Joshua, men “in
whom is the Spirit.” They are endowed
by God with the spiritual qualifications
for the discharge of their sacred duties.
The Divine call and the Divine qualifi-
cation are invariably associated. (6)

II. That the ordination is to the
most important work.

Joshua was ordained to preside over
the Israelites and direct them in all
their affairs. “Set a man over the
congregation, which may go out before
them,” &o.

How unspeakably important are the
duties of the Christian minister! It is
his to publish the glad tidings, to in-
struct the people of his charge, to
counsel, to warn, to rebuke, to en-
courage, &c. (c)


“'Tis not a cause of small import
The pastor’s care demanas;
But what might fill an angel’s heart,
And filled a Saviour’s hands.”
— Doddridge,


518


CHAP, XXVIL





III, That the ordination should be
conducted by tried men.

Joshua was ordained by Moses alone.
But in the ordination of Timothy, Paul
was assisted by the elders of the Church
(1 Tim. iv. 14). The cases were
different. Joshua was to be chief
magistrate ; but Timothy was ordained
to a purely spiritual ministry. The
forms of government also were much
altered. Moses’s time joined on to the
days of patriarchal government ; but it
was far otherwise in Paul’s day. But,
in both cases they were proved men,
men of experience and of good reputa-
tion, holy and honoured men, So
should it ever be in ordinations to the
Christian ministry.

IV. The ordination should be ac-
companied with the imposition of
hands.

“Take thee Joshua.... and lay
thine hand upon him.” This was done
as a sign of the transference ef the
government to him, and of the con-
ference of the Holy Ghost upon him.
“ Joshua wasfull of the spirit of wisdom ;
for Moses had laid his hands upon him”
(Deut. xxxiv. 9). The imposition of
hands is a natural and impressive form
for the expression of benediction; and
seems to have been go used in all ages
(comp. Gen. xviii. 14; Matt. xix. 13,
15; Acts vi. 6; viii. 17; ix. 17; 1 Tim.
iv. 14; v. 22; 2 Tim. i. 6. (d)

V. That the ordination should in-
clude a charge to the ordained.

“Give him a charge.” The duties
and responsibilities of the office should
be laid before those who are being set
apart to it ; and the experience of godly
and approved men should be made
available for the direction of the inex-
perienced. What wise and inspiring
things Moses would say to Joshua in
this charge !| What sage counsels drawn
from his ripe experience, &c. ! Nothing
is more natural and becoming than to
give a charge to any one entering upon
new and solemn relationships and
duties, The parent gives acharge to his
son a8 he goes forth from home to the
battle and burden of life, &. The
Micah has been in many a battle


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; NUMBERS.





is well able tu counsel the recent recruit,
who is about to gird on the armour for
the first time.

VI. That the ordination should be
conducted in the presence of the
people.

“Set him before Eleazar the priest,
and before all the congregation, and
give him a charge in their sight.” The
Christian minister should be ordained
in the presence of the congregation,
because the office to which he is being
set apart is one mvolving mutual
obligations, Moreover, such an ar-
rangement—

1. Zs more impressive to the person
being ordained. There present with
him are the immortal souls for whom
he has to live and labour.

2. Tends to influence the people
beneficially. As they hear of the im-
portant duties and solemn responsi-
bilities of their minister, they should
be awakened to deeper solicitude and
more earnest prayer on his behalf,
and to heartier co-operation with
him. (e)

VII. The ordination should confer
honour upon the person ordained,

“Thou shalt put some of thine
honour upon him, that all the con-
gregation of the children of Israel may
be obedient ” (comp, Deut. xxxiv. 9).

To serve God in the ministry of re-
demptive truth is a great honour, even
to the holiest and ablest of men—to
be an “ambassador for Christ,” &c. (f)
But in addition to this, when a
number of experienced and honoured
ministers, who know the person they
are about to “lay hands on,” unite to
ordain him “ before all the congrega-
tion,” by that act they declare that
they, knowing him, regard him as a fit
and proper person for the holy office
of the Christian minister ; and so they
put of their honour upon him, that the
people of his charge may have ampler
ground for respecting and trusting
him. For this reason, those who take
the chief duties in an ordination ser-
vice should be personally acquainted
with him whom they ordain.

VIII. That a person go chosen of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP, XXVII.


ee


fod, should seek special direction from
Him, and seeking, shall obtain it.
‘And he shall stand before Eleazar
the priest,” &o. (ver. 21). The general
principle here suggested we take to be
this,—that every man who is called of
God to special responsibilities, should
seek and shall obtain special help to fit
him for those responsibilities, That
such was the case with the Apostles,


1. Asa warning against self-sufficiency.
The great Apostle of the Gentiles writes,
“* Not that we are sufficient of ourselves
to think anything as of ourselves,” &c.
(2 Cor. iii. 5,6). Again he asks, “Who
is sufficient for these things %”

2. Asa source of encouragement and
strength. We have access to the infinite
resources of the Most High God. “If
any man lack wisdom, let him ask of


we see from Matt. xxviii, 18-20; John God,” &o. “Our sufficiency is of God,"
xiv. 26; and xvi. 12,13. Thisshould &c. (g).
serve—

ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) For illustrations on this point, see pp.
23 (2), 60 (c), and 326 (a).

(6) For illustrations on ministerial qualifi-
cations, see pp. 328, 329,

(c) For illustrations on this point, see p. 62
(a) and (3).

(d) The laying-on of hands had been, from
the time when Moses was directed to lay hands
upon Joshua, the regular recognized manner
of appointing to an office in the Church of
God; and it was just adopted by the Christian
Church from having prevailed by God’s own
command in the Jewish, It is of course a sig-
nificant appointment; an appointment signi-
fying the delegation of authority to do that
which the person appointing is empowered
thus to appoint another to perform. Further
than that we cannot say respecting it. It is
accompanied always with prayer: and the
laying-on of hands would probably be con-
sidered to denote that that which was applied
for in the prayer was granted to the prayer
and conveyed to the person appointed. That
would seem to be the explanation of the ges-
ture in thus appointing, in the simplicity of the
primitive Church.—H. Alford, D.D.

(¢) It is a popular error to suppose that a
gig can go on one wheel. The minister must
have the co-operation of his hearers. They
must be workers together. The minister can-
not beg, and organize, and visit, and preach,
and preside—get up bazaars, estublish societies,
collect for chapel debts, tell anecdotes at sew-
ing meetings, and reconcile all the differences
which arise between two-and-ninepence and
half-a-crown. He is called to preach the Gos-
pel—work enough for the strong: st powers!
Let bim be encouraged and honoured in his
holy vocation.—Joseph Parker, D,D.


(f) Let those who sustain the character of
Christian ministers, think what a Master they
serve, and in how great a work they are en-
gaged! How little all the titles which the
princes of this world can give must appear,
when compared with that of the ministers ot
Jesus, and a servant of God, in the salvation
of souls! How low the employments of se-
cular life are, even those in which the nobles
and kings of the earth are engaged, in com-
parison with theirs!—Philip Doddridge, D.D.

(g) Brothers! “ our sufficiency is of God.”
Let us betake ourselves to the “throne of the
heavenly grace,” for our strength must be
maintained by prayer. The suppliant leaves the
altar clothed with power; the breath of his own
prayer is returned into his spirit as an inspira-
tion from heaven. ‘The hope of the ministry
isin Prayer. To the devout mind, the sacred
page is lighted with unearthly splendour ; on
the prayerful intellect, the noblest thoughis
alight in their descent from the Eternal In-
telligence ; on the contrite heart, God be-
stows the most enriching bliss. Minister of
Ohrist ! wouldst thou study profitably ? Pray
much. Wouldst thou preach with soul-arous-
ing energy? Pray mucu. Wouldst thou
edify the believer, reclaim the wanderer,
abasb the blasphemer, and thrill the indif-
ferent ? PRAY MUCH. “ Them that honour
Me [ will honour,” ‘The pulpit of the prayer-
ful minister will be the scene of most brilliant
conguest,—from it will stream the banner of
glorious triumph ; and instead of appropriating
the honour to himself, the minister will ex-
claim, “I can do all things through Christ
aoe strengtheneth me.”—Joseph Parker


CHAP. XXVIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





“Tan Gop or roe SPirits oF ALL Fiesa.”®


(Verse 16.)


“The God of the spirits of all flesh.”

Various ways in which we become
impressed by Scripture with a sense of
the value of the soul—histories of
Scripture — promises of Scripture—
great transactions of Scripture—Re-
demption. Now let us learn the same
lesson by contemplating the powers of
the soul itself, especially in its connec-
tion with God. :

Our text brings God and man to-
gether—spirits and the God of spirits.

I. The affecting view here furnished
of the agency and dominion of God
in connection with the human mind.

It is affecting. The power of other
agents extends chiefly to the body.
The oppressor holds the body bound ;
but knows not what a range the spirit
takes unconscious of a chain.

1. God imparts the powers of the
spirit. We have nothing self-derived.
“ Thou hast granted me life and favour,
and Thy visitation hath preserved my
spirit.” But what is spirit? Of its
essence we know nothing—only its pro-
perties. We know only the properties
and attributes of matter,—hard, soft ;
hot, cold; wet, dry; resistance, &o.


So of the spirit—by its properties,
powers, affections. I see that God has
made it like Himself—a being of intel-
lectual order; capable of knowledge,
wisdom, devotion ; and, like its Author,
capable of communicating its own hap-
piness and impressions ; and especially,
like its Author, capable of purity.

2. He. claims the affections of the
spirit.

3. He heals the disorders and sympa-
thises with the sorrows of the spirit.

4. He alone can constitute the happi-
ness of the spirit.

5. He will decide upon the future des-
tiny of the spirit. :

II, The moral uses of these con-
templations,

1. Let them teach you reverence for
the human mind.

2. Let them impress you with thoughts
of the vast importance of personal reli-
gion.

3. Let tt inspire you with practical
efforts to benefit and bless society. By
education—by missions, &c.

4. Let wt kindle hope for the prospects
of the human race.—Samuel Thodey.


CHAPTER XXVIIL


CritioaL AND ExpnianatTory Nores.


In this and the next chapter the
laws for the ordering of the worship of
the people in their sacrifices and on
their great festivals, most of which had
been given already, are completed and
prevented in regular order. During the
wanderings in the wilderness the
Israelites could not have carried out
fully so elaborate a system of cere-
monial worship. And now, with their
settlement in Canaan so near, the
whole law for their sacrificial worship
is appropriately promulgated,


Verses 3-8 (comp. Exod. xxix. 38, 42).
Verse7. Strong wine. Taw = strong


drink. It is perhaps used here fer
= wine.

Verses 9,10, The Sabbath-offering,
now first commanded,

Verses 11-15. The offering at the
new moons, also now first commanded.
The observance of the new moon had
been enjoined before (chap. x. 10) ; but
now the offerings are specified for the
first time.


F is another homiletic sketch and illustrations on this text ace pp. 802-805,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XXVIII.


ee


Verses 16-25 (comp. Exod. xif. 3-
28 ; xiii. 3-10; Lev. xxiii. 4-8; chap.
ix. 1-5 ; and see pp. 139-148),

Verses 26-31 (comp. Lev. xxiii, 15-
22; Deut. xvi. 9-12).

Most of the Homiletic topics sug-
gested by this chapter have already
been dealt with in “ The Preacher's


Tos Mornin@ aNnpD


Comm.” ; some of them in the work on
Exodus, and others in our own work on
this book. On the significance of the
different kinds of offerings, see pp. 98,
99, 115, 116; on the Passover, see pp.
139-143; and on the relations and
proportions between different kinds of
offerings, see pp. 271-279,


Evenine Sacririczs,


(Verses 1-8.)


These directions for the daily wor-
ship of the Israelites suggest —

I. Our daily need of consecration
to God.

This is suggested by the burnt
offering, which was designed to express
the entire devotion of the offerer himself
to the Lord.

1. This personal consecration was
claimed by God. “ My offering, and
My bread for My sacrifices made by
fire, for a sweet savour unto Me, shall
ye observe to offer unto Me in their due
season.”

2. This personal consecration was
made by man. By offering the con-
tinual burnt offering, the Israelites
symbolically expressed the surreader
of themselves to the service of God.
Keil and Del. : “In the daily burnt
offering the congregation of Israel, as
a congregation of Jehovah, was to
sanctify its life, body, soul, and spirit,
to the Lord its God.” Every morning
we need to devote ourselves afresh to
God, to seek His accepting and sanctify-
ing grace, &c. “I beseech you there-
fore brethren by the mercies of God,”
&c. (Rom. xii. 1).

II. Our daily need of atonement
with God.

The burnt offering sometimes ex-
pressed the idea of expiation as well as
consecration. Thus Dr. Outram ob-
serves: “ As burnt offerings are said in
the Scriptures to ‘make atonement’
(Lev. i. 4; xiv. 20, 31) for those by
whom they were offered, hence the
Jews consider this class of victims as
expiating certain kinds of sins.” In the


“continual burnt offering” “the idea
of expiation was subordinate to that of
consecrating surrender to the Lord,”
but it was present in the offering, and
it suggests our continual need of the
atoning efficacy of our Saviour’s. blood.
As our daily imperfections and sins
tend to produce estrangement from God,
80 we daily need the reconciling in-
fluences of the sacrifice of Jesus Christ.
(a

a in Our daily need of prayer to

od.

“Of the daily burnt offerings Abar-
binel says: ‘The daily burnt offerings
were intended as a species of solemn
supplications presented to God, that
He would be pleased to remember His
mercy towards Israel morning and
evening, that He would increase their
corn, and wine, and oil: as is evident
from the meat offering and drink
offering which were to accompany
them.” .... After the Jews were
deprived of the opportunity of sacrific-
ing, the Sanhedrim decreed, that in-
stead of the stated sacrifices they should
offer stated prayers; evidently con-
sidering the design of sacrifices and
prayers as one and the same.”-— Outram.

Our daily necessities should lead to
our daily prayers. Here are some of
our daily needs—

1. Forgiveness of sin. Sins of omission
or commission, sins secret or open,
mark our daily life; and cause us to
need daily forgiveness. (0)

2. “Grace to help.” Daily we need
direction in difficulties and perplexities,
and strength in our ae 4 3 both


®


cnaP. xxvii 4 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


a


bodily and spiritual supplies are a
constant necessity with us. (c)

3. Protection from dangers both to
body and to soul. There are bodily
perils visible and invisible, from acci-
dent and disease, &c. There are
spiritual perils from corrupt social
influences, from spiritual adversaries,
&c. Hence our need of Divine guardian-
ship. (d)

4. Renewal of spiritual strength. As


in the body there are daily waste and
exhaustion which have to be repaired
by food and rest; so have we need
daily of that spiritual renewal which is
obtained by the exercise of prayer and
other means of grace. “They that
wait upon the Lord shall renew their
strength,” &e.

Let us every day offer to God our
morning and evening sacrifice of prayer
and praise. (¢)


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) See an illustration on this point, by Dr.
Parker, on p. 356.

(6) For an illustration on this point, see p.
338 (c).

(c) For an illustration on this point, see p.
409 (6).

(d) It is a blessed state of heart to wait up-
on God continually in the spirit of humble,
fervent, believing prayer. Satan well knows
the value of such a spirit, and therefore tries
hard to prevent its exercise. He labours to
extinguish this sacred fire, kindled in the soul
by the Holy Ghost. He endeavours to disturb
the mind, to ride upon the wings of the imagi-
nation, and to fill the soul with an endless
succession of fleeting images : this daily irrupe
tion of the enemy constitutes no smull part of
the Christian warfare.— Gleanings. ;

(e) This morning and evening sacrifice
should direct us how and when to worship
God ; we must remember Him in the morning
and in the evening; He must be in our
thoughts first and last; we must begin the
day and end the day with Him. Let Him be
in our first meditations, when we awake out of
sleep If the heart and thoughts be well
settled in the morning, they are like to
be better ordered and disposed all the
day after. This made the prophet say,
i My voice shalt Thou hear in the morn-
ing,” &c. (Psa. v. 8; and xxii. 2; lv. 17;
exix. 55, 62, 164; Dan. vi. 10). Then are
the faculties of the soul most fresh and cheer-
ful, then are the senses comforted and ree


freshed, because of the night’s rest, and there-


fore best able to perform any duty to God or
man. Again, the morning is a time wherein
the world, and the business of this life, have
not yet forestalled and possessed our hearts
and «affections, and therefore we are then the
most fit to perform any special or spiritual
duty required of us. Lastly, it is the first
part of the day, #1d therefore the most worthy
to be consecrated to God, after we have newly
tasted His great mercy in the night past, which
He might have made everlasting darkness un-
to us, and never raised us up again. More-
over, as the greatest part neglect this time, so
do they also at evening; they forget what
blessings they have received, what dangers
they have escaped, what temptations they have
resisted, what wants they have obtained, what
decays they have supplied and repaired, for
which they should give Him thanks; and,
lastly, what sins they have committed for
which He might justly destroy them. They
remember not to cast themselves upon His
protection; they consider not that He might
make their bed their grave, and never brins
them to see the light and the sun again.— Wr.
Attersoll,

They know little of their own wants and
emptiness, who are not much in prayer; and
they know little of the greatness and goodness
of God, who are not much in praise. The
humble Christian hath a heart, in some measure
framed to both, He hath within him the
best schoolmaster, who teaches him how to

ray, and how to praise, and makes him dee


ight in the exercise of them both.— Gleanings.


Tos OFfFfERINGs oF THE SaBBaTH AND oF THE New Moons; OR SEASONS OF
Sprxciat Reuicious OBsERVANOR,


(Verses 9-15.)


In addition to the two lambs, which
were to be offered daily for “a continual
burnt offering,” on the Sabbath-day
two lamba, with their meat offering and

518


their drink offering, were to be offered
as “the burnt offering of every Sabbath.”
And at the beginning of every month
two young buliocks, one ram, and seven


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,  onap. xxvin.
—_—


lambs, with their meat offerings and
drink offerings, were to be sacrificed as
a burnt offering, and one kid of the
goats for a sin offering, beside the con-
tinual burnt offering.

Moreover, during the Sabbath all

temporal and bodily labours were sus-
pended. And at the new moon they
rested from their secular occupations
(Amos viii. 5, 6) ; they feasted (1 Sam.
xx. 5); they blew the trumpets (chap,
x. 10) ; and heard from the prophets the
word of God (2 Kings iv. 23).
‘ What was the reason of these observ-
ances? Why were they instituted ?
We suggest, because that in addition
to the ordinary daily discharge of
religious duties, man needs seasons more
especially for religious exercises and oc-
cupations. (a) This need will appear
if we consider—

I. The tendency of material and
temporal things to engross our atten-
tion and regard.

The things of this life and of this
world,—present, visible, and tangible—
very generally receive much more than
their meed of thought and concern and
effort. The temptation to worldliness
is perhaps more continuous and more
subtle than to any other evil. Hence
we need seasons which call our mind
and heart to spiritual and eternal
things. (bd)

Ii. The supreme importance of
spiritual things,

Our Lord taught that the soul of man
is of more value to him than the whole
world. What is a man profited if he
gain?” &c, (Matt. xvi. 26), The immense
worth of the soul may be gathered from
its nature, its capacities and powers,
and its duration. If it be engrossed in
worldly things it is degraded, and will
be ruined, lost. It needs to be occupied
in the pursuit of truth, holiness, love,
beneficence, for in this pursuit it finds
its true development and blessedness,
And these high things are the real, the
permanent, and the priceless things.


Hence the importance of those seasons
which call the mind and heart to the
contemplation and cultivation of these
things.

III. That spiritual engagements
and exercises are indispensable to the
healthy existence and activity of the
spiritual in man.

In human nature, until it is renewed
by the Holy Spirit, the spiritual ele-
ments are not vital and vigorous.
“That which is born of the flesh is
flesh,” &o, “The law is spiritual, but
Iam carnal.” Even after a man “is
born of the Spirit,” he must exercise
his spiritual powers, must “ walk in
the spirit,” or their vitality will decline.
Activity is an essential condition of
spiritual health and progress. The
spiritual life needs culture, training,
and action. For these reasons we
argue the importance of special times
and seasons for religious engagements
and exercises,

Many of these seasons of special reli-
gious observance have passed away, the
end for which they were instituted hav-
ing been accomplished. But the Lord’s
day, the successor in a certain sense of
the Jewish Sabbath, with its duties and
privileges, remains as a priceless boon
to mankind. Never were its physical
rest and its spiritual associations and
occupations more needed than in this
age. Let us prize the day; let us use
it wisely and well. “ Every day,” says
Trapp, ‘should be a Sabbath to the
saints, in regard of ceasing to do evil,
Jearning to do well ; but on the seventh-
day-Sabbath our devotions should be
doubled. The whole Sabbath should
be spent in God’s service. Psalm xcii.,
titled, ‘A Psalm for the Sabbath,’
mentions morning and evening per-
formances (verse 2). Variety of duties
may very well take up the whole day
with delights. Besides, God gives us
six whole days. Now, to sell by one
measure and buy by another, is the
way toa curse.” (¢)


519


CHAP, XXVIIL,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





ILLUSTRATIONS.


(@) A man who does not pray usually, is
but a hypocrite when he pretends to pray es-
pecially. Who would care to live in a miser’s
house who starved you all the year round, ex-
cept that now and then on a feast day he fed
you daintily ? We must not be miserly in
prayer, neglecting itregularly, and only abound-
ing in it on particular occasions, when ostenta-
tion rather than sincerity may influence us.
But even he who keeps a bounteous table,
sometimes spreads a more luxurious feast than
at other times; and even so must we, if
we habitually live near to God, select our ex-
traordinary seasons in which the soul shall
have her fill of fellowship.—C. H. Spurgeon.


(6) The world is too much with us; late and


soon,
Getting and spending, we lay waste our
powers ;
Little we see in nature that is ours ;
We have given our hearts away, a sordid boon!


This sea that bares her bosom to the moon,
The winds that will be howling at all hours
And are up-gathered now like sleeping

flowers—

For this, for everything, we are out of tune;


It moves us not. Great God! I’d rather be
A pagan suckled in a creed outworn,
So might I, standing on this pleasant lea,
Have glimpses that would make me less
forlorn;


Have sight of Proteus rising from the sea 5
Or hear old Triton blow his wreathéd horn,


— William Wordsworth,


For another illustration on this topic, see p.
426 (c).

(c) I certainly do feel by experience the
eternal obligation, because of the eternal ne-
cessity, of the Sabbath. The soul withers with-
out it; it thrives in proportion to the fidelity
of its observance. Nay, I even believe the
stern rigour of the Puritan Sabbath had a grand
effect upon the soul. Fancy a man thrown in
upon himself, with no permitted music, nor
relaxation, nor literature, nor secular conver-
sation—nothing but his Bible, his own soul,
and God's silence! What hearts of iron this
system must have made. How different from
our stuffed-arm-chair religion and “ gospel of
comfort”! as if to be made comfortable were
the great end of religion. I am persuaded,
however, that the Sabbath must rest not on an
enactment, but on the necessities of human
nature. It is necessary, not because it is com-
manded ; but it is commanded because it is
necessary. If the Bible says, “ Eat the herb
of the field,” self-sustenance does not become
a duty in consequence of the enactment, but
the enactment is only a statement of the law
of human natnre. And so with the Sabbath,
—F. W. Robertson, M.A., “ Life and Letters.”

On pp 285, 286, will be found other ex-
tracts illustrative of this topic.


Tue First SacRaMENT OF THE YEAR,


(Verse 11.)


“And in the beginnings of your
months ye shall offer a burnt offering
unto the Lord.”

It is always advantageous to look
back upon the Gospel of the Old
Testament, as well as upon the Gospel
of the New. Good to light our torch
at their fire ; good amidst the meridian
effulgence of the Gospel to look back
upon the early twilight of the Law—
since all tends to heighten our sense of
present privilege and of present obli-
gation. Our text enables us to do this,

We may well apply the language of
our text tothe first Sacrament of the year,

I, That approach to God through
a sacrifice of His own appointing has
always been the privilege of His
devoted people,

520


Four of these sacrifices are here de-
scribed ; daily (vers. 3-8); weekly
(vers. 9, 10); monthly (vers. 11-15);
yearly at Passover (vers. 16-25). and
at Pentecost (vers. 26-31). Concern-
ing each observe—

1. The authority by which tt was
prescribed. ‘‘Command the children of
Israel” (ver. 2). It was not left to
option. This is His commandment,
Nothing was to be done on Moses’s
authority: everything was in God's
name. So of Christ. “ Whom God hath
set forth,” &c. (Rom. iii. 25). ‘ Him
hath God exalted,” &c. (Acts v. 31).
Whatever is done in God’s service must
be done by His direction; for God's
Church and instituted religion are more
precious than all the world beside.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.  omapP. xxvii.





2. The peculiar interest which God
took in them. ‘“ My offering, My bread
for My sacrifices,a sweet savour unto
Mfe.” The wine was to be “poured
unt» the Lord.” God sets a high value
upon all the means and offices which
bring the suul near to Himself; and
we should do so too.

3. The typical end and design of all
was by these various means to prepare
for the coming of Christ, and to con-
duct the soul to Him.

“The precious blood of Christ” —
precious in the sight of God for its in-
finite value ; precious to the conscience
of the convinced sinner for its purify-
ing virtue; precious to the accepted
believer for its blessings; precious to
all around the throne, who are there
alone through its virtue.

if. That there are some seasons in
which the mind is aroused to a special
contemplation of the great atonement.

“The beginnings of your months.”
We may fitly apply this to the beginning
of the year. God marks the flight of
time. “God requireth that which is
past.” And it quite accords with our
feeling that the Sabbaths of the year
should commence with a service ex-
pressly directing us to the Cross of
Christ.

1. Look back upon the sins and short-
comings of the year past; and let this
be a motive to a more full and direct
application “to the blood of sprinkling.”
‘“‘ Tn those sacrifices there is a remem-


brance again of sins every year.” Look
upon the sins of your holy duties, of
your religious acts, of your sacramental
services. It was not in vain that the
sacrifice was doubled on the Sabbath.

2. Look forward to the duties, trials,
and enjoyments of the coming year ; and
then see the influence of pardon and
acceptance, softening the one, and
heightening the other.

III. That in all our religious en-
gagements we must have an immedi-
ate respect to the presence and glory
of Him whom we approach.

“‘ Ye shall offer a burnt-offering unto
the Lord.” We have something to do
with man; but everything to do with
God. “All things are naked and
opened unto the eyes of Him with
whom we have to do.” Think of
this—

1. To give solemnity to your spirit.
“God is greatly to be feared,” &c. (Psa.
Ixxxix. 7). “Put off thy shoes,” &c.
(Exod. iii. 5).

2. To give confidence to your faith
“ Let us draw near in full assurance of
faith” (Heb. x. 22). “Let him ask
in faith, nothing wavering ” (James i. 6).

3. To give earnestness and simplicity
to your prayers.

IV. That we are looking forward
to a world in which no repetition of
these sacrifices and no renewal of
these instructions will be required.


‘ : Samuel Thodey.


Tus OFFEeRiIncs oF THE Feast ov PASSOVER.


(Verses 16-25.)


The institution and observation of
the Passover have received full consider-
ation in “The Hom. Comm.” on Exod.
xii. and xiii. 1-10. The subject has
iso been briefly treated on pp. 139-143


of: this work. It does not seem
desirable to take up the subject again,
On the significance of the various offer-
ings, see pp. 98, 99, 115, 116,


CHAP. XXVIIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


ap ee ee
Toe Feast ov Penrgcost; on, Man’s CeLesraTion op THe GoopNESS
oF Gop In Harvsst.


(Verses 26-31.)


This festival was called “the feast
of harvest” (Exod. xxiii. 16), ‘‘ the
feast of weeks” (Deut. xvi. 10), and
the feast of Pentecost, because it was
observed fifty days after the Passover
(Lev. xxiii, 11, 15, 16). The most
important passages of Scripture relating
to it, in addition to the text, are Lev.
xxiii. 15-22, and Deut. xvi. 9-12.

Jewish writers in modern times
generally regard this festival as the
commemoration of the giving of the
Law on Mount Sinai; but we do not
find this taught in the Scriptures.
Moreover, we shall not attempt hee to
indicate all the homiletic suggestions of
this feast, but simply those connected
with our subject, Man’s celebration of
the goodness of God in harvest.

I. The goodness of God to man calls
for religious celebration from man.

By Divine command one day is here
set apart for joyful acknowledgment of
the goodness of God in the grain-
harvest. The celebration was to be
marked by—

1. Rest from worldly labours. “Ye
shall do no servile work ” (comp. Exod,
xii. 16).

2. Assembling for religious service.
“Ye shall have an holy convocation.”
In the days of the Apostles, as we learn
from Acts ii, 1, 5-11, many Jews came
from foreign countries to celebrate this
feast.

3. Rejoicing in the blessing of God upon
their labours. ‘The Lord thy God hath
blessed thee: and thou shalt rejoice
before the Lord thy God” (Deut. xvi.
10, 11). It was a joyous occasion.
‘They joy before thee according to the
joy in harvest.” Joyous worship honours
God, and is acceptable to Him. God’s
goodness to us should be gratefully
and gladly celebrated by us. (a)


*@O bless the Lord, my soul,
Nor let His mercies lie
Forgotten in unthankfulness,
' a without praises die,"— Watts,
2


II, Thegoodness of God to man calls
for confession of man’s sin to God.

At this harvest festival a sin offering
was to be made to God. “One kid of
the goats, to make an atonement for
you.” But now that Jesus Christ hath
made “ His soul an offering for sin,”
we have no need to bring a ‘‘kid to
make an atonement.” Yet the principles
involved in the offering remain.

1, God’s goodness should deepen our
impression of our sin. It should remind
us of our unworthiness, and ill-desert.
“The goodness of God leadeth thee to
repentance,”

2. The deeper impression of caw sin
should lead us to exercise increased faith
tn the Great Sacrifice for sin. “If the
blood of bulls and of goats,” &. (Heb.
ix. 13, 14). (6)

III. The goodness of God to man
calls for the thanksgiving of man to
God.

Pentecost was a festival of thanks
for the harvest. Such a festival in-
volved—

1, Acknowledgment of dependence upon
God. It is He who giveth “us rain
from heaven, and fruitful seasons, fill-
ing our hearts with food and glad-
ness.” (c)

2. Expression of gratitude to God.
The “ new meat-offering unto the
Lord” (verse 26), the two wave loaves
of leavened bread of fine flour (Lev.
xxiii. 17), and the “two sheep of a year
old for a sacrifice of peace-offerings”
(Lev. xxiii, 19), were all designed to
express the thankful homage of the
people to God. The blessings of God
to us should lead us heartily to enquire,
“ What shall I render unto the Lord
for all His benefits toward me?” (d)

IV. The goodness of God to man
calls for the consecration of man to
God.

“Ye shall offer the burnt-offering
for a sweet savour unto the Lord; two
young bullocks,” &c. (verses 27-29, 31),


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





The principal meaning of the burnt-
offering was the self-dedication of the
offerer. Two observations are sug-
gested—

1. Man’s consecration to God should
be complete. The burnt-offering was
completely consumed on the altar to
the honour of God. So man should
dedicate himself unreservedly to God.
And the blessings bestowed by God on
man should impel him todoso. “I
beseech you, therefore, brethren, by
the mercies of God,” &c. (Rom. xii.
1. ()


2. Man’s complete consecration to God


CHAP. XXIX,


$s acceptable to Him. ‘Ye shall offer
the burnt offering for a sweet savour
unto the Lord” (see pp. 272, 273).

V. The goodness of God to man
calls for goodness from man to his
fellowman.

At the harvest festival God calted
man to liberality and hospitality; to
show kindness to the poor, the stranger,
the fatherless, and the widow (Lev.
xxiii. 22; Deut. xvi. 11). The kind-
ness of God to us should constrain us
to show kindness to each other, espe-
‘cially to the poor, &, “ Freely ye have
received, freely give.” (Jf)


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) Anextract illustrative of this point will
be found on p. 118 (c).

(6) For illustrations on this point, see pp.
356, 359.

(ec) This topic is illustrated on p. 276 (6)
and (¢)


(d) And this topic is illustrated on p.276 (a).

(e) Self-consecration is illustrated on pp.
93 (a) and (6), 101 (4) and (c), 117 (6), and
344


(c).
(f) Illustrations on this point appear on
pp. 117 (a), and 343 (@) and (6).


CHAPTER XXIX.


CriticaL AND Expianatory Norzs,


In this charter we have directions
concerning three great annual religious
oceasiv: 3, the Feast of Trumpets, the
Day of Atonement, and the Feast of
Tabernacles. Hach of these had been
previously instituted; and the chief
reason of their mention here is for the
enumeration of the sacrifices to be
offered upon each occasion. ‘The chief
tre:.tment of the topics which these
occasions suggest will be found in other
volumes of The Preacher's Commentary,
chiefly in that upon Zeviticus. And as
we have already explained the moral
significance of the different kinds of
sacrifice (see pp. 98, 99, 115, 116), and


Tas Feast ov TRUMPETS:


considered the relations and proportions
between them (see pp. 271-279), the
chapter only requires brief treatment
from us.

Vers. 1-6. The Feast of Trumpets
and its offerings (comp. Lev. xxiii. 24,
25; chap. x. 1-10; and see pp. 156-160).

Vers. 7-11. The great Day of Atone-
ment and its offerings (comp. Lev.
XVi. ; Xxiii. 26 32).

Vers. 12-40. The Feast of Taber.
nacles and its offerings (comp. Ixod,
xxiii. 16,—“the Feast of Ingathering;”
Lev. xxiii. 34-36, 3943; Deut. xvi,
13-15; xxxi. 10-13).


How to Becin a New Yaar.


( Verses 1-6.)


The Feast of Trumpets is “ the feast
of the new moon, which fell on the first
of Tizri. It differed from the ordinary


festivals of the new moon in several

important particulars. It was one of

the seven days of Holy Convocation.
523


CHAP. XXIX.


Instead of the mere blowing of the
trumpets of the Temple at the time of
the offering of the sacrifices, it was ‘a
day of blowing of trumpets.’ In
addition to the daily sacrifices and the
eleven victims offered on the first of
every month, there were offered a
young bullock, a ram, and seven lambs
of the first year, with the accustomed
meat offerings, and a kid for a sin offer-
ing. The regular monthly offering was
thus repeated, with the exception of
one young bullock.” Let us notice—

i. The time of the celebration. ‘And
in the seventh month, on the first day
of the month.” The seventh month
was called by the Jews in later times
Tizri, but in the Old Testament
Ethanim (1 Kings viii. 2), Tradition
unanimously affirms it to have been the
first month of the civil year. Religious
selebrations were more numerous in
this month than in any of the others.
“Tt formed,” says Scott, “‘a kind of
vacation between the harvest and the
ensuing seed-time ; and thesesolemnities
during that season might intimate, that
the ordinances of God are the rational
refreshment from the fatigue of business ;
and that religion does not at all
interfere with our true interest even
in this world.” (a)

ii. The meaning of the celebration.
“There seems to be no sufficient reason
to call in question the common opinion
of Jews and Christians, that it was the
festival of the New Year’s Day of the
civil year, the first of Tizri, the month
which commenced the Sabbatical year,
and the year of Jubilee.”— Bibl. Dict.

Taking this view of its meaning, we
regard the paragraph before us as
illustrating the manner in which we
should begin a New Year.

I, Withspecial attention to religious
duties and privileges.

This day was to be marked by rest
from ordinary labours, and by a
religious assembly, ‘ Yeshall have an
holy convocation ; ye shall do no servile
work; it is a day of blowing the trum-
pets unto you.” Additional sacrifices
were to be offered on this day. ‘Ye
shall a a burnt offering for a sweet

52





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


i


savour unto the Lord,” &o. (vers. 2-5).
And thee were to be in addition te
“the burnt offering of the month,” &c.
(ver. 6). It is eminently appropriate
to enter upon a new year with religious
meditation, and by offering to God the
sacrifices of praise and prayer and of
beneficence to man. ‘Ihe assembling
in “holy convocation” also is as
becoming in us, and as helpful to us,
as it was to the Israelites. (6)

II. With humble confession of sin
and prayer for pardon.

The Israelites were to offer “one kid
of the goats for a sin offering, to make
an atonement for them” (ver. 5). See
p. 115. And in entering upon a new
year it is wise to seriously review our
past lives, to mark where we have
rebelled against the holy will of God,
how often and sadly we have failed in
our duty, &c.; to humbly acknowledge
uur sin unto God ; and to seek forgive-
ness from Him through our Great Sin-
Offering. In this way we should
commence the year with our sins
forgiven and our souls cleansed by the
blood of Christ. (¢)

III. With grateful acknowledg-
ment of the Divine mercies.

The Israelites were commanded to
offer a “ meat-offering of flour mingled
with oil,” d&c. (vers. 3, 4). The meat-
offerings, like the peace-offerings, were
eucharistic (see pp. 99, 116). How
appropriate is it for us at the very
beginning of the year to review the
mercies of the past! Think of God’s
mercy in sparing our sinful lives ; in
forgiving our many aggravated offences ;
in sustaining us by the constant exercise
of His power; in enriching us with
countless gifts of His grace, &c. Let
us reflect upon His mercy in all this
until our heart grows warm with holy
fire; and then let us pour out unto
Him the offerings of our fervent grati-
tude. We are not fit to enter upon
any year until we have heartily and
devoutly blessed God for His great
kindness to us in the past. (d)

IV. With complete consecration of
ourselves to God.

“Ye shal) offer a burnt offering for


ROMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XXIX.


eee


a sweet savour unto the Lord,” &o
(ver. 2). See pp. 98, 115, 116. An
extra burnt offering was required from
the Israelites, at the Feast of Trumpets,
May we not infer from this that, at the
commencement of the year, there are
special reasons why we should conse-
crate ourselves to God, or renew such
consecration, if it has already been
made? We suggest as such reasons—

1. “The multitude of His mercies”
to us. We have said that they should
be reviewed at this time; and the re-
view should lead to our self-consecration
to Him, “I beseech you, therefore,
brethren, by the mercies of God,” &e.


e

2. The abridgment of our opportunt-
ties. The past years have borne away
with them many opportunities of use-
fulness, &c. ‘“ Much of our time has
run to waste.” We ought to have


devoted ourselves to God long ago.
“ Knowing the time, that now it is
high time to awake out of sleep.” (f)

3. The uncertainty of the future. How
many who commenced last year well
and strong in body, were called away
by death before its close !


“ To-morrow, Lord, is Thine,
Lodged in Thy sovereign hand;
And if its sun arise and shine,
It shines by Thy command.”
—Doddridge.


“Behold, now is the accepted time;
behold, now is the day of salvation.”

Concuusion.

i. Let the people of God begin the year
by renewed and more fervent devotion to
Him.

ii. Let those who have not hitherto given
themselves to Him do so at once, com-
pletely, and for ever,


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) The times of the festivals were evi-
dently ordained in wisdom, so as to interfere
as little as possible with the industry of the
people. The Passover was held just before
the work of harvest commenced, Pentecost at
the conclusion of corn-harvest and before vin-
tage, the Feast of Tabernacles after all the
fruits of the ground were gathered in. In
winter, when travelling was difficult, there
were no festivals.—S. Clark, M.A., in Bibl.
Dict.

(6) We stand in the first Sabbath of the
xew year. It is a time for review and con.
templation. He is a genius at stupidity who
does not think now. The old year died in
giving birth to this: as the life of Jane Sey-
mour, the English Queen, departed when that
of her son, Edward VI., dawned. The old
year was a queen, thisisaking. The grave
uf the one and the cradle of the other are side
‘ay side.—T. De Witt Talmage, DD.

(c) For illustrations on this point, see pp.
856, 359. ;

(d) In the dew drops that top every spike
af grass, sow the sward with orient pear], and
nang like pendant diamonds, sparkling in the
gun from all the leaves of the frost, you see
the multitude of His mercies. He crowns the
year with His bounty. We have seen other
streams dried up by the heat of summer, and
frozen by the co!d of winter—that of His
mercies never. It has flowed on; day by day,
night by night, ever flowing ; and largely fed
of heavenly showers, sometimes overflowing
all its banks, To this, and that other one, has


the past brought afflictions ? Still, may I not
ask, how few our miseries to the number of
our mercies ; how far have our blessings ex-
ceeded our afflictions; our nights of sleep,
those of wakefulness; our many gains, the
few losses we have suffered ? For every blow,
how many blessings? and even when He
smote with one hand, did not a gracious God
hold up with the other? Who has not to
sing of mercy as well as judgment; aye, much
more of mercies than judgments? Let us
not write the memory of these on water, and
of those on the rock.—Thomas Guthrie, D.D.

(e) Beloved, remember what you have
heard of Christ, and what He has done for
you; make your heart the golden cup to hold
the rich recollections of His past lovingkind-
ness ; make it a pot of manna to preserve the
heavenly bread whereon saints have fed in
days gone by. Let your memory treasure up
everything about Christ which you have
heard or felt, or known, and then let your
fond affections hold Him fast evermore.
Love Him! Pour out that alabaster box of
your heart, and let all the precious ointment
of your affection come streaming on His feet
If you cannot do it with joy, do it sorrowfully ;
wash His feet with tears, wipe them with tha
hairs of your head, but do love Hfm, the
blessed Son of God, your ever tender friend.—
C. H. Spurgeon,

Whatever the joy and peace of a Chris-
tian’s death-bed, there will always be a feeling
of regret that so little has been done, or rather
so little attempted for Christ. sar while


GHAP, XXIX,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


ee ee


His firmament glows with the dawnings of
eternity, and the melody of angels is just
stealing on his ears, and the walls of the
bright city bound his horizon—if one wish
could detain him in the tabernacle of flesh,
oh! it would not be the wish of tarrying with
the weeping ones who cluster round his bed ;
and it wouid not be the wish of providing for
children and superintending their education,
or of perfecting some plan for their settlement
in life ; he knows that there is a Husband for
the widow and a Father of the fatherless.
The only wish which could put a check on
his spirit as the plumes of its wing just
feel the free air; it is that he might toil a
little longer for Christ, and do at least some
fraction more of His work before entering into
the light of His presence. And what, then,
is the reminding him that “now is his salva-
tion nearer,” but the admonishing him that
whilst thousands upon thousands are bowing
down to the stock and the stone, and vice is
enthroned on high piaces, and an unholy


covenant is made between evil spirits and evil
men, to sweep from this globe the name of the
believer, there is a swift lapsing of the period
during which he may act out his vows of
allegiance ; that nerve and sinew, time and
talent—all must be centred more fixedly than
ever in the service of Christ; lest his dying
day find him recreant or indolent, and he is
summoned to depart ere he have done the
little which with all his strenuousness he
might possibly effect for the Lord and His
kingdom.—H. Melville, B.D.

Some of you are spending your last January.
You have entered the year, but you will not
end it. Somewhere you will shut your eyes
in the sleep that knows no waking. Other
hands shall plant the Christmas-tree and
shake the New Year’s greeting. It will be
joy to some, sorrow to others. I would leave
in your ears five short words of one syllable
each—“ This year thou shalt die.”—Z, Le
Watt Talmage, D.D,


Tus Great Day ov ATONEMENT; ITs MoraL SuGGESTIONS.


(Verses 7-11.)


The whole of the ceremonies of this
day are described in Lev. xvi. Our
business is to attend to the moral sug-
gestions of the paragraph under present
consideration.

I, That itis our duty to set apart
some time for serious reflection upon
our sins.

The Israelites were required to set
apart this one day in every year for
the special remembrance of their sins,
and for humiliation and atonement be-
cause of them. To seriously reflect
upon our sins is a duty we owe—

1. Z'o ourselves. Unless our sins be
forgiven, they will prove our ruin ; unless
we sincerely repent of them, they will
not be forgiven; unless we recognise and
feel them, we cannot repent of them ;
and unless we consider our life in re-
lation to them, we shall not recognise
and feel them, for they are apt to
escape our notice, and we are prone to
overlook them, or to call them by soft
names. Hence the need, &o.

2. To God. He calls upon us to
consider our ways, to repent of our
sins, to turn from them, &c. It is
both our duty and interest at times to
pause, examine our ways, &0. (a)

526


II. That reflection upon our sins
should lead to humiliation because of
them.

The day of atonement was sometimes
called the “feast of humiliation”
amongst the Jews, who upon it were
required to humble themselves before
God on account of their sins, Self-
examination and reflection on our sins
will be unproductive of any good re-
sult unless they lead to penitential
sorrow because of them. Without
true repentance the knowledge of sin
tendeth to spiritual death rather than
life. (6)

III. That humiliation because of
our sins should lead to the mortifica-
tion of our carnal appetites.

“Ye shall afflict your souls,” was
one of the Divine commands to Israel
concerning this day. ‘‘The expression
to ‘afflict the soul,’ appears to be the
old term for fasting; but its meaning
evidently embraces, not only abstinence
from food, but that penitence and hu-
miliation which give scope and purpose
to the outward act of fasting.”—
Speaker's Comm. Fasting is good re-
ligiously only when bodily abstinence
is an expression of spiritual penitence


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP, XXIX,


—_—_—__-- rrr


We do not affirm that fasting is a
Christian duty. Even amongst the
Jews, on this solemn day, children
and sick people were exempt from the
obligation. But it is the duty of the
Christian to keep carnal passions under
the control of spiritual principles, and
not to allow bodily appetites to damp
the ardour of spiritual aspirations.
Thus did St. Paul: “I keep under my
body,” &e. (1 Cor. ix. 27; Gal. v. 24;
Col. iii. 5, 6). (c)

IV. That true penitence leads to
gratitude and personal consecration to
God.

Special burnt-offerings, expressive of
self-consecration, with their meat-offer-
ings, expressive of thankfulness, were
to be offered unto the Lord on this
day. ‘Ye shall offer a burnt offer-
ing,” &c. (ver. 8-10). (d)

V. That our penitence, even when
it is true in itself and in its expres-
sions, is imperfect, and needs the
merits of the Saviour’s sacrifice.

The Israelites were commanded to
offer “one kid of the goats for a sin-


proaches to God in penitence and
prayer and praise are defective and
faulty. ‘‘Though we must not repent
that we have repented, yet we must
repent that we have not repented
better,”

VI. That the sacrifices of the cere-
monial law were unable to take away
sin.

The fact that in addition to the sin-
offerings of the great ceremonies of this
day (Lev. xvi.), another sin-offering
was required, most impressively dis-
plays the insufficiency of the legal
offerings, in themselves, to secure par-
don and cleansing from sin for the
offerers. “It is not possible that the
blood of bulls and of goats should take
away sins” (comp. Heb. x. 1-18). “We
have redemption through His blood,
the forgiveness of sins.” ‘The blood
of Jesus Christ cleanseth us from ali
sin.” (e)

Thus all the suggestious of this pars-
graph lead us up to our Lord and
Saviour. He is the true hope of the
penitent soul. He is the only and the


offering; beside the sin-offering of all-sufficient Saviour from sin. Seek
atonement,” &o, (ver. 11). Our ap- Him; trust in Him; live to Him.
ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) We shonld weigh our own spirits. In
the remembrance that our hearts are “ deceit-
ful above all things,’ we should, in that duty,
go carefully and faithfully to work ; not satis-
fied with a mere surface look ; not regarding
the word and the action merely, but jealously
tracing each, as in the sight of God, to its
secret source within; testing that source by
the application of Bible criterions; desiring
to detect not merely motives that are un-
mixedly evil, but every secret adulteration of
motives that are in the main good—every
alloy—every deteriorating ingredient ; ‘‘ keep-
ing our kear's with all diligence ;” and looking
forward to that day, when the equal balances
of Heaven shall try—both in deed, and in
principle and motive—“ every man’s work of
what sort it is.’,—Ralph Wardlaw, D.D..-

(6) Ascertain fabrics need to be damped
before they will take the glowing colours with
which they are to be adorned, so our spirits
need the bedewing of repentance before they
can receive the radiant colouring of delight,
The glad news of the Gospel can only be
printed on wet paper. Ilave you ever seen
Clearer shining than that which follows a


shower. Then the sun trarsforms the rain-
drops into gems, the flowers look up with
fresher smiles and faces glittering from their
refreshiag bath, and the ’ irds from among the
dripping branches sing with notes more rap-
torous, because they have paused awhile. So,
when the soul has been saturated with the
raiu of penitence, the clear shining of forgiving
love makes the flowers of gladness blossom
all around. The steps by which we ascend to
the palace of delight are usually moist with
tears. Grief for sin is tne porch of the House
Beautiful, where the guests are full of “the
joy of the Lord.”— C. A. Spurgeon.

(c) The flesh warreth against the spirit ;
and the enemy is never so effectually van-
quished, as when he is reduced by famine.
That hunger is not holiness we are ready to
admit ; but that it may easily be improved in-
to a glorious mean or instrument of it, uni-
versal practice has asserted, and general ex-
perience confirmed. The prophet, therefore,
does not barely say (Joel ii. 15-18), “proclaim
a fast,” but “sanctify,” that is, hallow or
render it holy ; make it subservient to moral
and religious purposes, by aig Sg tie


CHAP. AXIX,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


Fae NS ene ee a


of that humble, and serious, and recollected
frame of mind, which bodily mortification has
a natural tendency to produce ; and let it lead
you to godly sorrow, heartfelt repentance, and
strenuous resolutions of immediate reforma-
tion. — W. Busfield.

It is true that there is no direct and positive
command given by Christ that you should
abstain from animal and vegetable food, and
the drinking of water; but lest the flesh-pam-
pering man should be too eager to avail him-
self of this silence, or make a screen of such a
supposed authority, I ought to say, that it is
in full and manifold proof that such national
self-denial, accompanied with sincere faith and
humility, has restrained the hand of the Lord
from national judgmenta ; and moreover, that
although the practice of fasting degenerated
into the Pharisaism of monkish austerities, it
was observed by the Church of Christ in its
simplest, purest, and healthiest estate; and
that the more pious and holy of the followers
of Jeaus have left behind them strong testi-


monies te its value and efficacy.—T7. J.
Judki:


n.

The Church of God would be far stronger
to wrestle with this ungodly age if she were
more given to prayer and fasting. There is a
mighty efficacy in these two Gospel ordinances.
The first links us to heaven, the second sepa-
rates us from earth. Prayer takes us into the
banqueting house of God; fasting overturns
the surfeiting tables of earth. Prayer gives
us to feed on the bread of heaven, and fasting
delivers the soul from being encumbered with
the fulness of bread which perisheth, When
Christians shall bring themselves up to the
uttermost possibilities of spiritual vigour, then
they will be able, ny God’s Spirit working in
them, to cast out devils, which to day, without
the prayer and fasting, laugh them to scorn.—
C. iid Spurgeon.

(d) Illustrations on this point will be found
on pp. 93, 101, 117, 344.

(e) For an illustration on this point see p.
141 (0).


Tue Feast or TABERNACLES; ITS MEANING AND LESSONS.


(Verses 12-40.)


This institution is introduced here
simply for the purpose of giving direc-
tions as to the offerings to be presented
during the feast; and nothing is said
of its origin, or design, &ce. Notice—

i. The number of the offerings pre-
scribed, The offerings required upon
this occasion were far more numerous
than those of any other festival. During
the seven days of the feast, fourteen
rams, ninety-eight lambs, and no less
than seventy bullocks were sacrificed
to the Lord ; being twice as many rams
and lambs, and five times. as many
bullocks, as were cffered at the Feast
of Passover; and in addition, on the
eighth day were offered one bullock,
one ram, and seven lambs.

ii. The datly distribution of the offer-
mgs. The arrangement as to the num-
ber of bullocks to be offered each day
is peculiar. On the first day thirteen
were to be offered, on the second day
twelve, and so on, reducing the number
by one each day, till on the seventh
day seven were offered. This arrange-
ment was instituted, and the total num-
ber was also fixed at seventy, probably
to soa ae promineace the number


seven, “the holy symbolical covenant
number, by way of intimation that the
mercies of the harvest accrued by virtue
of God’s covenant.” Bishop Words-
worth, however, suggests “that the
gradual evanescence of the law till the
time of its absorption in the Gospel is
here presignified in the law itself”
And from the fact that at the solemni-
ties of the eighth day, which closed the
Feast, only one bullock was offered,
Matthew Henry makes a similar sug-
gestion: “It is hereby intimated to
them that the legal dispensation should
wax old, and vanish away at last; and
the multitude of their sacrifices should
end in one great sacrifice, infinitely
more worthy than all of them,”

Having repeatedly spoken of the
general significance of these offerings,
we proceed to notice briefly—

iii, Zhe meaning of this Festival.
From the fact that the Feast was cele
brated in booths, and is always desig:
nated by this word (booths, Heb.,
succoth), Dean Stanley argues “that it
did not commemorate the tents of the
wilderness, but probably the ‘booths’
of the first start (Succoth, Lev. xxiii.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS. CHAP. XXIX,


SN,


43; Exod. xiii, 20), the point of transi-
tion between the settled and the no-
madic life.” But this view attaches
too great importance to the use of a
word, and is not in harmony with the
statements of the Scriptures as to the
meaning of the Feast. We will en-
deavour to point out the meanings as-
signed to it in the Scriptures, and the
corresponding lessons which it conveys
to us.

I It wasa memorial of their eman-
cipation from Egypt, teaching us that
we should cherish the memory of
former mercies.

That it was such a memorial appears
from Lev. xxiii. 43, ‘That your gene-
rations may know that I made the
children of Israel to dwell in booths,
when I brought them out of the land
of Egypt.” “The tents of the wilder-
ness furnished a home of freedom
compared with the house of bondage
out of which they had been brought.”
The remembrance of God’s gracious
dealings with us should be piously
fostered by us.

1. Gratitude urges to this. To forget
the kindnesses bestowed upon us is
basely ungrateful.

2. Reason urges to this. The recol-
lection of past mercies inspires confi-
dence and hope in present difficulties
and needs. To forget them isfolly. (a)

II. It was a memorial of their life
in the wilderness, rem_iding us that
our present condition is that of
strangers and pilgrims.

“And ye shall take you on the first
day the fruit of goodly trees, branches
of palm trees, &c. That your genera-
tions may know that I made the chil-
Aren of Israel to dwell in booths” (Lev.
txiii. 40-43). “Now the booth in
which the Israelite kept the feast, and
the tent which was his ordinary abode
in the wilderness, had this in common
—they were temporary places of so-
journ, they belonged to camp life, The
seven days of abode in the booths of
the festival was thus a fair symbol of
the forty years of abode in tents in the
wilderness.” It suggests, that ‘‘ here
have we no continuing city.” We are

uM





dwellers in tents, not in mansions,
Life in this state is brief even at the
longest. ‘Our days upon the earth
are as a shadow and there is none
abiding.” (0)

But the Feast was to ccmmemorate
the blessings of their life in the desert ;
blessings such as are given to us in our
pilgrimage.

1. Divine guidance. ‘The Lord went
before them,” &. “The pillar of the
cloud departed not from them by day,”
&c, (Neh. ix. 19). The same is pro-
mised to us (Psa, xxxii, 8; Prov. iii. 6;
Isa. lviii. 11). (c)

2. Divine support. “Forty years
didst Thou sustain them in the wilder-
ness,” &¢. (Neh. ix. 21). And still He
supports His people (Psa. lxxxiv. 11;
Matt. vi. 25-34). (d)

3. Divine protection. The pillar of
the cloud and of the fire was a protec-
tion. The Lord also made them victo-
rious over their enemies. In our pil-
grimage He defends us (John x. 28;
Rom. viii. 31, 37-39; 1 Pet. iii. 13).
e
( in It was a thanksgiving for rest
and a settled abode in the Promised
Land, suggesting the certainty and
blessedness of the rest which iemains
for the people of God.

This aspect of the Feast is clearly
expressed in the Speaker's Comm. : “‘No
time in the year could be so suitable
for the Israelites to be reminded of the
wonderful Providence which hud fed
and sheltered them in the wilderness,
where they had no land to call their
own, and where there was neither har-
vest, nor gathering into barns, nor vin-
tage, as the .eason in which they
offered thanksgiving to Jehovah for
the fruits of the ground, and conse-
crated the crops newly stored in, In
this way the transitioa from nomadic
to agricultural life, which took place
when the people settled in the Holy
Land, must have tended to fulfil the
meaning of the Feast of Tabernacles,
From that time the festival catled to
mind the long and weary wanderings
in contrast with the plenty and com-
fort of settled possession.” ‘ ue


CHAP, XXIX,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


—_


son of Lev. xxiii. 40 with Rev. vii. 9,
suggests that to the inspired Seer of
Patmos the Feast of Tabernacles was a
figure of the perfect rest and joy of
heaven. Hengstenberg says that the
“palms” of Rev. vii. 9, “are beyond
doubt those of the feast of taber-
nacles.” There are at least three points
of analogy—

1, Rest. With this Feast all labour
ceased, and winter, the period of rest,
began, In heaven the Christian rests
from his wanderings, rests from weary
labours, rests from the struggle against
sin, &c. (

2. Keward. At this Feast the Is-
raelite had gathered in the entire har-
vest, had secured the reward of his
labours. In heaven the Christian shall
reap a rich reward for all bis toils on
earth, &e. (g)

3. Rejoicing, This was the most
joyful of ali the Jewish feasts. “They
joy before thee, according to the joy
in harvest.” The redeemed in heaven


have “entered into the joy of their
Lord.” (h)

IV. It was a thanksgiving for the
completed harvest, teaching us to re-
ceive the precious fruits of the earth
as the kind gifts of a bountiful Provi-
dence.

“The feast of ingathering, in the
end of the year, when thou hast
gathered in thy labours out of the
field” (Exod. xxiii. 16). ‘When ya
have gathered in the fruit of the land,
ye shall keep a feast unto the Lord
seven days” (Lev. xxiii. 39). “Thou
shalt observe the Feast of Tabernacles
seven days, after that thou hast
gathered in thy corn and thy wine,”
&o. (Deut. xvi. 13-15). Learn from
this, that in the harvest we should
gratefully recognise the result of the
blessing of God upon our labours. He
giveth us “rain from heaven, and
fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with
food and gladness” (Acts xiv. 17). See
sketch on chap. xxviii. 26-31. 9


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) For illustrations on this point, see pp.
407, 416, 417.

(5) illustrations on Life, a Pilgrimage, will
be found on pp. 168, 409.

(c) ‘This point is illustrated on pp. 152,
154, 164.

(d) Illustrations on the dependence of man
and the support of God appear on pp. 154,
155, 276.

e) ‘iis point is illustrated on pp. 105,
154, 164, 176.

(f) The rest of inaction is but the quiet
of a stone, or the stillness of the grave, or
the exhaustion of a spent and feeble nature,
But there is a nobler rest than this. There is
rest in health; there is rest in the musical
repose of exqnisitely balanced powers; there
is rest to the desiring faculties when they find
the thing desired ; there is zest in the rapture
of congenial eraployment ; rest in the flow of
joyful strength; rest in the swift glide of the
stream when it meets with no impediment.
Such is the rest of the glorified. Perfect
beings in a perfect world, rejoicing in their
native element, having no weikness within,
and no resisting force without, to check the
outflow and expression of their loving natures;
their activity, therefore, being easy, natural,
and necessary, ae light is to the sun, and
fragrance to the flowers of spring—activity
to them is rest. “ Blessed are the dead that
die in ws Lord ; for they rest,” not from


their works, but only “from their abours.”
It would be a labour for them not to work.
To hush their music, and to stop their action,
would be to them intolerable toil; they would
be “weary with forbearing, and could not
stay.” So they “rest ;” yet “they rest not
day nor night.”—C, Stanford, D.D.

Another illustration on this point appears
on p. 420.

(g) An illustration on the Rewards of
heaven appears on pp. 6, 7.

(A) For an illustration on the Joys of heaven
see p. 169.

(t) There is a point at which we must give
up and stand still, and say, “ We can do no
more.” That is a matter of certainty in your
common daily life ; and out of it will come
such reflections as these: I have nothing that
has not upon it God’s signature and super-
scription, I can work; but my work may
come to nothing. I may sow my seed, but if
He withhold the baptism of the dew and the
rain, and the benediction of the sunlight, all
my labour will came to nothingness, to morti-
fication and pain! This must have some
meaning. There must, in such a combination
of circumstances as these, be a purpose which
T ought to know, and understand, and work

If a man once be started on that course
of reflection, the probability is, that he who
begins as a reverent inquirer, will end as a
devout worshipper.—Joseph Parker, D.D.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAF. XXX.


NESSES
CHAPTER XXX,


CRITICAL AND ExpianatTory Nora,


In this chapter we have regulations
as to the force and obligatoriness of
vows, with certain cases specified in
which they ceased to be binding. Rules
for the estimation of things vowed to
the Lord had already been laid down
in Lev. xxvii. The present chapter ap-
propriately follows the laws regulating
the sacrifices, inasmuch as vows fre-
quently related to the offering of sacri-
fices.

Ver. 1. Unto the heads of the tribes,
because the questions which are here
dealt with would be brought before them
for settlement.

Ver. 2. A vow. Heb. neder, “a
positive vow, or promise to give any
part of one’s property to the Lord.”—
Keil and Del.

A bond. Heb., tssar, ‘the negative
vow, or vow of absfinence.”—Jbid.

“A vow involved an obligation to do:
# bond, an obligation to forbear doing.”
—Speaker’s Comm.

He shall not break his word. Margin:
“ profane,” 4.¢., by not fulfilling, or by
violating it.


Four cases are specially prescribed
for: (1) that of a youthful maiden in
her father’s house (vers. 3-5); (2) that
of a woman betrothed, but not married
(vers. 6-8); (3) that of a widow, or
divorced woman (ver. 9); (4) that of
a@ married woman in her husband’s
house (vers. 10-12).

Ver. 6. And if she had at all an hus-
band, &c. “ Rather, ‘ And if she shall
at all be an hushand’s, and her vows
shall be upon her, or a rash utterance
of her lips, wherewith she hath bound
her soul.’ The ‘at all’ intimates that
the case of a girl betrothed, but not yet
actually married, is here contemplated.”
—Speaker’s Comm,

Uttered ought, &e. *“Lit., ‘the rash
utterance of her lips.’”—Jdid. “ Gossip
of her lips, that which is uttered
thoughtlessly or without reflection.”
—Keil and Del.

Ver. 15. He shall bear her iniquity ;
s.e., ‘the sin which the wife would have
had to bear if she had broken the vow
of her own accord.” —Jbéd,


Tue Sotemn Opziaation or Reticious Vows


(Verses 1 and 2.)


Notice—

L The case supposed.

“Tf a man vow a vow unto the Lord,
or swear an oath to bind his soul with
@ bond.”

1. The vow ts made unto God. He
is the only true and proper object of
religious vows. There is not a trace in
the Bible of vows being made to saints
or angels.

2. The vow binds the soul. ‘Swear
sn oath to bind his soul with a bond.”

+A promise to man is a bond upon the
estate, but a promise to God is a bond
upon the soul.”

%. The vow ts voluntarily made.
« Yows were not of Divine appoint-
ment, but originated with men them-

au 3


selves.” Spontaneity was of the essence
ofa vow. The obligations were always
voluntarily self-imposed. This is clearly
expressed in regard to the offering of
Ananias (Acts v. 4). (a)

4. The thing vowed must be lawful.
No one can rightly bind himself to do
en unrighteous thing. Generally vows
were solemn promises to consecrate
something to God, or to do something
in His service and to His honour. But
“ votive offerings arising from the pro-
duce of any impure traffic, were wholly
forbidden ” (Deut, xxiii.18). The offer-
ing must be pure; the service must br
righteous and good.

II, The danger implied.

“He shall not break His Be &e.


CHAP. XXX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





This implies temptation to break the
word, or peril of failure in fulfilling the
vow. There is in human nature a deep-
rooted and deplorable tendency to for-
get in health the vows which were
made in sickness, and to ignore in our
security and peace the vows we made
in our danger and alarm. (0)

III. The command given.

l. That he shall perform his vow.
“He shall not break his word.”

2. That he shall fully perform his
vow. He shall do according to all


that proceedeth out of his mouth.” (e)

Conclusion.

Appeal to those who have unful-
filled vows resting upon them.

1. Baptismal vows, in the case of
some of you, are unfulfilled. (d)

2. Vows made in affliction or danger
by some of you have not been paid.

“When thou vowest a vow unto God,
defer not to pay it,” &c. (Eccles. v. 4,
5). Humbly and earnestly resolve, “J
will pay my vows unto the Lord now.”
Resolve and do.


ILLUSTRATIONS,


(a) A vow is a promise made to God, in
the things of God. The obligation of it is,
by casuists, deemed to be as great as that of
an oath. It is a sacred and solemn bond,
wherever a goul binds iself to God in lawful
things ; and being once tound by it, it is a
most heinous evil to violate it. “It is a high
piece of dishonesty to fail in what we have
promised to men,” saith Dr. Hall; “but to
disappoint God in our vows is no less than
sacrilege. The act is free and voluntary ; but
if once a just and lawful vow or promise hath
passed your lips, you may not be false to God
in keeping it.” It is with us as to our vows,
as it was with Ananias and Sapphira as to
their substance : “ Whilst it remained,” saith
Peter, “ was it not thine own?” ite needed
not to sell and give it ; but if he will give, he
may not reserve: it is death to save only a
part; he lies to the Holy Ghost that defal-
cates from that which he engaged himself to
bestow. If thou hast vowed to the mighty
God of Jacob, look to it that thou be faithful
in thy performance, for He is a great and
jealous God, and wiil not be mocked.—J.
Flavel,

This topic is illustrated on pp. 92, 93.

(6) In English we aay, “The river past,
and God forgetten,” to express with how
mournful a frequency He whose assistance
was invoked, it may have been earnestly, in
the moment of peril, is remembered no more
as soon as by His help the danger has been
surmounted. The Spaniards have the pro-
verb too, bui itis with them : “ The river past,
the saint rorgotten,” the saints being in Spain
more prominent objects of invocation than
God. And the Italian form of it sounds a
still sadder depth of ingratitude: “The peril
ance the saint mocked.”"—R, C. Trench,


Praise should always follow answered prayer.
It was thus with one man. He was very ill; a
great strong man in his day: yet disease
touched him, shrivelled him up, laid him upon
8 lowly bed, made him pray to tke humblest

632


creature in his house for favours hour after
hour. Ashe lay there in his lowliness ané
weakness, he said, “If God would raise me
up I would be a new man, I would be a dee
vout worshipper in the sanctuary, I would live
to His glory,” And God gathered him up
again ; did not break the bruised reed, did not
quench the smoking flax, but permitted the
man to regain his faculties. And he was not
well one month till he became ag worldly as
he was before his affliction. He prayed as if
his heart loved God; and when he got his
health back again he was a practical atheist
—he was virtually the basest of blasphemers.
—Joseph Parker, DD.

For another illustration on this point, see
p. 186 (0).

(c) I know of two men who started business
with this vow: “ We shall give to God one tenth
of all our profits.” The first year the profits
were considerable. The nsxt year there was
increase in the profits, and of course increase
in the tithe ; in a few years the profits became
very large indeed, so that the partners said to
one another, “Is not a tenth of this rather too
much to give away? suppose we say now we
shall give a twentieth ?’ And they gave a
twentieth,—and the next year the profits had
fallen down ; the year after that they fell down
again, and the men said to one another, ag
Christians should say in such a case, ‘‘ Have
not we broken our vow? Have not we robbed
God ?” And in no spirit of selfish calculation
but with humility of soul, self-reproach, and
bitter contrition, they went back to God and
told Him how the matter stood, prayed His
forgiveness, renewed their vow, and God
opened the windows of heaven and came back
to them and all the old prosperity.—J0id.

(d) The children of pious parents, who in
their infancy were dedicated to God in holy
baptism, lie under the solemn vows which
were assumed {n their behalf. Though your
parents had authority to promise for you, it is
you that must perform it, for it is you that
they obliged. If you think they did you


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP, XXX.


—_— ees


wrong, you may be ont of the covenant when
he will, if you will renounce the kingdom of

eaven. But it is much wiser to be thankful
to God, that your parents were the means of
so great a blessing to you; and to do that
again more expressly by yourselves, which


they did for you; and openly with thankfal-
ness, to own the covenant in which you are
engaged, and live in the performance and in
the comforts of it all your days.—Richard
Baxter,


Tos Vows oy Women,—Turig RatiricaTion aNnpD ABROGATION:


(Verses 3-16.)


_. These verses suggest the following
observations—

I. That religious vows are some-
times rashly made. :

They are sometimes “ the rash utter-
ance of the lips” (ver. 6). Considering
their solemn nature and binding force,
they ought never to be made without
serious consideration.

II. That religious vows made by
females under the authority of a father
or a husband, and disallowed by them,
cease to be binding,

Three examples are given of the
abrogation of the vowsof women. (1)
A father may annul a vow made by
his youthful daughter dwelling with
him (vers. 3-5). (2) A man betrothed
toa maiden, but not married to her,
may annul a vow made by her after
her betrothal to him (vers. 6-8). (3)
A married man may anuul a vow made
by his wife (vers. 10-12). But in order
to annul these vows the father or the
husband, as the case may be, must for-
bid their fulfilment, and that at once.
If he kept silence concerning the vow,
by so doing he ratified it (vers. 4, 7, 11).
And the prohibition of the vow, if it
was to be of any force, must be
promptly uttered. ‘If her father dis-
allow her in the day that he heareth,”
&c. (ver. 5, and vers. 7, 8,12). These
regulations were wise and equitable ;
for the daughter or wife might make a
vow which would be “ prejudicial to the
affairs of the family, perplex the pro-
vision made for the table if the vow
related to meats, or lessen the provision
asde for Lis children if the vow would
be more expensive.than his estate
would bear,” or otherwise seriously


interfere with the measures of the father
and husband,

III. That vows made by females
under such authority and not dis-
allowed, and vows made by females
not under such authority, are binding.

If the father did not without delay
protest against his young daughter's
vow (vers. 3, 4), or the intending
husband against the vow of his be-
trothed (vers. 6, 7), or the husband
against the vow of his wife (vers. 10,
11), such vow remained in full force.
And the vows made by widows or
divorced wives were as binding as those
made by a man (ver. 9). Not being
dependent upon a husband or father,
such a woman was at liberty to make
vows, and having made @ vow was
bound to fulfil it.

IV. That if a husband improperly
annul a vow made by his wife, the
guilt of its non-fulfilment will rest
upon him.

“ But if her husband altogether hold
his peace at her from day to day,” &c.
(vers. 14, 15). In this case the guilt
of the unpaid vow would rest upon the
liusband ; and he must either present
a trespass-olfering for the expiation of
his sin (Lev. v. 4-13), or he must bear
the punishment due to the sin.

The regulations we have been con-
sidering authorise the following sénfer-
ences— ;

i. Lhe solemnity of religious vows.
They relate to the soul and to God.
They ought not to be lightly made ;
and when made, they should be per-
formed with scrupulous fidelity.

ii. The importance and sacredness of
parental authority. Even a nA made


CaAP, XXX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; NUMBERS.


aS


by a maiden to God must be set aside
if her father object to it. The Scrip-
tures clearly and repeatedly affirm the
authority of parents (Exod. xx. 12;
Eph. vi. 1-3), And it is confirmed by
the example of our Lord (Luke ii. 51).
This authority involves a double
obligation—

1. Parental obligation—to consider
and to promote the welfare of their
children, &c. (Gen. xviii. 19; Deut.
vi. 7; Prov. xxii. 6; Eph. vi. 4). (a)

2. Filial obligation. (1) To revere
their parents (Exod. xx. 12; Mal. i. 6;
Eph. vi. 2, 3). (6) (2) To obey their
parents. We see from this chapter
that “obedience to a father stood higher
than a self-imposed religious service.”


“Children, obey your parents in the
Lord; for this is right.” (c) (3) To
be grateful to their parents. The
ceaseless solicitude and tender care and
quenchless love of parents for their
children should evoke from them deep
and thankful affection (John xix. 26,
27; 1 Tim.v. 4). (d)

iii, Zhe importance and sacredness of
marital authority. The authority of
the husband over the wife, as laid
down in this chapter, and in other
portions of the scriptures, is very great
(1 Cor. xi. 3, 7-9; Eph. v. 22-24; 1
Tim. ii, 12-14; 1 Pet. iii. 1-6).

Let the husband “love his wife even
as himself; and the wife see that she
reverence her husband.” (¢)


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) When children are born to you, the
most solemn book is opened, so far as you
are concerned, that ever is opened, except that
which relates to your own soul's fate. The
account that begins to be incurred when par-
ents rejoice because a child is born to them, is
the most solemn account that ever is incurred
aside from one’s own individual duty towards
God. Ido not mean that al! the misconduct
and evil doings of the child are to come back
upon the parent, and that there is to be in the
child no free will, so that no individual ac-
count can belongto him. Forif a parent has
cleansed his skirts of his children, the guilt
of their sins will rest on their heads, and not
on his. But unless the parent can show that
the child’s misconduct and wreck of eternity
are not attributable to any fault of his, the
weight of the child’s condemnation will be
divided—no, it will not be divided, it will rest
andivided on the child’s head, and undivided
on the parent’s head. It is a responsibility
assumed by every parent, to look after the
welfare, temporal and eternal, of his child. If
God had sent to him an angel, with a scroll of
heavenly writ, saying, “I send to school to you
my well-beloved child; take it, teach it, and
bring it back to heaven ; and let its education
be the teat of your fidelity "—if God had sent
to the parent such a missive, hia 1esponsibility
would not be greater or more real than that
which is laid upon us when we undertake to
bring up children, They are not simply
playthings, although they do make play-
things. They are not mere little plea-
sure-bells, although no bells ever ring so
swectly. They are not instruments of music,
and pictures, and flowers of dear delight in
our househ_ld, that we may enjoy them, and
that s Ve enjoy themselvea. Thev are


not frolicsome kittens and singing birds for
our pleasure and their own. They are God’s
immortals. They are sent forth to make an
earthly pilgrimage, and you are their school-
masters and pilots. It is a solemn thing te
have such a charge put into your hands.—
H. W. Beecher.

For adiitional illustrations on Parental
duties and responsibilities, see pp. 33, 46, 47.

(6) There are some children who are almost
ashamed to own their parents because they are
poor or in a low station of life. We will
therefore give an example of the contrary, as
displayed by the Dean of Canierbury, afters
wards Archbishop Tillotson. His father. who
was a plain Yorkshireman, perhaps something
like those we now call “ Friends,” approached
the house where his son resided, and enquired
whether “John Tillotson was at home.”
The servant, indignant at what he thought
his insolence, drove him from the door; but
the Dean, who was within, hearing the voice
of his father, instead of embracing the oppor-
tunity afforded him of going out and bringing
in his father in a more private manner, came
running out, exclaiming in the presence of
his astonished servants, “It is my beloved
father!” and falling doy.n on his knees,
asked for his blessing.—Dict. of Iilust.

(c) During Havelock’s stay in England, a
gentleman went one evening to the house of
the colonel, in compliance with an invitation.
In the course of conversution, Mrs. Havelock
turned suddenly round to her husband, and
said, ‘My dear, where is Harry ?” referring
to her son, whom she had not seen during the
whole afternoon. The cclonel started to his
feet. “Well, poor feliow! he’s standing on
London Bridge, and in this cold too! I told
him to wait for me there at twelve o'elock


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


CHAP, XXX,


etree


day ; and, in the pressure of business, I quite
forgot the appointment.” It was now about
seven o’clock in the evening. The colonel
ordeied a cab to be called; and, as he went
forth to deliver his son from his watch on
London Bridge, he turned to excuse himself
from his visitor, saying, “ You see, sir, that is
the discipline of a soldier’s family.” In the
course of an hour, he returned with poor
Harry, who seemed to have passed through
the afternoon's experience with the greatest
od humour.—Joérd,

(d) An old schoolmaster said one day toa
clergyman who came to examine his school,
“T believe the children know the cat: chism
word for word.” “But do they understand
it ? that is the question,” said the clergyman.
The schoolmaster only bowed respectfully,
and the examination began. A little boy had
repeated the fifth commandment, “ Honour
thy father and thy mother;” and he was
desired to explain it. Instead of trying to
do so, the little fellow with his face covered
with blushes, said, almost in a whisper, “ Yes-
terday, sir, I showed some strange gentlemen
over the mountain. The sharp stones cut my
feet ; and the gentlemen saw them bleeding,
and they gave me some money to buy me
shoe». 1 yave it to my mother, for she had
no shoss either; and I thought I could go
barefoot betver than she.” The clergyman
then looked very much pleased; and the old
schoolmaster only quietly remarked, “ God
gives us His grace and His blessing.”—Chris-
tian Treasury.

(e€) Sometimes we have seen a model mar-
riage, founded in pure love and cemented in
mutual esteem. Therein the husband acts as
a tender h-ad, and the wife, as a true spouse,
realises the model mariage relation. She
delights in her husbanu, in his person, his
character, his affection : to her he is not only
the chief and foremost of mankind, but in her
eyes he is all in all, her heart’s love belongs to
him and to him only. She finds sweetest con-
tent and solace in his company, his fellowship,
his fondness ; he is her little world, her para-
dise, her choice treasure. To please him she
would gladly lay aside her own pleasure to
find it doubled im gratifying him. She is


glad to sink her individuality in his. She
seeks no name for herself, his honour is re-
flected upon her, and she rejoices in it. She
would defend his name with her dying breath;
safe enough is he where she can speak for
him. The domestic circle is her kingdom ;
that she may there create happiness and com-
fort is her life-work, and his smiling gratitude
is all the reward she seeks. Even in her dress
she thinks of him, without constraint she con-
sults his taste, and thinks nothing beautiful
that is obnoxious to his eye. A tear from his
e\e because of any unkindness on her part,
would grievously torment her. She asks not
how her behaviour way please a stranger, or
how another’s judgment may be satisfied with
her behaviour; let her beloved be content and
she is glad. He has many objects in life,
some of which she does not quite understand,
but she believes in them all, and anything
that she can do to promote them she delights
to perform. He lavishes love on her, and she
on him. Their object in life is common.
There are points where their affections so
intimately unite that none could tell which is
first and which issecond. To see their children
growing up in health and streny th, to see them
holding posts of usefulness and honour, is their
mutual concern; in this and other matters
they are fully one. Their wishes blend, their
hearts are indivisible. By degrees they come
very much to think the same thoughts. Inti-
mate association creates uniformity; we have
known this to become so complete that at the
same moment the same utterance has leaped
to both their lips. Happy woman and happy
man! If heaven be found on earth, they
have it! At last the two are so welded, so
engrafted on one stem, that their old age pre-
sents a lovely attachment, a common sym-
pathy, by which its infirmities are greatly
alleviated, and its burdens are transformed
into fresh bonds of love. So happy a union
of will, sentiment, thought, and heart exists
between them, that the two streams of their
life have washed away the dividing bank, and
run on as one broad current of united exis-
tence till their common joy falls into the
main ocean of felicity.—C. H. Spurgeon.


CHAPTER XXXL


CriticaL aND Expianatory Nores.


Moses had already received com-
mand to smite the Midianites (chap.
xxv. 16-18); and in this chapter we
have the order given to him to execute
that command, and the narrative of
its execution.

Verse 2. Avenge the children of Israet
of the Midianites, te. for the injury


which the Midianites had done to the
Israelites in seducing them to the
licentious and idolatrous worship of
Baal-Peor,

Afterward shalt thou be gathered wnto
thy people. See p. 379.

Verse 3, Avenge the Lord of
Midian, because their warner of the


CHAP. XXXI.


/





Israelites had violated the Divine honour.

Verse 4. Of every tribe a thousand.
Margin: “A thousand of a tribe, a
thousand of a tribe.”

Verse 5. So there were delivered.
Or, so there were “counted off.”—
Fuerst. Dr. Howard: “And they
numbered out.”


Verse 6. Phinehas. He had mani-


fested his fitness for a prominent posi-


tion in this enterprize by his zeal for
God and against the idolators (chap.
xxv. 6-13).

With the holy instruments, and the
trumpets. ‘Or rather, ‘with the holy
instruments, to wit, the trumpets,’
for the trumpets themselves seem to


be the instruments intended.”—
Speaker's Comm. Comp. chap. x. 9.
Verse 8. And they slew, &a.


“Render thus: ‘And the kings of
Midian they put. to death, beside those
that fell in the battle ; namely,’ &,”—
Ibid. Comp. Josh, xiii. 21.

Verse 10. Goodly castles. Rather,
“encampments or hamlets.” — Fwerst.
“ Hamlets” seems preferable, “ Tent-
villages.” —Keil and Del.

Versell. The spoil, i.e., booty in goods
such as are mentioned in vers. 22 and 50.

The prey, t.e., the captives and the
cattle seized as booty.

Verse 16. Caused. .... to commit
trespass. Keil and Del.: “‘They have
become to the Israelites to work un-
faithfulness towards Jehovah,’ te, they
have induced them to commit an act
of unfaithfulness towards Jehovah.
The word “D3, which only occurs in


this chapter, viz., in vers, 5 and 16,
appears to be used in the sense of giv-
ing, delivering, and then, like D2,


doing, making, effecting.”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





Verse 17. Kill every male, &o. “The
object of the command to put all the
male children to death, was to exter-
minate the whole nation, as it could
not be perpetuated in the women. Of
the female sex, all were to be put to
death who had known tue lying with a
man, and therefore might possibly have
been engaged in the licentious worship
of Peor (chap. xxv. 2), to preserve the
congregation from all contamination
from that abominable idolatry.”—Keil
and Del.

Verse 19 (comp. chap. xix. 11, 12).

Verse 22. Brass. Rather, copper,
“as the mixture of copper and zinc, now
known as brass, was not known to the
ancients.” —Alford.

Verse 23. Purified with the water
of separation (comp. chap. xix. 9, 17-19.

Verse 49. There lacketh not one man
of us. A noteworthy proof of the pre-
sence and protection of God.

Verse 50. Chains. Or “arm bands,
arm ornaments, 2 Sam, i. 10,"—
Fuerst.

Rings. “Signet rings.”—

Tablets. * Buckles, bracelets,” —Jbid.
Others say they were ornaments * worn
suspended from the neck.”

To make an atonement. ‘*An ac-
knowledgment of having received un-
deserved mercies. These, if acknow-
ledged, would have entailed guilt on
the soul.”—Speaker’s Comm.

Verse 52. Sixteen thousand seven
hundred and fifty shekels. ‘In value
about £20,00U.”—Speaker’s Comm. “If
we take the golden shekel at 10 thalers
(30 shillings), the value of the orna-
ments taken by the officers under
Moses would be about 167,500 thalers
(£25,125).”—Kei and Del,


Tos Vengeance oy Jenova on MipiaK.


(Verses 1-12.)


This paragraph suggests the follow-
ing observations—
I. That in the administration of
&36


the Divine government the punishment
of sin is certain.
The Israelites were severely pum


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


CHAP. XXX


_— USNS


ished for the sins which they com-
mitted with the Midianites, and now
the Midianites are to reveive their
punishment, Notice—

1. The sin which the Midianites had
committed. Their women had seduced
the Israelites to the licentions and
idolatrous worship of Baal-Peor (see
p. 487).

2. The Author of the punishment of
the Midianites. The Lord Himself
commanded it ; and it seems to us that
He prescribed the arrangements for its
execution, and empowered and pro-
tected its executioners. (a)

3. The executioners of the punishment.
The Israelites were called upon to
avenge the gross wrongs which the
Midianites had done them as the people
af Jehovah. It was eminently fitting
that as Israelitish men had been cor-
rupted by the Midianites, Israelitish
men should execute the judgment of
God upon them. (6)

4. The severity of the punishment. (1)
It fell upon an immense number,
“They slew all the males.” This does
“not mean that they exterminated all
the men of the nation, but only that
they slew all who withstood them ;
for the nation itself consisted in con-
siderable strength, and was able in
a few generations to bring the Is-
raelites themselves under subjection.”
And, in addition, vast numbers were
taken captives, many of whom were
afterwards slain. (2) It fell upon per-
sons of every rank. “The kings of
Midian they put to death, besides those
that fell in the battle; namely, Evi,”
&c. Against the punishments of God,
princes and potentates are as defenceless
as plebeians and paupers. “There is
no respect of persons with God.” ‘“ He
accepteth not the persons of princes,
nor regardeth the rich more than the
poor.” (3) It involved the destruction
of their towns and villages, and the
loss of their property. ‘The children
of Israel took the spoil of all their
cattle, and all their flocks, and all their
goods. And they burnt,” é&o. (vers.
9-11). (¢

ge en government of God


sin ever brings forth sorrow, tribulation
follows transgression. (d)

II. That God can work by many, or
by few, in the execution of His pur-
poses.

Out of an army of more than six
hundred thousand (chap. xxvii. 51),
only twelve thousand men were sent to
this war. The number was probably
small, as compared also with the forces
which they had to encounter. The
accomplishment of the purpose of God
by this small force was fitted to answer
three ends—

1, Toteachthemthat this expedition was,
in a special manner, the Lord's. He was
concerned in the punishment of the sin
of Midian, and in the vindication of
His honour, &e.

2. To teach them that He can effect His
purposes “by many or by few” (1 Sam.
xiv. 6; and Judg. vii.). (e)

3. To check any temptation or ten-
dency to self-glorification on the part of
the soldiers. (f)

IIL. That God honours the holy zeal
of His servants by employing them as
leaders in the execution of His pur-
poses,

“Moses sent Phinehas, the son of
Eleazar the priest, to the war, with the
holy instruments, even the trumpets to
blow in his hand.” Phinehas went with
the army as the priest of the Lord, to
encourage them in fighting, because
the war was a holy one against the
enemies of the Lord their God (comp.
chap. x. 9). His appointment to this
duty, on this occasion, may be viewed—

1. As the employment of an agent of
approved fitness for his duty. Phinehas
had shown his fitness for this appoint-
rent (chap. xxv.). In the accomplish-
ment of His purposes, God employs
suitable agents and instruments. (g)

2. As the reward of distinguished ser-
vice. He who is brave and faithful in
one duty shall be called to other and
more arduous duties (comp. Matt.
xxv. 21).

IV. That God enriches His people
with the spoils of their enemies,

“ And they took all the spoil, and all
the prey,” é&o. (vers. 11, ae


CHAP. XXXi.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


oe aa


Those who have assailed the Church
by persecution have defeated them-
selves, and confirmed and extended the
Church. “The blood of the martyrs
has been the seed of the Church.” And
they who have attacked it with cap-
tious criticism and bitter controversy,
have contributed to the strength of
its defences and the extension of its


triumphs, They have aroused the
scholars and the thinkers of the Church
to the marshalling of the evidences of
our religion, and to the vindication of
its claims. God frustrates the designs
of the enemies of His cause, and over-
rules them for the accomplishment of
His purposes and the extension of His
kingdom. (A)


ILLUSTRATIONS,


(a) For illustrations on the justifiableness
of war, see pp. 19, 20.

(6) For illustrations on the E-ecuttoners of
Divine judgments, see pp. 252, 312.

(c) Among the causes which justify war,
none is more unanimously asserted by political
writers, than an attempt on the part of one
community against the civil institutions, and
so against the integrity and internal peace, of
another. The Hebrews had therefore an un-
doubted right, even apart from the Divine
command, to attack the people of Midian, who
had treacherously endeavoured to withdraw
them from their allegiance, and thus to unset-
tle the foundations of all their union, prospe-
rity, and peace, and prepare them to become
an easy conquest to their own arms.

Now, if it be right to wage war at all, it is
not only right to wage it in such a manner a8
shall accomplish its object, but it would be
wrong to wage it in any other manner. War
is, in its very nature, the infliction of suffering
in order to an ulterior good; and the inflic-
tion of any degree of suffering is unjustifiable,
unless so far as it may lead to this result. If,
therefore, in the prosecution of a war, the
measures adopted are of such lenity as to be
insufficient to produce the end in view, namely,
protection for the present and security for the
future, the mitigated evil then becomes un-
compensated by any ulterior good. It is then
a causeless and unjustifiable evil; it is not
mercy, but cruelty and crime. This principle
is clear, and is theoretically acknowledged;
yet when any application of it however wise
and just, tends to severities which we are not
accustomed to regard as belonging to the
necessities of the case. our feelings are natu-
rally shocked, Yet the principle continues to
operate, and is acknowledged in all our war-
fare, although, with the progress of civilisa-
tion, it has come to be understood in civilised
communities, that infiictions formerly resorted
to shall be forborne. But in their conflicts
with barbarous nations, who have no such un-
derstanding, they are accu-tomed to adopt
harsher measures ; and this ‘or thesimple and
sound reason, that the object would not other-
wise be gained, and that if they were to allow
a war to be to theiradversaries a less evil than
these adversaries were in the habit of expect.


ing it to prove, such # self-prostrating lenity
is ascribed to weakness, and not to the pride
of conscious strength. Severity, in short, is
beneficent, when it is suited to guard against
the necessity of its own repetition; and how
much or how little is adequate to that end, is
a question to be determined by reference to
some existing state of society. The Israelites
conducted their warfares on the principles
generally recognised in their time; and to
have done so on any other or milder principle,
against such enemies as they had to contend
with, would have been ruinous and suicidal.
Thus only could it be effectual ; and war not
intended to be effectual should not be waged
atall. It is confidently hoped and believed,
that the time is coming, is near at hand, when
war, a8 now conducted by ourselves—when
any war,—will be looked back upon with the
same feelings of disgust and horror, as those
with which we now regard the conflicts of the
nations beyond the Mediterranean three-and-
thirty centuries ago.—John Kitto, D.D.

(d) For illustrations on the Certainty of the
punishment of sin, see pp. 89, 225, 258, 812,
818, 374.

(e) The straw cannot beat the mountain
into flying dust. The hand of man cannot
crumble the great gigantic bulwarks behind
which error has entrenched itself. You are
quite right. But God hath chosen the weak
things to throw down the mighty. It is not
the straw that does it; it is the hand that
wields it. Shakespeare dips his pen into the
ink, and writes Ham/et, I take up the same
pends Jip into the same ink, but I can’t write
Hame: It #4 not the pen that does it ; it is
the writer. Itis not the little instrumentality;
it is the God who is able to do, and who has
done exceeding abundantly above all that we
ask or think.—Joseph Parker, D.D.

The weakness of the instrument is a small
matter when the hand is infinitely strong.
You and I have said, “We are men full of
infirmities. What canwedo? We have but
few talents, we have no social position, wé
have not the opportunities of doing good that
some have, and, therefore, we are discouraged.”
But the Lord knows thy heart, my brother.
If thou wert meaner in the scale of society 3
if thou hadst not even one, but only a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XXXi.


SS ener


talent ; if thou wert less able to speak than
thou art, and wert a man slow of speech like
Moses ; yet if God be behind thee, dost thon
not know that every weakness of thine is ac-
cording to His own intent and purport, and
is as much designed as the strength of the
strongest to illustrate the majesty of His
might ? Qh, didst thou believe, thy weak-
ness would be thy glory; thou wouldst rejoice
even to be nothing, that in this the great Alle
in-all might the more resplendently display
Himself.—C. 4. Spurgeon.

(f) This point is illustrated on p. 276.

(g) The opinion is very prevalent, and the
impression still more so—though neither so
prevalent as they used to be—that God is in
the habit of employing unlikely instruments;
that, for the purpose of revealing His all-
sufficiency and bringing honour to Himself,
He delights to contrast results with their
secondary causes, and to disappoint the cal-
culations founded on the supposed efficiency
of human agents. To hear some men talk,
you might conclude that God cannot be


properly eaid to employ instzumente at all,
that in nature, and still more in providence,
and most of all in grace, they are not so much
instruments that He employs as obstacles, not
so much things having a tendency and fitness
to accomplish His designs, as things altogether
unsuitable and inappropriate. Now, this be-
lief or feeling is entirely erroneous, and wo-
fully mischievous. It is dishonouring to God,
and injurious to men. Such is not God's
custom, such is not even God’s exceptional
act. We rejoice in the thought that, in a
sense, God does all things, that there is no
power but of God, that even physical instro-
ments and moral agents derive all their force
from Him, owing to Him their existence and
their efficiency ; but we also hold fast by the
conviction that power and wisdom go together;
that God acts by laws and delights to honour
them, and that in all His operations He pays
profound respect to the inherent relevancy of
things.—A. J. Morris,

(A) An illustration on thie point appears
on p. 472.


Tus Doom or tas Dovsie-HEARTED.,


(Verse 8.)


“ Balaam also, the son of Beor, they
tlew with the sword.”

Balaam had taken the field against
Israel,—against a people whom he had
pronounced blessed,—whom he had
pronounced invincible both by earth
and hell. Yes; Balaam “the son of
Beor,”—he, and not another of the
name,—he rushes on the bosses of the
Almighty’s buckler; he defies Israel
and Israel’s God !

But he fails. He would fain have
cursed Israel; but he could not. He
counselled Moab to seduce Israel by
temptation, and his device succeeded
too well. He now fetches the last
stroke. Invain. He perishes ignobly.
He is slain with the sword which he
had defied.

Such is the end of the backslider; of
one who knew the truth but did it not ;
who once said, ‘‘ Let me die the death
of the righteous, and let my last end
be like his.” It was certainly not the
end he prayed for; yet it was the end
to which his whole life had been tend-
ing. He reaped what he sowed, and in
_ him “God was not mocked.”

He died as he lived, in fellowship


with Moab, yet in heart persuaded that
Israel was the beloved of the Lord, and
that Jehovah was God. His life had
been with Midian, and so was his death.
His grave is with ths unclean. He
passes from earth with none to soothe
his death-bed and close his eyes ; none
to lament for him or build his monu-
ment. Sad end of a life of halting and
indecision, and resistance of the Spirit,
and braving of conscience, and rejection
of light, and wretched covetousness.
He “loved the wages of unrighteous-
ness,” and verily he had his reward.
Let us see what he wanted and how
he failed; how ambitious he was, yet
what a life of utter failure and dis-
appointment was his. He would fain
have risen, but he sunk. He would
fain have been rich, but he lost every-
thing. What a wasted life! Yet the
life of one who knew better things, but
did them not; who knew that the
world was vanity, yet followed it; who
knew that Israel’s portion was the best,
yet chose that of Moab; who knew the
true God and the true Messiah, but
preferred the idolatries of Israel’s
enemies. He saw Him “ er ton


GmaPr, XXXI.





of the rocks,” but that was all. He got
a passing glimpse of the cross, but no
more. It was all he saw of the way of
life, ere he plunged into death and
woe.

I. He wanted to serve two masters.

These were the same as the Lord in
after days designated God and mammon.
He wanted not to offend either; to
please both. He was like Issachar
crouching between two burdens. But
it would not do. He failed. Such is
the certain failure of all who make the
like attempt. ‘‘Ye cannot serve God
and mammon.” He loved the one mas-
ter, mammon; and he dreaded the
other; but would fain do the will of
both. He could not afford to lose the
favour of either. Miserable life! More
miserable death! The life and death
of one whose whole career was one long
attempt to do the bidding both of God
and the devil.

II. He wanted to earn two kinds of
wages.

The wages of righteousness and the
wages of unrighteousness (2 Pet. ii.
15), were doth in his eyes; he would
fain have the nay both of God and of
the devil. He was urwilling to do or
say anything which would deprive him
of either. He was as cautious and
cunning as he was covetous. He would
not work without wages ; and he would
work for a hundred masters if they
would only pay him well. How like
many so-called “religious” men amongst
ourselves.

III. He wanted to do two opposite
things at the same time.

He wished both to bless and to curse.
He was willing to do either according
as it might serve his interests. The
only question with him was, “ Would
it pay?” If the blessing would pay,
he would take it; if the curse would
pay, he would take it; if both would
pay, he would take them both. Bless-
ing and cursing were both alike to him ;
confessing and denying the true God,
worshipping Baal or Jehovah, it mat-
tered not, if by “this craft he could
have his wealth.” So with many among
us. If Sabbath-keeping will pay, they

540


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


a


will keep the Sabbath; if Sabbath-
breaking will pay, they will break the
Sabbath. True Balaams— without prin-
ciple, without faith, and without fear.

IV. He wanted two kinds of friend-

ship.
He would fain be friends with every
body. Perhaps he was timid ; of those
whom Scripture calls fearful (Rev. xxi.
8); perhaps, also, he was ambitious,
and sought great things for himself
wherever these could be obtained (Jer.
xlv. 5); certainly he had before him
“the fear of man which bringeth a
snare,” and the love of man’s approba-
tion which brings no less a snare ; he
dreaded Israel’s God, of whom he knew
much, but he dreaded also Moab’s
gods, though whether he really believed
in them we know not. Made up of
these contradictions, and acting not by
faith but unbelief, he tried to secure
the friendship of all whom he counted
great, whether in heaven or on earth.
He shut his eyes not only to the sin but
to the émpossibility of such a course;
he saw not that the friendship of the
world is the enemy of God, and that
whosoever will be the friend of the
world must be the enemy of God.

V. He wanted to have two rel-
gions.

He saw religion to be a paying con-
cern, @ profitable trade, and he was
willing to accept it from anybody or
everybody, to adopt it from any quarter
if it would but raise him in the world,
and make his fortune. Perhaps he
thought all religions equally right or
equally wrong, equally true or equally
false. He would rather not offend any
god if he could help it. He would make
concessions to “religious prejudices”
of any kind if the prejudiced people
will only help himon. . . . . Two
gods and two religions he wanted to
have,

But this double service, and double
friendship, and double religion, would
not do. He would make nothing by
them. They profited him nothing
either in this life or that to come. His
end was with the ungodly, his portion
with the enemies of Israel. And bis—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS, CHAP, XXXL





soul, where could it be? Not with
Israel’s God, or Israel’s Christ, or in
Israel’s heaven. He reaped what he
sowed.

He was a good specimen of multitudes
in these iast days. An educated and
intelligent man, shrewd and quick-
seeing, of respectable character ; high
in favour with the rich and great, a
religious man, too, after a fashion, not
unsound in creed go far, for he acknow-
ledges Jehovah as the true God. But
he is fond of the world, fond of money,

fond of preferment: one that would not
let religion stand in the way of his ad-
vancement; who could pocket al
scruples if he could pocket a little gold
along with them ; hollow of heart, but
with a fair outside. He would rather
not risk offending God, but yet he
would not like to lose Balak’s rewards
and honours. He would rather not
take up his cross, nor deny himself, nor
forsake all for his God.

So is it with multitudes amongst us.
They want as much religion as will
save them from hell; not an atom
more. The world is their real god ;
gold is their idol; it is in mammon’s
temple that they worship. Love God


with all their heart! They don’t so
much as understand the meaning of
such a thing. Sacrifice riches, place,
honour, friends, to Christ! They scoff
at the thing as madness.

Oh, be on the side of God, out and
out. ... You may follow Christ in
some things, but if not in all, what is
your following worth? This world or
the world to come, that is the alter-
native ; not this world and the world
to come. Christ all or nothing. No
middle ground; no _ half-discipleship ;
no compromise. The new birth, or no
religion at all.

Look to thy latter end. What is it
to be? Where is it to be? With whum
is it to be? Anticipate thy eternity.
Is it to be darkness or light, shame or
glory t

Do not sear your conscience by pray-
ing Balaam’s prayer, “Let me die the
death of the righteous.” What will
that avail you? It is the life of the
righteous that God is calling you to
lead; and He will take care of your
death. Decide, halt not; else surely
yours will be a wretched life, and a still
more wretched death.—H. Bonar, D.D.
Abridged from “ Light and Truth.”


Taz REeTuRN oF THE VicTorIous ARMY.


(Verses 13-24.)


Let us notice—

IL, The reception of the returning
warriors.

“‘ And Moses and Eleazar the priest,
and all the princes of the congregation,
went forth to meet them without the
camp.” Thus the chief men of the na-
tion honour the brave men who had
been avenging the Israelites and Je-
hovah upon the Midianites.

Learn, that services rendered to the
public should be heartily recognized by
the public,

II. The remonstrance with the
returning warriors.

“And Moses wage wroth with the
officers of the host, the captains over


thousands,” &o, (vers. 14-16), The


women had been the chief offenders iv.
the matter which the army had been
sent to avenge; they had seduced the
men of Israel into sin; therefore in
the execution of their commission (ver.
3) the soldiers should have slain them.
“The sword of war,” says Scott,
“should spare women and children, as
incapable of resisting; but the sword
of justice knows no distinction, except
that of guilty or not guilty, and more or
less guilty. This war was the execution
of a righteous sentence upon a guilty na-
tion, in which the women were the prin-
cipal criminals ; and perhaps particular
instructions had been given on this
head: therefore Moses was angry wheu
he found the women had pee spared.”


CHAP, XXXI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


RS


Learn, the sinfulness of omissions of
duty or of the merely partial performance
of duty. (a)

III. The retribution to the Midian-
itish women.

“Now therefore, kill every male
among the little ones, and kill every
woman that hath known man,” &c.
(vers. 17, 18). This may be viewed—

1. As a punishment. The law con-
cerning adultery was, “the adulterer
and the adulteress shall surely be put
to death” (Lev. xx. 10). It is almost
absolutely certain that many of these
women had committed adultery with
the Israelites in the matter of Baal-
Peor. The Lord had himself put to
death by the plague the Israelites who
thus sinned; and now as part of His
vengeance upon Midian the women
who sinned are to be put to death.
The tempted having been punished, it
would not have been right for the
tempters to escape. And since it was
impossible, except by miracle, to sepa-
rate the guilty from the innocent, all
the women were slain (comp. 1 Pet. iv.
17).

4 As a precaution. The women who
had been engaged in the abominable
worship of Baal-peor, would, probably,
had they been spared, have seduced the
Israelites again into sin: and so their
death may have appeared necessary for
securing the purity and security of
Israel. And the boys, on growing into
manhood, would probably have con-
spired to avenge the slaughter of their
parents upon Israel, and so they were


put to death. Moreover, as an ex:
ample of Divine retribution, it was thus
rendered more impressive, ‘‘ warning
parents not to imitate the guilt of the
Midianites, lest they shculd involve
their beloved offspring in destruc-
tion.” (6)

Learn, that tt ts our duty to avoid
every occasion of temptation to sin (comp.
Matt. v. 29, 30). (c)

IV. The purification of the return-
ing warriors, their captives, and their
spoils.

“ And do ye abide without the camp
seven days,” &c. (vers. 19-23). The
camp of Israel was regarded as holy
because of the presence of the Lord
God there ; and the soldiers having be-
come ceremonially unclean by their con-
tact with the slain, could not enter
therein until they were purified (comp.
chap. v. 1-4; xix. 11-20). And the
captives having by their captivity be
come “to some extent a constituent
part of the Israelitish people,” needed
purification also, especially as they had
practised abominable idolatry, And the
spoil, as being taken from a heathen
people, would need purification, before
it could be admitted into the camp, and
appropriated to the use of the people
of God.

Learn, that it ts the solemn duty of
the Church of God to maiitain moral
purity within tts borders. ‘Ye are the
temple of the living God, as God hath
said, I will dwell in them,” &c (2 Cor,
vi. 16—vii. 1). (d@)


4LLOSTRATIONS.


(a) Mlustrations om this point appear on
pp. 278, 279.

(b) A more difficult point is the command
of Moses, that the adult females and the male
children among the prisoners should be put to
death. Pained as we are by the recital of
such horrors, and glad as we feel that such
usages have passed away from the practices
of war, close examination will enable us to
see that the principles which have been laid
down (see p. 538), supply an adequate excuse
for a course which Moses himself must have
regarded as distressing. His course was de-
signed to act tn terrorem, with a view to fu-


543


ture security. It isclear that he had no satis-
faction in the task. On the contrary, he
appears to have been strongly excited when
he beheld the array of prisoners, and to have
uttered a rebuke which shows that he would
far rather that whatever severity needed to be
exercised should have been finished in the fu-
rious haste of onset, than that it should
thus be left for execution in cold blood. As
it was, however, the prisoners were upon his
hands, and he had to Oe of them as the re-
cent hazards and the present condition of the
state demanded, in an age when the necessities
of the world’s government involved the use of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XXXL





& much harsher instrumentality than is now
requisite, ‘Taking these considerations with
us, it may be asked, What was to be done
with these prisoners? Should they be sent
home unharmed, or should they be welcomed
on an equal footing to the hospitality of
Israel? Then if the views already stated
(p. 538) are sound, the war ought not to have
been undertaken. This foilows, even without
insisting upon the circumstance, that had the
latter alternative been adopted, the youthful
sons of the Midianitish warriors would soon
have grown up to be a sword in the bosom of
the still feeble state, and possibly to compel
the hazards and hardships of another conflict,
Then, witk regard to the adult females, it is
to be considered that it was their wicked in-
' strumentality which had led Israel to sin,
and had given occasion to the recent war;
and, on the other hand, the danger to be ap-
prehended from them, if they were allowed
again to try their seductive arts upon the
Israelites, hud just heen proved to be such as
the infant state would by no means tolerate.
Keeping in view, therefore, the time
and country in which Moses lived, and
the circumstauces by which he was sur-
rounded, it will be a bold thing for any-
ene to say, that as a man entrusted with
the welfare of a nation he acted wrongly.
That he acted only from a strong sense of
duty, every one who has studied his character
must know; and who among us, in these


altered times, is better able than he was to
judge of what his duty exacted? But if in
this case he did err, in judging that the stem
obligations of political duty allowed him to
show no pity on more than one class of his
prisoners, let him alone bear the blame of the
deed. He appears to have acted on his own
judgment, and does not, as usual, adduce the
command of the Lord for the course which
was taken.—John Kitto, D.D.

(c) A man who has been corrupted by the
fire of intoxication, says, “I cannot resist the
cup when I sit with my companions and it is
being passed over my shoulder; I have to
drink ; I am seized as with an afflatus of in-
fernal fire, and [ cannot help drinking.” It
may be that, when you bring yourself where
liquor is dispensed, you cannot help drinking ;
but you can avoid going there. Once having
tried it and found that you could not resist
the temptation, the next time you are guilty,
not for not resisting it, but for going where
the cup that is irresistible to you is handed
about; and you are just as guilty as though
you could resist the temptation and did not,
only the guilt takes hold one step further
back. Men are responsible for their volitions,
and for those conditions which produce voli-
tions —and tris is the opinion of men generally.
—H. W. Beecher.

(d) For illustrations on this point, see pp.
78, 94.


Tus CounseL oF BaLAAM.


(Verse 16.)


How shall we characterise the con-
duct of Balaam in this transaction?
Consider —

I. The measure of his criminality.

To do this we must form some esti-
mate of his knowledge of what was
right for him to do towards Israel. He
knew everything concerning Israel, and
their relation to God. His sin was
thus committed knowingly, consciously,
wilfully. He set himself to do wickedly.

Il, His motives in this course.


The meanest. He “loved the wages
of unrighteousness.”

III. The baseness of the method he
adopted to accomplish his design.

God had revealed to him, in pro-
phetic insight, the secret of I[srael’s
greatness and strength. And Balaam
used that very inspiration to injure,
fatally, God’s own chosen people.—
W. Roberts. Quoted in Zhe Beblical
Museum.


Tas DisTRiBuTion oF THE Srorts or THE Wak.


(Verses 25-47.)


Ths ord God gave directions to
Moses as to how the bocty taken from
the vanquished Midianites should be


divided. This would tend to prevent
dissatisfaction and complaint, dé
Notice—

wAS


OHAP. XXXL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





I, In this distribution the claims
of all classes of the community were
recognised.

The soldiers who had fought the
battle and seized the booty did not
retain the whole of it. They had been
chosen out of the whole congregation
to conduct the war for the congregation,
which had therefore a just claim to
share in the spoils. They ‘that took
the war upon them, who went out to
battle, and all the congregation,” the
priests, and the Levites, all received a
share.

Learn, that public servants should seek
to benefit the entire community. (a)

II, In this distribution the claims
of each class were considered and
equitably dealt with,

Though all olasses shared in the
booty, all classes did not have equal
portions. And this was just. The
soldiers who had returned from the
war, though only one fiftieth of the
entire congregation, received for their
share as much as all their brethren who
had remained at home. And it was
right that, inasmuch as they had borne
the hardships and hazards of the war,
they should be rewarded for their
services. Again, the portion of the
Levites was ten times as much as that


of the priests, as they were vastly more
numerous. But the portion of each
individual among the priests must have
been considerably greater than that of
each individual among the Levites, as
was fitting on account of the more
exalted and responsible character of
their office. The proportion allotted tc
each class seems tc have been son-
spicuously just and fair.

Learn, that God requires us te act
equitably in all our dealings.

III. In this distribution the claims
of the Lord were practically acknow-
ledged.

The portions which were given by
the warriors to the priests, and by the
congregation to the Levites, were “a
tribute unto the Lord”—“a heave
offering of the Lord.” Surely this was
right and comely. He had given them
the victory over the Midianites; and
they would have been guilty of injustice
and iugratitude if they had not pre-
sented a thank-offering to Him.

Learn, that of all our gains a portion
should be devoted to the Lord God.
“Thou shalt remember the Lord thy
God; for it is He that giveth thee
power to get wea'th” (comp. Deut. viii.
10-18).  (¢)


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) All personal and private interests must
be sacrificed to the call of duty. In the higher
walks of benevolent activity, there is no such
thing asa life of inglorious ease, . . . .

This sublime principle of self-annihilation
is couspicuous in the Christian system. Com-
pared with the one act of the Saviour’s conse-
cration and surrender, the flame of a thousand
worlds would have gone out in cold ashes,
Having loved us even unto death. this was the
last possible point to which His self-devotion
could reach, and never was there such a perfect
oblivion of self as in His one offering on the
Cross. Drinking into this spirit, His disci-
ples forsook all and followed Him, Martyrs
and confessors stand before us magnanimous
in the spirit of a self-forgetting love. If the
Greeks provided that their citizens might be
brave in mind, and strong in body, Chris-
tianity must ever be looked upon as the
religion of heroism. We must be prepared
to give up whatever comes between the call
of dutv and our own individual interest. We


we


know little of the power of the Cross, if ithas
not crucified us to the world. and crucified the
world to us. In proportion as we are filled
with the power of the Cross, do we become
superior to the littleness and the selfishness of
our nature, and devote ourselves to the cause
ot universal good.—R. Fergrson. LL.D,

(4) Justice isthe greatest iatercet of maron
earth. It is the ligament which holds civilized
beings and civilized nations together. Wher-
ever her temple stands, arid so long as 35 is duly
honoured, there is a foundation for social
security, and general happiness, and the
improvement and progress of our race. And
whoever labours on thia edffice with nsefuk
ness and distinction, whoever cleara ite
foundations, strengthens its pillars, adorne its
entablatures, or contributes to raise its august
dome still higher in the skies, connects him-
self in name and fame and chara*ter with that
which is and must be as endurable as the
frame of human society.— Webste,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


(c) A man gives away a sovereign in
Christ’s name and for Christ’s sake. Look at
the elements which constitute that act and
give it value, The man made the sovereign
honestly ; it is his, in point of fair service, by
what is called right. he keeps that sove-
reign, he will break no law in commerce; if
he will it away to his family, he will violate
no law in social equity ; if he spend it upon
himself, society will not condemn him. Yet
the man deliberately gives that sovereign
away to a poor child, to a friendless stranger,
to a Christian society. See what lies behind
the deed. The man says, in effect if not in
words, ‘‘ The money may be mine, but I myself
am not my own. How then can anything,
except temporarily, and under laws of steward-

‘ ship and responsibility ? I have no property


CHAP. XXXI.





in myself; I am bought with a price; I am
God’s agent. So far as I have given society
an equivalent for the sovereign, it is mine;
but the strength, the skill, the knowledge by
which I gained it are the gifts of God. The
image is Cesar’s, but the gold is God’s, I
will hold what Ihave as Christ's; holding it
so, I instantly yield it at His call, saying,—
Thine—oh, wounded blessed Christ —Thine is
the right!” So this giving away of the sove-
reign is not an off-hand deed; it is not done
flippantly ; it is not done to save appearance ;
it 1s not done from external social pres-
sure; it becomes a great religious act, e
solemn sacrifice, a holy thank-offering.—-Joseph
Parker, D.D. .

Additional illustrations on this point appear
om pp. 842-344.


A Nosus ACKNOWLEDGMENT oF aN ExTRaoRDINwaBY Favour,


(Verses 48-54.)


We have here—

I, Anextraordinary favour received.

“And the officers which were over
thousands of the host, the captains of
thousands,” &c. (vers. 48, 49). God
had not only given them a complete
victory and great booty, but He had
given them these things without the
loss of a single man. In this we have
“striking proof of the protection of
God ; but it is not so marvellous as to
furnish any good ground for calling in
question the correctness of the narra-
tive. Rosenmuller has cited an ex-
ample from Yacitus (Ann. xiii. 39), of
the Romans having slaughtered all the
foe without losing a single man on the
capture of a Parthian castle; and an-
other from Strabo (xvi. 11, 28), of a
battle in which 1,000 Arabs were slain,
and only two Romans, And Havernick
mentions a similar account from the
life of Saladin in his introduction (i. 2,
p. 452).” It is also important to bear
in mind that “the Midianites were a
nomad tribe, who lived by rearing flocks
apd herds, and therefore were not a
warlike people. Moreover, they were
probably attacked quite unawares, and
being unprepared, were completely
routed and cut down without quarter.”
—Keil and Del. Again, in this extra-
ordinary preservation of the army of

NWN


Israel we view the hand of the Lord
their God. “ This is the Lord’s doing ;
it is marvellous in our eyes.” He
“covered their heads in the day of
battle.” At His express command they
went forth to the war; and He pro-
tected them from harm. Their preser-
vation would stamp the war and the
victory as His; and so add to the im-
pressiveness of the warning it was
intended to convey. (a)

II. An extraordinary favour ac-
knowledged.

When the officers discovered that
every man who went forth to the war
had returned from it safely, they went
to Moses and declared the fact, taking
with them a handsome thank-offering
as an acknowledgment of their gratitude
to God. Their acknowledgment was—

1. Voluntary. No one commanded
them or exhorted them to do this:
their action was spontaneous and
hearty ; they offered “not grudgingly,
or of necessity ; for God loveth a cheer-
ful giver.”

2. Practical. They had not only
thanks upon their lips, but a generous
offering in their hands. They sought
to express their gratitude by their
gifts. (6)

3. Humble. They oftered this obla-
tion “to make an atonement for their

545


CHAP. XXXI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


a


souls before the Lord.” This does not
mean that the offering was to expiate
any particular offence which they had
committed; but to acknowledge un-
merited mercies. They felt themselves
unworthy of the distinguished favours
bestowed upon them. (¢)

4, Liberal. “All the gold of the
offering that they offered up to the


Lord was sixteen thousand seven hun-—


dred and fifty shekels,” the value of
which is variously estimated from
£20,000, to £25,000, It was, indeed,
a right noble offering. (d)

Learn, that the reception of spectal
mercies should be followed by special ae-
knowledgments thereof. (1) Such ac-
knowledgments are due to God. They
cannot be withheld without sin. (2)


Such acknowledgments are a benefit to
man, “It is good to give thanks unto
the Lord,” &c. The practical expres-
sion of gratitude enriches the heart. (¢)

III. The acknowledgment of extra-
ordinary favours accepted.

“And Moses and Eleazar, the priest,
took the gold of the captains of thou-
sands and of hundreds, and brought it
into the tabernacle of the congregation,
for a memorial for the children of Is-
rael before the Lord.” This means, as
we see from Exod. xxx. 16, that the
gold was placed in the treasury of the
tabernacle.

Learn, that God ts graciously pleased
to accept the offerings of humble and
grateful hearts. (f)


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) No prince ever returns safe out of a
pattle, but may well remember how many
blows and bullets have gone by him, that
might easily have gone through him; and by
what little, odd, unforeseen chances death ha:
been turned aside, which seemed in a ful
ready, and direct career, to have been posting
to him. All which passages, if we do not
acknowledge to have been guided to their
respective ends and effects by the conduct of
a superior and a Divine Hand, we do by the
same assertion cashier all Providence, strip
the Almighty of His noblest prerogative, and
make God, not the Governor, but the mere
Spectator of the world.—-Dr. South.

(6) For an illustration on this point, see p.
841. (c)

(c) Objects scem large or little according
to the medium through which they are
viewed. In the microscope, what a remark-
able change they undergo! The humble moss
rises into a graceful tree; the beetle, armed
for battle, fashes in golden or silver mail; a
grain of sand swells into a mass of rock; and,
on the other hand, a mountain looked at
through the wrong end of a telescope sinks
into a mole hill, and the broad lake into a
tiny pool. Even so, according as we look at
them, with the eyes of self-condemning
humility, or of self-righteous pride, God’s
mercies seem great or little. For example, a
minister of the Gospel passing one day near
a cottage, was attracted to its door by the
sound of aloud and earnest voice, It was a
bare and lonely dwelling ; the home of a man
who was childless, old, and poor. Drawing
near this mean and humble cabin, the stranger
at length made out these words, “ This, and
Jesus Chrigt too! this, and Jesus Christ too i”

546


as they were repeated over and over again in
tones of deep emotion, of wonder, gratitude,
and praise. His curiosity was roused to see
what that could be which called forth such
fervent, overflowing thanks. Stealing near,
he looked in at the patched and broken win-
dow; and tkere in the form of a grey, bent,
worn-out son of toil, at a rude table, with
hands raised to God, and his eyes fixed on
some crusis of bread and a cup of water, sat
piety, peace, humility, contentment, exclaim-
ing, “This, and Jesus Christ too !”—Zhos.
Guthrie, DD.

(d) Illustrations on this point appear on pp.
101, 117, 342. re tet ee

(e) It is well to feel that whatever good
your gift may do to the Church, or the poor,
or the sick, it is twice as much benefit to you
to give it. It is well to give, because you love
to give; as the flower which pours forth its
perfume because it never dreamed of doing
otherwise; or like the bird which quivers
with song, because it is a bird, and finds a
pleasure in its notes; or like the sun, which
shines, not by constraint, but because, being a
sun, it must shine; or like the waves of the
sea, which flash back the brilliance of the sun
because it is their nature to reflect and not to
hoard the light! Oh, to have such grace in
our hearts that we shall jo fully make sacri-
fices unto our God !—C. H. Spurgeon.

(7) On our birthdays our little children love
to give their father something, if it is only a
bunch of flowers out of the garden, or a four-
penny piece with a hole in it; they like to do
it to show their love; and wise parents will
be sure to let their children do such things for
them. So is it with our great Father in heaven.
What are our Sunday-school teachings and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


CHAP, XXXII,





our preachings, and all that, but these cracked
fourpenny pieces? Just nothing at all; but
the Lord allows us to do His work for His
own loye’s sake. His love to us finds a sweet-
ness in our loye to Him.— Ibid.
The other day, in walking down the street,
a little beggar boy, having discovered that I
loved flowers, came and put in'o my handa
faded little sprig which he had somewhere
. found. I did not look directly at the scrawny,
- withered branch, but beheld it through the
medium of the boy’s heart, seeing what he
would have given, not what he gave; and so
looking, the shrivelled stem was laden with
blossoms of beauty and odour. And if I, who
am cold, and ignorant, receive so graciously
the offering of a poor child, with what tender
‘joy must our heavenly Father receive the sin-


cere tribute of His creatures, when He looks
through the medium of His iufinite love and
compassion? . . .. Christ does not say,
“Take the noblest things of life, and bring
them perfect to Me, and I will receive them.”
He says, ‘‘ Take the lowest and most disagree-
able thing; and if you bring it cheerfully for
My sake, it shall be to Me a flower of remem-
brance, and I will press it in the Book of Life,
and keep it for ever.” Go, then, search for
flowers to bring to Christ; and if you cannot
find even roa'l-side or pasture weeds—if there
are only nettle and briars, and vou are willing
for His sake to thru+t your hand into the thorn
bush and bring a branch from thence, He will
take it lovingly, and cherish it evermore.—
&. W. Beecher,


CHAPTER XXXIi.


CritTicaL aND ExpLanatory NOTES.


In this chapter we have the account
of the allotment of the territory con-
quered by Israel on the east of the
Jordan to the tribes of Reuben and
Gad, and tke half tribe of Manasseh.

Verse 1. Jazer (see on chap. xxi.
82).

Gilead, “a mountainous region east
of the Jordan; bounded on the north
by Bashan, on the east by the Arabian
plateau, and on the south by Moab and
Ammon (Gen. xxxi. 21; Deut iii, 12-
17.)”— Bibl. Dict.

A place for cattle ; a district of “rich
pasture land, with shady forests, and
copious streams.” —ZJ bid.

Verse 3. Ataroth, &c. (see on verses
34-38),

Verses 8-13 (see chaps. xiii. and xiv.).

Verse 8. Kadesh-carnea (see on
chap. xiii. 26).

Verse 9. Lshcol (see on chap. xiii. 23).

Verse 17. Go ready armed. Keil
and Del.: “ Equip ourselves hastily.”

Verse 23. Be sure your sin will find
you out, “Lit.: ‘Know ye of your sin
that it will find you out.’”—Speaker’s
Comm.

Verse 28. Moses commanded Eleazar,
&c. (comp. chap. xxxiv. 17-29).

Verse 33. And unto half the tribe of
Manasseh. “The participation of this
half tribe in the possession is accounted

NN 2


for in ver. 39”—0O. » Gerlach (see
also Josh. xvii. 1). At this time Moses
only gave to the two tribes and a half
a general promise of this country. The
determination of their respective allot-
ments, and the taking possession of
them, was not effected until some time
afterwards.

Verses 34-36. Places restored and
fortified by the Gadites.

Verse 34. Dibun (see on chap. xxi.
30).

(Tepe wat crowns,” probably iden-
tical with the ruins Attarus, on Jebel
Attarus, and seven miles north-west of
Dibon,

Aroer—* ruins,” now in ruins and
called Arair, upon the very edge of the
precipitous north bank of the ravine
through which the Arnon flows, Not to
be confounded with “ Aroer that is be-
fore Rabbah” (Josh. xiii. 25),

Verse 35. <Atroth, Shophan. This
should be written Atroth-Shophan ;
Shophan being added to distinguish it
from the Ataroth of the preceding
verse. The situation has not been
identified.

Jaazer, or Jazer (see on chap. xxi. 32).

Jogbehah, now in ruins and called
Jebeiha, seven miles north-west, of


Jazer.
Verse 36. ilar C7 of


CHAP, XXXIL


sweet water ;” in ver. 3 contracted into
Nimrah ; situated five miles north of
Libias ; now in ruins and called Nahr
Nimrin, where the waters of the Wady
Shoaib enter the Jordan.

Beth-haran, the same as Beth-aram,
which should be Beth-haram (Josh. xiii.
27). Herod Antipas named it Libias,
in honour of Livia, the wife of
Augustus Cesar. It is now in ruins,
and is called Rameh; situated not far
from the mouth of the Wady Hesban.

Verses 37, 38. Places restored and
fortified by the Reubenites.

Verse 37. Heshbon (see on chap.
xxi. 25).

Elealeh, now called El-A’al, a little
more than a mile north-east of Hesh-
bon.

Kirjathaim, was probably situated
three miles south of Heshbon, where
the ruins of et-Teym are now found.

Verse 38. Nebo, a town on or near
Pisgah, in the mountains of Abarim
(see chap. xxi. 20). “A ruined village
of the name Neba has been mentioned
by travellers as still existing in those
parts, and from the latest account seems
to be on the most elevated of the crests”
of Pisgah, “ due west of Baal-meon, and
three miles south-west of Heshbon.”—
Speaker's Comm.

Baal-meon, called Beon in ver. 3;
Beth-Baal-meon in Josh. xiii. 17, and
Beth-meon in Jer. xlviii, 23, was pro-
bably about two miles south-east of
Heshbon, where the ruins of Myun are
now found.

Shibmah, more correctly Sibmah (Isa.
xvi. 8), probably four miles east of
Heshbon, and now marked by the ruins
esSameh. “All the places built by
the Reubenites were but a short distance
from Heshbon, and surrounded this
capital . . . The insertion of the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





words their names being changed, before
Shibmah, is an indication that the latter
place did not receive any other name,
Moreover, the new names which the
builders gave to these towns did not
continue in use long, but were soon
pressed out by the old ones again.”—
Keil and Del.

And gave other names, &o. Margin:
“Heb., ‘they called by names the names
of the cities.’” “A roundabout way
of saying, they called the towns by
(other, or new) names.’”—Zéid.

Verse 39. Machir the son of Manassch
(comp. Gen. 1. 23).

Went. Rather “had gone.” “The
imperfects in ver. 39 are to be under-
stood in the sense of pluperfects.”—Keil
and Del.

Gilead. ** More strictly part of north
Gilead” (comp. Deut. iii. 13).

Verse 41. Jazr the son of Manassch.
“Jair was the grandson of a daughter
of Machir the son of Manasseh, and
therefore a great-grandson of Manasseh
on the mother’s side. His father, Segub,
was the son of Hezron of the tribe of
Judah, who had married a daughter of
Manasseh (1 Chron. ii. 21, 22) ; so that
Jair, or rather Segub, had gone over
with his descendants unto the maternal
tribe, contrary to the ordinary rule, and
probably because Machir had portioned
his daughter with a rich dowry like
an heiress.” —Kezl and Del.

Took the small towns (comp. Deut.
ili. 14):

Havothjair—villages of Jair.

Verse 42. Nobah. This is the only
mention of him in the Scriptures.

Kenath. Now “ Kenawat, a ruined
town at the southern extremity of the
Lejah, about 20 miles north of Bisrah.”
—Bibl. Dict.


Tay Se.rish Request oF THE REUBENITES AND GADITES,


(Verses 1-5.)


This request exhibits—

I. Mean selfishness.

It is marked by av utter absence of
548


regard for the interests of others. Thesa
two tribes think and plan, and petition
wolely for themselves, In the compete


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP, XXXII,


tions of business and of professional and
sucial life there is often very much of
mean selfishness, and that even amongst
persons who are avowedly Christians,
But selfishness is utterly opposed to the
spirit of Jesus Christ ; and “ if any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none
of His.” (a)

II, Predominant worldliness,

“Now the children of Reuben and
the children of Gad had a very great
multitude of cattle,” &o. (ver. 1). The
one consideration which actuated them
was this, ‘The country is a land for
cattle, and thy servants have cattle.”
They had no care for the unity and
prosperity of the nation. Their patriot-
ism utterly succumbed to the force of
their worldliness. They had no solici-
tude as to the relation of the coveted
country to the institutions of national
worship. Religion was not sufficiently
strong in them to bear up against their
eagerness for worldly gain. They re-
sembled Lot in this respect, that they
had so keen an eye for worldly gain as
to be almost blind to every other con-
sideration (comp. Gen. xiii. 10-13). In
this day there are many, who regard
themselves as Christians, who resemble
the Reubenites and Gadites,—many
who are chiefly influenced by temporal
and worldly considerations in (1) the
selection and conduct of their business ;
(2) the formation of matrimonial alli-
ances; and (3) the determination of
their residence. Temporal gain, social
surroundings, salubrity of atmosphere,
and similar things, are often deeply
considered, while sacred and spiritual
things are well-nigh overlooked. (6)

III. Disregard of the interests and
rights of their brethren.

They manifest no concern for the
settlement of their brethren of the
other tribes in suitable inheritances ;
and silently they ignore their equal
claim to the country which they sought
for themselves. The brethren whom
the Reubenites and Gadites thus disre-
gard had shared with them all the toils,
hardships, and dangers of the battles
by which the land they sought for
themselves had been seoured ; but in


their selfishness the two tribes pay no
heed to this fact. The tendency of sel
fishness is to produce disregard of the
claims of others, which is often most
unjust. (e¢)

IV. Disparagement of their Divine
calling and destiny.

“Let this land be given unto thy
servants,” &. (ver. 5). Contrast their,
“Bring us not over Jordan,” with the
fervent prayer of Moses, “O Lord God,
I pray Thee, let me go over,” &c.
(Deut. iii. 25). -If they did not ac-
tually despise the glorious destiny which
hed been the hope of their ancestors
for ages previous, yet they grievously
depreciated it. What vast numbers
practically despise their exalted spiri-
tual calling in the Gospel for the pass-
ing and perishing things of this world !

V. Want of faith in the Divine
promise. ;

It is not improbable that they had
their doubts as to their taking the good
land beyond Jordan, and therefore
sought to secure for themselves what
the nation had already conquered.
Such unbelief is a grievous dishonour
to God.

Conclusion.

Mark the folly of this request of the
Reubenites and Gadites. The country
which they desired had very grave dis-
advantages. It was most exposed to
the attacks of their enemies; and it
was very difficult of united and suc-
cessful defence, because the Jordan to
some extent cut them off from the great
bulk of their nation. Their position
very speedily gave rise to misunder-
standing between them and their
brethren on the other side of Jordan.
Their association with heathen neigh-
bours led them into idolatry ; and they
were the first of the Israelites that were
carried into captivity (1 Chron. v. 25,
26). How foolish did Lot’s choice of
Sodom prove! (Gen. xiv. 12; xix. 15-
26). He who renounces spiritual and
eternal advantages for material and
temporal prosperity makes a fool’a
choice. “ For what is a man profited 4”
&o. (Matt. xvi. 26). A selfish policy is
generally a self-defeating policy: (d)


CHAP. XXXIL,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


ete A


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) What amazing selfishness visibly appears
tn the general conduct of mankind, and how
little are they, amidst all the cnlture of edu-
cation and humanity, all the restrairts of law,
and all the illuminations, injnnctions, and
threatenings of religion, disposed to act agree-
ably to the dictates of truth, righteousness,
and benevolence towards each other! A little
prosperity, alittle power, a very humble office,
or some other trifling object of ambition, will
at any time make those who have been for
life bosom friends, vehement: and irreconcile-
able enemies. In the common bargains be-
tween men. again, how rerely is it the design
to exchange an equivalent for that which is
received, although the only possible rule of
honesty ; and how generally to make what
is called a good,and what is in reality a
fraudulent, bargain. How many persons ob-
tain their whole living, and spend their whole
lives, in this kind of frand! What pains are
taken to conceal or belie the sta/e of the markets!
of our own circumstances, our real intentions,
or our ability to fulfil the engagements into
which we enter! What hase deceptions are
practised in cases of bankruptcy ; and whet
frauds perpetrated in order to attain levally
the character and immunities of a ' ankrupt!
How Gifficult has it been even to make a law
which can at all secure to creditors an equit-
able share in the actual remains of a bank-
rupt’s property! How strange would these
observations appear in a world of honest, vir-
tuous beings. - Timothy Dwight, D.D.

I warn every aspirant for wealth against
the infernal canker of selfishness. It will eat
out of the heart with the fire of hell, or bake
it harder than a stone. The heart of avari-
cious old age stands like a bare rock in a
bleak wilderness, and there is norod of autho-
rity, no incantation of pleasure, which can
draw from it one crystal drop to quench the
raging thirst for sa\isfaction— A. W. Beecher.

(6) There are business men in our city to-
day who have schemed for a future which, if
analysed, would disclose nothing but a careful
regard for personal and domestic comfort I
can give you the brief programme of such
men; it runs after this fashion—Country,
Garden, Quietness, Out-door amusements. I
thought I could have mentioned a fifth object
of pursuit, but I believe this exhausts the
whole scheme. Now it is for them to say
whether they will persist in urging this re-
he They are at perfect liberty to leave the

ity, to abandon the poor, to get away from
all that is foetid, noisome. and otherwise of-
fensive ; but let them beware lest, in reaching
the supposed heaven. they find that ‘hey have
gone in the wrong direction, and that where
they expeoted heaven to begin they find that
they have only reached the outward edge of
earth, Men who make arrangemenis exclu-
sively with a view to physical comiort never

0


ask the questions which are the chief in-
quiries of souls that truly live. They do not say,
What xind of preaching shall we have in the
locality to which we propose to move ? What
scholastic advantages will be available ? What
libraries will be accessible? No! What they
want is Country. Garden, Quietness Out-door
amusements—and they getthem; but the fruit
which they had coveted so eagerly turns to
ashes in their mouths —Joseph Parker, D.D.

Another illustration on this point appears
on p. 166

(c) You wonld be indignant if you saw a
strong man walk into a theatre or lecture-
room, and ealmly choosing the best place,
take his feeble neighbour by the shoulder, and
turn him out of it into the back seats or the
streets. You would be equally indignant if
you saw a stout fellow thrust himself up to a
table where some hungry children were being
fed, and reach his arm over their heads and
take their bread from them. But you are not
the least indignant if, when a man has stout-
ness of thought and swiftness of capacity, and,
instead of being long-armed only, has the much
greater gift of being long-headed—you think
it perfectly just that he should use his intellect
to take the bread out of the mouths of all tha
other men in the town who are of the sama
trade with him; or use his breadth and sweep
of sight to gather some branch of the commerce
of the country into one great cobweb, of which
he is himself to be the central spider, making
every thread vibrate with the points of his
claws, and commanding every avenue with the
facets of his eyes. You see no injustice in
this—John Ruskin, MA.

(d) It is a singular thing this: That men
by grasping lose; that by scraping they get
nothing ; that by having great bunches of keys
to lock up seven-fold doors they can’t find what
they have locked away—there must be some
way inside from the back, some way spirits get
into it—at all events the thing goes. God has
many ways of turning selfish man’s very suc-
cess to failure and disappointment, The dark-
ness, the mildew, the locust, the frost, the
lightning, the winds, are His servants. Thou
shalt carry much seed into the field and shalt
gather but little in, for the locusts shall con-
sume it. ‘ Ye have sown much and bring in
little; ye eat, but ye have not enough; ye drink,
but ye are not filled with drink; ye clothe you,
but there is none warm. He that earneth
waces, earneth wages to put into a bag with
holes.” “Ten women shall bake your bread in
one oven, and they shall deliver your bread
again by weight, and ye shall eat, and not be
satisfied.” How God mocks the bad man!
How He can turn the wicked man’s very suc-
cess into tailure, and how out of selfish ambi-
tion He can bring the scorpion whose sting is
death,—Joseph Parker, DD.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; NUMBERS,


CHAP. XXXII.





Tas Fairaru, Resvxs ov Mosss ro tas Raevsenires aND GaDITEs.


(Verses 6-15.)


In this rebuke Moses indicates—

I. The injustice of their proposal.

“Moses said unto the children of
Gad and the children of Reuben, Shall
your brethren go to war, and shall ye
sit here?” Their request, or proposal,
was unjust towards their brethren.
Why should they have as their inherit-
ance that country which all had assisted
to conquer, and leave their brethren to
conquer other possessions for them-
selves without their aid? But did
Moses misinterpret their request as
regards their intentions in this matter ?
Some think that he did, and that the
Reubenites and Gadites intended to aid
their brethren in the conyuest of Ca-
naan. This view of their conduct does
not commend itself to our judgment ;
for, “ when Moses reproved them, the
speakers did not reply that they had
not cherished the intention attributed
to them, but simply restricted them-
selves to the promise of co-operation in
the conquest of Canaan.” It is pro-
bable that, from “the rapid and easy
defeat of the two mighty kings of the
Amorites, Sihon and Og,” they had
come to the conclusion “ that the re-
maining ten tribes were quite strong
enough to conquer the land of Canaan
on the west of Jordan.” Whatever
view may be taken of their request in
this respect, they cannot be acquitted
of a want of brotherly feeling, and of
interest in the welfare of the nation as
a whole; and, therefore, they deserved
the rebuke which Moses addressed to
them.

Selfishness gravitates towards injus-
-ice. (a)

II. The tendency of their proposal
to dishearten their brethren.

“‘ Wherefore discourage ye the heart
of the children of Israel from going
over into the land which the Lord hath
given them?” Their request was cal-
culated to produce discouragement, be-
cause if it were granted it would be
likely to—


1, Reduce their numbers. They would
have fewer soldiers with which to con-
quer the land.

2. Engender dissatisfaction. The ten
tribes would feel that they had reason
for dissatisfaction and complaint.

In entering upon any course of pub-
lic action, we are morally bound to
consider what its: probable effect will be
on the community at large. “ None of
us liveth to himself.” (6)

III. The wickedness of their pro-
posal.

“ And, behold, ye are risen up in your
fathers’ stead, an increase of sinful


men,” &c. Their request was a sin
against God, inasmuch as it in
volved—


1. Unbelief of His word. They
doubted His promise to give them the
good land.

2. Depreciation of His goodness.
They practically disparaged the in-
heritance to which God had called
them. (See the preceding homily, in
which these points are noticed.) (c)

IV. The tendency of their proposal
to call down the wrath of God.

1. The cause of His anger. “Ye
are risen up in your fathers’ stead,
an increase of sinful men, to augment
yet the fierce anger of the Lord.”
With awful intensity His wrath ever
burns against sin. It is the “ abomin-
able thing which He hates.” (d)

2. The expression of His anger, “ For
if ye turn away from after Him, He
will yet again leave them in the
wilderness ; and ye shall destroy all
this people.” Ifthe unworthy desires
of the Reubenites and Gadites had
spread to the other tribes, it would have
been most just that God should exclude
them from Canaan. The expressions
of the Divine wrath are ever perfectly
just and right.

3. The subjects of His anger. ‘All
this people.” The sad consequences of
sin are not confined to the actual trans-
gressors, One member ofa ie sins,


CHAP, XXXII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,





and all the members suffer by reason
of that sin. In the nation, one class
or party pursues an evil course, and all
classes or parties suffer loss or pain.
An argument against sin. (¢)


V. The solemn example by which
Moses enforced his rebuke. (Verses
8-13.)

See our exposition of chapters xiii.,
xiv.


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) For an illustration on Injustice see p. 550,

(6) Illustrations on this point appear on pp.
£28, 485.

(c) Illustrations on this point may be found
on p. 252,

(d) God Himself, we have always under-
stood, hates sin with a most authentic,celestial,
and eternal hatred. A hatred, a hostility,
inexorable, ee aeveur which blasts the
scoundrel, and all scoundrels ultimately, into
black annihilation and disappearancefrom the
sum of things, The path of itis the path of
a flaming sword : he that has eyes may see it,
walking inexorable, divinely beautiful and
divinely terrible, through the chaotic gulf of
human history, and everywhere burning, as
with unquenchable fire, the false and the
deadworthy from the true and lifeworthy ;
making all human history, and the bioy raphy
of every man, a God’s Cosmos in the place of
a Devil’s Chaos. 0 it is in the end ; even so


to every man who isa man, and not a muti
nous beast, and hag eyes to see.—Tos,
Carlyle.

Other illustrations on the Wrath of Ged ap-
pear on pp. 220, 221.

(e) Sages of old contended that no sin was
ever committed whose consequences rested on
the head of the sinner alone; that no man
could do ill and his fellows not suffer. They
illustrated it thus :—‘ A vessel sailing from
Joppa, carried a passenger, who, beneath his
berth, cut a hole through the ship’s side.
When the men of the watch expostulated with


him, ‘ What doest thou, O miserable man?’


the offender calmly replied,‘ What matters it
to you? The hole I have made lies under my
own berth.’”

The ancient parable is worthy of the utmost
cousideration, No man perishes alone in his
iniquity ; no man can guess the full conse-
quences of his transgression.—C. H, Spurgeon


Tur AmENDED PROPOSAL OF THE REUBENITES AND GADITES.


(Verses 16-27.)


Our subject
branches—

i. «ue amended proposal made.

“And they came near unto him, and
said, we will build,” &c. (verses 16-
19), The chief terms of the proposal
are these—

1. That they should provide at once
for the safe settlement of their families
and ther flocks and herds. “ We will
build sheepfolds here for our cattle, and
cities for our little ones, and our little
ones shall dwell in the fenced cities be-
cause of the inhabitants of the land.” A
reasonable proposal; for it was their
duty to look to the safety of their wives
and little ones and possessions; and
when this was done, they would be
more free to go forth to the conquest of
the land.

2. That they would assist their
brethren in the conquest of Canaag.

552


has three main


“We ourselves will go ready armed
before the children of Israel until we
have brought them -unto their place.”
They would take their full share in the
hardships and dangers which were to
be encountered in taking the country.

3. That they would not leave their
brethren until that conquest was com-
pletely effected. “We will not return
unto our houses, until the children of
Israel have inherited every man his
inheritance.” They would not return
unto their homes until their brethren
ceased to require their services.

4. That they would not seek for any
inheritance with their brethren on the
other side of the Jordan. “We will not
inherit with them on yonder side Jor-
dan, or forward ;) because our inherit-
ance is fallen to us on this side Jordan
eastward.” They would not seek for
any additional territory as compensa


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XXXII.


Ce ee


tion for helping their brethren in their
wars, but would be content with the
inheritance for which they were now
asking.

Such are the chief terms of the
amended proposal of the Reubenites and
the Gadites; and they are manifestly
reasonable and equitable.

II, The amended proposal accepted.

“And Moses said unto them, if ye
will do this,” &c. (verses 20-24),

1. Moses re-affirms the chief terms of
their proposal, He “said unto them, if
ye will do this thing, if ye will go
armed before the Lord to war, and will
go all of you armed over Jordan,” &o.
(verses 20-22), In this way he would
impress them with the importance of
the engagements they were making,
and the solemnity of the obligations
incurred by then.

2. He accepts their proposal as righte-
ous. “Then afterwards ye shall re-
turn, and be guiltless before the Lord,
and before Israel; and this land shall
be your possession before the Lord.
Build you cities for your little ones, and
folds for your sheep: and do that which
hath proceeded out of your mouth.”

3. He warns them that if they fail to
faithfully fulfil tts terms punishment
will overtake them. “But if ye will
not do so, behold, ye have sinned
against the Lord: and be sure your sin
will find you out.” “The guilt will


haunt you at heels, as a bloodhound
and the punishment will overtake you.’
Their sin would certainly bring its owr
punishment. (a)

III. The amended proposal con.
firmed.

“ And the children of God and the
children of Reuben spake unto Moses,
saying, Thy servants will do as my
lord commandeth. Our little ones,”
d&c. (verses 25-27). And the proposal
thus ratified was faithfully fulfilled
(Josh. iv. 12, 13).

Lessons,

i, The duty of manifesting a practical
regard for the rights and interests of
others. ‘‘We are members one of an-
other.” ‘The members should have
the same care one for another. And
whether one member suffer,” d&c.
(1 Cor. xii, 25, 26). It behoves us not
merely to cultivate kind feelings to-
wards others, but also to render
practical help in the toils and trials of
life. (b)

ii. The wnportance of faithfully ful-
filling the engagements into which we
enter, Our covenants we should always
keep. Our promises should always be
translated into performances, (c)

iii. Zhe delusweness of the notion that
any one can sin and escape the punish-
ment of sin. The penalty follows the
transgression as an inevitable conse-
quence. (d)


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) A vessel was going from Bassorah to
Bagdad, the author of Persian Stories re-
lates, with several passengers on board. In
the course of the voyage the sailors, by way
of a joke, put a man in irons, as he lay asleep,
and he became a subject of diversion to the
whole party till they drew near to the capital.
But when the sailors wanted to let him loose
the key was nowhere to be found, and after a
long and fruitless search they were compelled
to send for a blacksmith to knock off the fet-
ters. When, however, the blacksmith came,
he refused to do what they wanted till he had
authority of the magistrate, for he thought the
man might be some criminal whom the officers
of justice had laid hold of, and that his friends
wished to favour his escape. To the magistrate
they accordingly went, who sent down one of
his attendants to see into it, But the officer,


when he had heard their story, and had taken
the evidence of some of the most respectable
among the passengers, shook his head, and
with a look of solemnity said it was much too
serious a case for him to decide. So they re-
paired in a body tothe magistrate, and carried
the poor captive with them. So strange a
procession was sure to attract notice, and a
crowd soon collected about them, each curious
to know the prisoner’s offence, and to catch a
sight of him ; till at length one man, springing
forward, seized the captive by the throat and
exclaimed, “ Here is the villain I have been
looking for these two years, ever since he robbed
and murdered my poor brother!” Nor would
he quit his hold till they came before the magis-
trate, and the murder being clearly proved,
the man who had been confined in joke only
was given up to death, as amen for the


CHAP. XXXIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY


NUMBERS.





blood he had shed.—Zhe Sunday School
Teacher.

Another illustration on this point is given
on p. 90.

(6) “ Two,” says Solomon, “‘ are better than
one ; for if they fall, the one will lift up his
fellow : but woe to him who is alone when he
falleth ; for he hath not another to help him
up.” The cobbler could not paint the picture,
but he could tell Apelles that the shoe latchet
was not quite right, and the painter thought
it well to take his hint, Two neigh-
bours, one blind and the other lame, were
called to a place at a great distance. What
was to be done? The blind man could not
see, and the lame man could not walk. Why,
the blind man carried the lame one; the
blind one assisted by his legs, the other by his
eyes, Say to no one, then, “I can do without
you ;” but be ready to help those who ask
your aid, and then, when it is needed, you
may ask theirs. Mankind are so much in-
debted to one another, that they owe mutual
attention.—Anon,

Man is not himself his own work; he is
precisely the most wonderful piece of God’s
workmanship extant. In this best piece not
only he is bound to take delight, but cannot,
in a right state of thought, take delight in
anything else, otherwise than through himself,
Through himself, however, as the sun of crea-
tion, not as the creation. In himself, as the
light of the world; not as being the world.
Let him stand in his due relation to other crea-
tures, and to inanimate things—know them all
and love them, as made for him, and he for them;
and he becomes himself the greatest and
holiest of them. But let him cast off this rela-
tion, despise and forget the less creation round
him, and instead of being the light of the world,
he is a8 @ sun in space—a fiery ball, spotted
with storm.


All the diseases of mind leading to fatalest
ruin consist primarily in this isolation. They
are the concentration of man upon himself ;
whether his heavenly interests or his worldly
interests, matters not; it is the being his own
interests which makes the regard of them so
mortal. Every form of asceticism on one
side, of sensualism on the other, is an isola-
tion of his soul or of his body ; the fixing his
thoughts upon them alone: while every
healthy state of nations and of individual
minds consists in the unselfish presence of the
human spirit everywhere, energizing over all
things ; speaking and living through all
things —John Ruskin, M.A.

(c) When Justice North, afterwards the
Lord Keeper Guildford, during one of his
circuits, visited the Duke of Beaufort, at his
princely seat at Badminton, the Lord Arthur,
then a child about five years old, was very
angry with the judge (he said) for hanging
men. The judge replied, “that if they were
not hung, they would kill and steal.” “No,”
said the little boy, ‘you should make them
promise upon their honour they would not do
so, and then they would not.” How delicate
must the noble principle have been in the
breast of this infant noble, and how rich a
soil wherein to plant and to cherish it—
Biblical Museum.

I have somewhere met with an anecdote of
Lord Chatham, who had promised that his
son should be present at the pulling down of
a garden wall. The wall was, however, taken
down during his absence, through forgetful-
ness; but, feeling the importance of his word
being held sacred, Lord Chatham ordered the
workmen to rebuild it, that his son might
witness its demolition, according to his father’s
promise.—F’. F, Trench.

(d) Illustrations on this topic are given on
pp. 89, 225, 318, 374,


ConFiiot THz ConpiTION oF ATTAINMENT, AND SUFFERING THE CoNSEQUENOE
oF SIN.


(Verses 20-23.)


Old Testament histories are New
Testament instructions. ‘“ Whatsoever
things were written aforetime,” &c.
(Rom. xv. 4). They teach that human
nature is the same in all ages; that
God’s government is the same, &c.

I. A truth to be confirmed—that
those who would share in the inherit-
ance must engage in the conflict.

In this warfare not to fight is to
perish. To obtain the possession we
must “go armed before the Lord to
war.” Life is a scene of conflict be-
tween the seed of the Serpent, &c.

554


1. This ¢s opposed to the thoughtless
impiety of the worldling ; who, intent
upon present objects, has no sympathy
with the claims of Truth, the designs
of God, or the conflicts of the Church.

They forget that in the great struggle
always going on between truth and
error, holiness and sin, Christ and
Belial, heaven and hell, every man
must take a part—for Christ against
Satan, or for Satan against Christ. The
moment that the life of faith begins,
the fight of faith begins. We cannot
put off our armour till we put on our


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP, XXXII


————————— eee


shroud. It was a striking saying of a
celebrated captain: “There’s theenemy;
if you don’t kill them, they will kill
you.”

They forget that this war, like that
against Canaan, is divinely appointed.
Six times in this connection it is stated
that it was “before the Lord” they
were to “go armed to war.” The con-
flict was begun at His command ; and
not to end but with His permission.

Reuben and Gad are fitting types of
worldly men. They had a fine eye for
worldly gain. They would willingly
engage with the warriors up to the
point of securing their inheritance, and
then fall back. Every unconverted
man is a Reubenite at heart. For the
world all eagerness, &c.

2. This is opposed to the sinister and
selfish designs of the hypocrite; who is
always pursuing some secondary object.
We are to guard against “all the de-
ceits of the world.” Calvin, speaking
of the Reubenites, thinks there was
“much amiss in the principle they
went upon, preferring their own ease
to the Church’s good, and having no
such regard to the honour of God and
the Covenant of Promise, as they ought
to have had.” Their request seemed
to arise from contempt of the good land,
or doubt of God’s power to bring them
through. It argued a culpable neglect
of their brethren. But the men of
Reuben, like other hypocrites, had other
ends. No man acts on asingle motive.
Reuben had lost his birthright, and
could not claim a first inheritance.
Manasseh, though the elder, was always
eclipsed and overshadowed by Ephraim,
the recognised head of ten tribes. And
Gad had a blot on his escutcheon, be-
ing descended from Zilpah, Leah’s
handmaid. Lach of these, therefore,
had a reason for wishing an inheritance
on that side the Jordan.

3. As opposed to the baseness of the
Antinomian ; who is all for privilege,
and nothing for obligation.

II. A warning to be applied—that
sin brings punishment; and that those
who think to sin with impunity, under
a dispensation of mercy, will find them-


selves fearfully disappointed. “Besure
your sin will find you out.”

No impression seems more common
than the hope of escape; but none
more fallacious. Some think they can
stop at a certain point ; others that they
can skilfully conceal their transgression ;
or that they can repent in time, Sin-
ning on a plan.

But the certain connexion between
crime and punishment is part of the
public creed of all nations. Hence the
tendency to convert calamities into
judgments. We look for and record
any token of retributive justice, by
which the consequences of men’s actions
are brought home to themselves,

1. In the way of natural consequence.
The law that rezulates the succession
of the seasons is not more certain than
that which regulates the just recom-
pense of reward that follows sin. God
who gives to every seed its own body,
makes the harvest of guilt answerable
to the seed time. The interval may be
long, but the result is certain. The
man who is undutiful to his parents, may
be visited by the equal undutifulness
of his own child. Jacob, who deceived
Isaac, was himself deceived by Laban
and Leah, and by his own sons. Agag,
who made mothers childless, was slain by
Samuel, and his mother made childless.

2. In the way of Providential dispen-
sation. God sees sin wherever it exists :
He is angry with the wicked. For sin
He drowned one world, &c.

See it in guilty nations. The Jews
crucified our Lord: they were crucified
by the Romans in the siege, &c. The
Roman emperors persecuted the Chris-
tians: they themselves came to un-
timely deaths. Spain founded the
Inquisition: she has been sunk to the
level of a third-rate power. France
persecuted the Huguenots: she has
been a hot-bed of revolutions.

See it in guilty men. Cain, Joseph’s
brethren, Gehazi, Achan, David.

3. In the way of final retribution.

III. A personal application to be
made.


se 8 Samuel Thodey,
655


CHAP. XXXIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


ea


Tor Certainty THAT SIN WILL FIND US OUT.


(Verse 23.)


The fear of punishment, if not the
best, is certainly the most common
preservative from sin. Under the
Mosaic dispensation, it was the principal
motive with which the Divine com-
mands were enforced. Nor did St.
Paul think it wrong to “ persuade men
by the terrors of the Lord.” Consider—

I. In what manner we have sinned
against the Lord.

It would be useless to attempt an
enumeration of all the sins we have
committed.

1. We shall confine ourselves to that
view of them which the context suggests.
The sin against which Moss cautioned
the two tribes was unfaithfulness to
their engagements ; and a preferring
of their present ease to the executing
of the work which God had assigned
them. Now, we promised to renounce
the world, &c., but how have we kept
the covenant which we solemnly entered
into 4 &e.

2. But the sin referred to in the text
will scarcely bear any comparison with
ours. The Israelites were to maintain
a warfare with men; we with the devil
(Eph. vi. 11, 12). They were to fight
for an earthly portion ; we, an heavenly
(1 Cor. ix. 25). They might have urged
that their aid was unnecessary when
God was engaged; and that after all
the prize was an inadequate reward for
such fatigue and danger. But can we
hope to conquer without exerting our
own powers? Or can we say that the
prize held out to us is not worth the
contest? If our engagements be more
solemn, our work more noble, and our
reward more glorious than-theirs, our
sin in disregarding all must be propor-
tionably greater. Yet who amongst us
must not confess that he has forgotten
all his vows? ‘Then we may say to all,
“Ye have sinned against the Lord.”

IJ. What assurance we have that
our sin shall find us out,

1. Sin may be said to find us out
when tt brings down the Divine judgmenta

556


upon us. Conscience, stupefied or seared,
often forgets to execute its office ; nor
speaks till God, by His providence or
grace, awaken it. Sometimes years
elapse before it reproves our iniquities
(Gen. xlii, 21, 22). Sometimes it
testifies to our face as soon as our sin
is committed (Matt. xxvi. 74, 75;
xxvii, 3, 4). Whenever it thus con-
demns us, our sins may be said to find
us out. But the expression in the text
imports rather the visitation of God for
sin, There is a punishment annexed
to every violation of God’s law (Ezek.
xviii. 4). And sin then finds us out
effectually when it brings that punish-
ment upon us.

2. That it will find us out, we have
the fullest possible assurance. (1) The
perfections of God's nature absolutely
preclude all hope of impunity. If He
be omnipresent, He must see ; if omnis-
cient, remember ; if holy, hate ; and if
just, punish the violations of His law.
If He be possessed of veracity and
power, He must execute the judgments
He has denounced (2) The declarations
of His Word abundantly confirm this
awful truth (Psa. xxi. 8; Prov. xi. 21;
Isa. iii. 11; Rom ii: 6, 9). Sin leaves
a track which can never be effaced;
and evil, however slow-paced, will
surely overtake it (Psa. cxl. 11; Prov.
xiii. 21). However scoffers may exult
in their security, their ruin is fast ap-
proaching (Deut, xxix. 19, 20; 2 Pet.
ii. 3; iii, 4, 9). (3) Zhe remarkable
instances of sin being detected and
punished in this world afford strong
additional testimony (Josh. vii. 14-18 ;
2 Sam. xii, 9-12; 2 Kings v. 26, 27).
How much more then shall the most
hidden things be brought to light here-
after! (4) Zhe appointment of a day
of final retribution puts the matter
beyond a possibility of doubt (Kecles,
xii. 14). We may, then, say to every
sinner, “ Be sure your sin,” &e.

InFrar—

i, How earnest should we be in search


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP, XXXIL


eee eC


tng out our own sins/ (Psa. 1, 21;
Luke xiii, 3.)

ii, How thankful should we be that a
way of escape ts provided for us! The
Man Christ Jesus is an hiding place
from the impending storm. Every
perfection of Deity is pledged to savea
believing penitent (1 John i. 9). We
are confirmed in this hope by the most


positive declarations of Scripture (Isa.
xliv. 22; Mic vii. 18, 19; Heb. viii.
12). We have most authentic and
astonishing instances of sin forgiven
(2 Sam. xii. 13; Luke vii. 47; xxiii
43). Let this blessed assurance en-
courage us to take refuge under the
Saviour’s wings (Matt. xxiii, 37),—C.
Simeon, M.A.


Tue Sexr-Rerrisutive Nature or Sim.


(Verse 23.)


“Be sure your sin will find you out.”

The text teaches the solemn and ad-
monitory truth that sin carries with it
its own punishment, which will even-
tually seize upon the sinner. This
truth is confirmed by—

I. The germinal character of human
actions,

Every action of life resembles a seed,
which brings forth fruit after its kind.
‘* Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall
he also reap;” &c. (a)

II. The exercise of memory.

In the exercise of its retentive func-
tion, memory holds all the sins we have
ever committed ; and in the exercise of
its reproductive function, it may at any
moment bring them forth, an awful pro-
cession, in clear and terrible aspects,
Memory is “the bane of the wicked ;”
for it torments them by vividly appall-
ing representations of their evil deeds.
In this way the sin overtakes and
smites the sinner. (5)

III. The operations of conscience.

The awakening of conscience to a
sense of its guilt is the kindling of a
hell within the breast from which there
is no escape, except through the Cross
of Christ. Guilt made Macbeth, the
noble and brave soldier, cry out :-—


“ How is’t with me when every noise appals
me!”


“The wicked flee when no man pur-
sueth.” ‘The sound of a shaken leaf
shall chase them: and they shall flee,
as fleeing from asword ; and they shall


fall when none pursueth.” “ Terrors


take hold on him as waters.”


“ inn pang where more than madness
ies !

- The worm that will not sleep, and never dies.

Thought of the gloomy day and ghastly
night,

That dreads the darkness, and yet loathes

the light :
That winds around, and tears the quivering


ear
Ah! seat ve not consume it and depart ?””
— Byron. (e)

IV. The power of habit.

“ Habit,” says Sir W. Hamilton, “ is
formed by the frequent repetition of
the same action, or passion, and this
repetition is called consuetude, or custom.”


« All habits gather by unseen degrees,

As brooks make rivers, rivers run to seas.”
—Dryden,

“ Habit is at first like a spider’s web ;
if neglected, it becomes a thread of
twine ; next, a cord or rope, and even-
tually a cable; and then who can break
it?” “Can the Ethiopian change his
skin, or the leopard his spots? then may
ye also do good that are accustomed to
do evil.” “ His own iniquities shall take
the wicked himself, and he shall be
holden with the cords of his sins.” (d)

Conclusion—

i, Warning against sin, Let the cer-
tainty of its punishment deter you from
the commission of sin.

ii, Motive to trust in Christ. Through
Him we may obtain forgiveness of sin,
cleansing from its stains, and freedom
from its power.

557


CHAP, XXXII,





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


NUMBERS.





ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) This topic is illustrated on pp. 89, 265,
481


(6) I knew a man who said, that in falling
twenty feet, when he expected to die, the
thoughts of a lifetime seemed to pass through
his mind. He thought of bis business, of his
wife, of his children, and of that eternity to
which he was going. A life seemed to pass
through his mind, and nothing was lost. So
it will be when memory summons the acts of a
life at the last tribunal. Nothing is lost.
Thoughts once impressed, but apparently lost,
will come cat again. A life is written on our
memory, as with invisible ink, It is appa-
rently lost to our frail sight while here ; but,
in the judgment light, it will be seen envelopse
around us, and will be unroll:d till every ling
and letter is made visible, I knew a sailor
once, who said, that when in a storm, on the
giddy mast, while trying to furl a sail, and
could not, he cursed God. It passed out of
his mind for twenty years; but then, in a
season of excitement, he said, “ Now I remem-
ber it. Iam lost."—H. W. Beecher.

Let a man try to forget any dreadful thing,
of which he hates the remembrance, and the
more he tries to forget it, the more surely he
remembers it, the more he bodies it forth, and
every thrust he makes at it causes it to glare
up anew, reveals some new horror in it.
Doubtless, this peculiarity in our mental con-
stitution is destined to play a most terrific
part in the punishment of men’s sins in eter-
nity ; for there can be nothing so dreadful as
the remembrance of sin, and nothing which
men will strive with more intense earnestness
to hide from and forget, than the recollection
of their sins; and yet every effort they make
at such forgetfulness only gives to such sins a
more terrible reality, and makes them blaze
up in a more lurid light to the conscience,
Oh, if they could but be forgotten! But the
more intense is the earnestness of this wish,
the more impossible becomes the forgetfulness,
the more terribly the dreaded evil stands out.
There are cases, even in this life, in which
men would give ten thousand worlds, if they
possessed them, could they only forget ; but
how much more in eternity! The man that
has committed a secret midnight murder, how
ofien, think you, though perhaps vot a human
being suspects it, would he give the riches of
the material universe, if he had them at com-
mand, could he but forget that one moment's
crime! But it is linked to his very constitu-
tion ; and every time he tries to cut the chain,
he does but rattle and rouse the crime out of
a pai into a new existence.—(G. B. Cheever,

ID,


Will no remorse, will no decay,
O Memory, soothe thee into peace ?
When life is ebbing fast away,
Will not thy hungry vultures cease ?
558


Ah, no! as weeds from fading free,
Noxious and rank, yet verdantly
Twine round a ruined tower ;
So to the heart, untamed, will cling
The memvry of an evil thing
In life’s departing hour:
Green is the weed when grey the wall,
And thistles rise while turrets fall.


Yet open Memory’s book again—
Turn o’er the lovelier pages now,
And find that balm for present vain
Which past enjoyment can bestow :
Delusion all, and void of power !
For e’en in thought’s serenest hour,
When past delights are “lt,
And Memory shines on scenes of woe,
Tis like the moonbeam on the snow,
That gilds, but cannot melt ;
That throws a mocking lustre o’er,
But leaves it cheerless as before.
—J. A. Heraud,


(¢) My dream was lengthened after life;
O, then began the tempest to my soul !
TI passed, methought, the melancholy flood,
With that grim ferryman which poets write of
Unto the kingdom of perpetual night.
The first that there did greet my stranger soul,
Was my great father-in-law, renowned War-
wick,
Who cried aloud— What scourae for perjury
Can this dark monarchy afford false Clarence?
And so he vanished: Then came wand’ring by
A shadow like an angel, with bright hair
Dabbled in blood ; and he shrieked out aloud
Clarence ts come,— false, fleeting, perjured
Clarence—
That stabb’d me in the field by Tewkesbury 5
Seize on him, furtes, take him to your torments!
With that, methought, a legion of foul fiends
Environed me, and howled in mine ears
Such hideous cries, that, with the very noise,
I trembling waked, and, for a season after,
Could not believe but that I was in hell ;
Such terrible impression made my dream,
T have done these things
That now give evidence against my soul.
—Shakespeare, Richard LII, i. 4


My conscience hath a thousand several tongues,
And every tongue brings in a several tale,
And every tale condemns me for a villain,
Perjury, perjury, in the high’st degree ;
Murder, stern murder, in the dir’st degree;
All several sins. all used in each degree,
Throng to the bar, crying all—Guilty! guilty!
I shall despair. There is no creature loves me,
And, if I die, no soul will pity me—
Nay, wherefore should they? since that I myself
Find in myself no pity to myself.
Methought the souls of all that I had murder’a
Came to my tent; and every one did threat
To-morrow’s vengeance on the head pepe
—IThid. v. &


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





(d) Here is a young man who says, “I can-
not see why they make such a fuss about the
intoxicating cup. Why, it is exhilarating.
It makes me feel well I can talk better,
think better, feel better. I cannot see why
people have such a prejudice against it.” A
few years pass on, and he wakes up, snd finds
himself in the clutches of an evil habit which


CHAP. XXXII.





he tries to break, but cannot; and he cries
ont, “O Lord God, help me!” It seems as
though God would not hear his prayer, and
in agony of body and soul he cries out, “It
hiteth like a serpent, and it stingeth like an
adder.” How bright it was atthe start! how
black it was at the last!—Z. De Witt Zal-
mage, D.D.


Sry WILL come To Liaut.


(Verse 23.)


“Be sure your sin will find you
out.”

Men, when they commit sin, wish to
think that they are done with the
thing for ever. Few succeed in con-
vincing themselves of this huge error ;
but some do think that the Most High
doth not regard, and will never call
them to account. Others think that
the day of God’s dealing with them
will not come till by some means, not,
sanctioned by Scripture, not approved
by sound reason, they will make all
right. In many ways sinners practise
deceit on themselves and harden them-
selves in iniquity. Men are not done
with sin when they have committed it.
After sin comes adread account. “ Be
sure your sin will find you out.”

I. God certainly shows His purpose
to punish sin by the way He causes
woe to come on some sinners here.

The drunkard, the glutton, and the
cheat, the liar and the lewd, are not the
only examples. Most frauds are ex-
posed. Nearly all murders are brought
to light. Men may plot very secretly,
and think their crimes are hid. But
Providence calls on stones and beams
of timber, on tracks and pieces of
paper, to be witnesses of the crime.
Then all that class of sins which are
not punishable by human laws. God
often punishes with a loss of respect,
esteem, or confidence. After twenty-
four years of concealment, Joseph’s
brethren are brought to feel and say
that God had found out their iniquity.
Ibycus, a famous Grecian poet, was
going to Corinth. Robbers attacked
and murdered him. As he was falling
and dying, he looked around to see if


there were no witnesses or avengers,
All he could see was a flock of cranes
high in the air. He called on them to
avenge his blood. You may think that
was an idle call. The robbers thought
so. They got their prey, and came to
Corinth. They went to the open
theatre. As they sat there, they looked
up and saw above them a flizht of
cranes, and one scoffingly said, “ Lo,
there are the avengers of Ibycus.” The
words were heard by some one near
them. Already fears of the poet’s
safety began to be common. The gang,
on being questioned, betrayed them-
selves, and Zhe Cranes of Ibycus be-
came a proverb, like that we have in
English, Murder will out.

II. Men might be sure that their sin
will find them out by the sore judg
ments which God sometimes sends on
men for their sins.

On this matter we should exercise
candour, caution, and charity, and not
call that an angry judgment which is
but a dark doing of love. Still thore
are on earth sore and marked judg-
ments. Look at the history of Achan,
of Korah, &c Of thirty Roman
Emperors, Proconsuls, and high officials,
who distinguished themselves by their
zeal and rage against the early Chris.
tians, it is recorded that one became
epeedily deranged after an act of great
cruelty ; one was slain by his own son;
one became blind; the eyes of one
started out of his head; one was
drowned ; one was strangled ; one died
in a miserable captivity; one fell
dead in a manner that will not bear to
be told: one died of so loathsome a
disease that several of his Ae en


CHAP. XXXII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBEKS.





were put to death, because they could
not abide the stench that filled his
room; two committed suicide ; a third
attempted it, but. had to call for help to
finish the bloody work; five were
assassinated by their own servants or
people ; five others died the most hor-
rible deaths, having many and strange
diseases; and eight were killed in
battle, or after being taken prisoners.
Men have more to do with sin than to
commit it.


III. One may escape detection and


strange judgments, and still his sins
may find him out in the fears, and clam-
ours, and remorse of conscience.

Remorse is remorseless. Like fire,
it burns all around it. No man can
protect himself against his sins flashing
him in the face at any moment. The
Bible, preaching, singing, praying, a
marriage, a trial in court, the sight of
the man he has injured, or one that
looks like him, or anything may arouse
his conscience into fury at the most
inconvenient time.

IV. But even if one escape all these
things, yet if he dies unpardoned his
sins will find him out in the next world.

Luke xii. 2; 1 Tim. v. 24; Hccles,
x. 20.


Why do not men admit the force of
these truths, and act accordingly ? The
reasons are very Clear.

1. Some think their sins will not find
them out because God has not yet called
them to account (Eccles. viii. 11). Such
men forget that with the Lord one day
is “‘as a thousand years,” &o. (2 Pet.
iii. 8-10).

2. In this world sinners often forget
their sins, and think God has also for-
gotten them (Ps. x. i1). But God for-
gets nothing.

3. Some think their sin will not find
them out because they doubt whether God
ts holy and just, and whether He takes
notice of human actions (Ps. xciv. 5-7).
But that is practical atheism (Prov.
xv. 3; Eccles. xii. 14).

4. Some think their sin will not find them
out because Godis merciful. But mercy
slighted and rejected can save no man.
All the cooling fountains can do no
good to him who does not drink them.

O sinner, “be sure your sin will find
you out.” You may now live in ease
and in error. You may now harden
your heart in pride. But you must
meet your sins at God’s tribunal. Re-
member that. O be wise, be wise unto
salvation. — W. S. Plumer, D.D.


Tos ARRANGEMENTS FoR CarRYING OUT THE PROPOSAL OF THE
REvUBENITES AND GaDITES,


(Verses 28-42.)


In these verses there are several
things which require a brief notice.

I. The arrangements made by
Moses for carrying out the agreement
into which he had entered with the
Reubenites and Gadites.

1. His command to Eleazar and
Joshua. ‘ Moses commanded Eleazar
the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun,”
&e. (vers. 28-30). Knowing that before
the engagements could be fulfilled he
would “be gathered unto his people,”
he charges the authorities of the nation
to carry them out.

3. His grant of the land to the two and

560


a half tribes. ‘ Moses gave unto them,
even to the children of Gad, and to the
children of Reuben,” &. Thus he
provides as carefully and completely as
possible for the fulfilment of the agree-
ment into which, as the head of the
nation, he had entered. Learn from
the conduct of Moses—

i. That men drawing near to the close
of life should provide for the fulfilment
of the engagements which they have made.
It behoves them “to set their house
(a order,” &c. (comp. 2 Kings xx. 1).
a .
ii. That men should not enter into en-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XXXIL





gagements for the fulfilment of which
they are unable to make provision,

If. The renewal of the promise of
the Reubenites and Gadites.

“And the children of Gad and the
children of Reuben answered,” d&ec.
Here are two considerations—

1. The engagement which they renew.
They pledge themselves, for the third
time, to do the will of Jehovah by aid-
ing their brethren in the conquest of
Canaan. ‘ As the Lord hath said unto
thy servants, so will we do,” &c.

2. The object which they had in view in
renewing the engagement. ‘ That the
possession of our inheritance on this
side Jordan may be ours.”

III. The bestowment upon the half
tribe of Manasseh of northern Gilead
and Sashan.

* And Moses gave Gilead unto Ma-
chir the son of Manasseh,” &c. (vers.
40-42). This half tribe of Manasseh
had not asked for their inheritance east
of the Jordan. Wherefore, then, was
it assigned to them there? Of the
three tribes “ who had elected to ree
main on that side of the Jordan, Reu-
ben and Gad had chosen their lot be-
cause the country was suitable to their
pastoral possessions and tendencies,
But Machir, Jair, and Nobah, the sons
of Manasseh, were no shepherds. They
were pure warriors, who had taken the
most prominent part in the conquest
of those provinces which up to that time
had been conquered, and whose deeds
are constantly referred to (ver. 39;
Deut. iii. 13-15) with credit and re-
nown. ‘Jair the son of Manasseh took
all the tract of Argob..,.. sixty
great cities’ (Deut. iii, 14; 4). * No-
bah took Kenath, and the daughter
towns thereof, and called it after his
own name’ (ver. 42). ‘Because Ma-
chir was a man of war, therefore he had
G.Jead and Bashan’ (Josh. xvii. 1). The
disizict which these ancient warriors


conquered was among the most difficult,
if not the most difficult, in the whole
country. It embraced the hiils of
Gilead, with their inaccessible heights
and impassable ravines, and the almost
impregnable tract of Argob, which de-
rives its modern name of Leah from
the secure ‘asylum’ it affords to those
who take refuge within its natural for-
tifications” (Bibl. Dict). Thus their
inheritance may have been assigned to
them there—

1. As an acknowledgment of their
bravery. The words of ver. 39 suggest
this, ‘The children of Machir, the son
of Manasseh, had gone to Gilead, and
taken it, and dispossessed the Amorite —
which was in it, And Moses gave
Gilead,” de.

2. As a precaution for the common
safety. The occupation of this frontier
country by these bold and valiant war-
riors would tend to promote the se-
curity of the nation. Moses might
have had this in view in settling them
there.

IV. The alteration of the names of
the places,

“Nebo and Baal-meon (their names
being changed), and Shibmah; and
gave other names unto the cities which
they builded.” The alteration of the
names of the towns arose probably
from—

1, A desire not to mention the names of
the heathen deities after which some of
them were called. Nebo and Baal are
such names. The Israelites were com-
manded not to utter the name of false
gods (Exod. xxiii. 13; Josh. xxiii. 7).

2. A desire to perpetuate their own
names. ‘Nobah took Kenath, and
called it Nobah, after his own name.”
“They call their lands after their own
names” (Ps. xlix. 11). Deep is the
desire of men to be remembered on the
earth when they have passed away from
it for ever, (0)


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) Tlustrations on the Fulfilment of pro-
mises appear on p. 554. .
In connection with the important subject of


00.


preparation for death—for we have all to die,
and the sooner we distinctly understand what
it requires to do so honourably ere ch the


CHAP, XXXIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


NUMBERS.


a eee


better,—allow me to mention, first, a wise and
equitable arrangement of your temporal affairs,
“Have you made your will?” There is an
aiimirable tract with this title. I wish it were
better known, and more generally read. He
who has property that will survive him, and a
family possessing indisputable claims on his
remembrance, ought not to give sleep to his
eyes nor slumber to his eyelids, till he has
made such a testamentary disposition of his
estate as shall be to the honour of his Christian
character, and save his family from contention,
litigation, and strife, in the event of his re-
moval.—TZhos. Raftes D.D., LL.D.

But not that way do all men make their
departure.
affairs settled, so that the executors and ad-
ministrators will not be confounded; and so
that what they have honestly earned be not
reattered among those who have no right to
it. If the sudden announcement should be
made to you to-night, what would be the state
of your families? Have you done all that
you can to fit them for heaven? Could you
feel, * Whatever I, as father or mother, could
jo, [have done. They will remember how I
prayed for them and talked with them; and
when they look at my picture, they will say :
‘That was a Christian parent. I want to
in the same way, and gain the same heaven ’” ?


Men ought to have their worldly .


The keys of this organ are twelve feet from the
organ-pipes; but every time those keys are
touched the pipes resound. So these parents
are now exercising influences which will res-
pond far on in the eternity of their children.
If they play an anthem now, it will be an an-
them then. If they play a dirge now, it will
A fs dirge for ever.—Z. De Witt Talmage,


(6) Various are the contrivances of vain
men to have their names written on earth,
and to procure, after their deaths, an imaginary
immorality, for themselves and their families,
in the memory and cenyersation of posterity ;
which is not often obtained; and, if obtained,
is of no value; when, with less trouble, they
might have had their names written in heaven,
and have secured to themselves a blessed im-
mortality, in the glorious kingdom of their
Redeemer.—Sp. Horne,


“Some sink outright.
Over See and o’er their names the billows
close,
To-morrow knows not they were ever born.
Others a short memorial leave behind ;
Like a flag floating when the bark’s engulfed,
It floats a moment, and is seen no more.
One Casar lives 3 a thousand are forgot.”
— Youna,


CHAPTER XXXIII.


CriticaL AND Expianatory Notes,


In this chapter we have a list of the
places at which the Israelites encamped
from their departure from Egypt unto
their arrival at the Jordan (vers. 1-49),
and directions as to the conquest
and distribution of Canaan (vers. 50-
56).

Verses 1 and 2, form the introduc-
tion to the list of encampments,

Verse 3. Rameses, a city in “ the
western part of the land of Goshen.”—
Bibl. Dict.

Verse 4. Buried. ‘Rather, ‘ were
burying.’”—Speaker’s Comm.

Verse 5. Succoth— “booths” or
“tents:” situated probably “nearly
jue east of Rameses, and fifteen miles
distant in a straight line.”— Budd.
Dict.

Verse 6. Etham, which is in the edge
of the wilderness. “It is reasonable to
place Etham where the cultivable land
ceases, near the Seba Bidr, or Seven
Wells, about three miles from the wes-

562


tern side of the ancient head of the
gulf."—Jbed,

Verse 7. Pi-hahiroth, The word is
most probably Egyptian, and signifies,
“the bed of reeds.”

Baal zephon, or ‘ T'yphon, a name of
Baal as representative of the opposite
of mundane order and harmony, or of
the god ruling in winter ”—(/uerst).
But Mr. Stuart Poole in Bzdl. Dict.
gives as its meaning “ place of Zephon;”
and he says, ‘‘We place Baal-zephon
on the western shore of the gulf of
Suez, a little below its head, which at
this time was about thirty or forty
miles northward of the present head.”

Migdol =‘‘a tower.” Sometimes, a
military watch-tower, or a look-out in
a vineyard. “ Migdol and Baal-zephon,”
says Mr. Poole, *‘ must-have been oppo-
site to one another, and the latter be-
hind Pi-hahiroth with reference to the
Israelites.”


Verse 8. Walderness of Etham; “é.¢.,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


CHAP. XXXIII.


NN


that part of the great wilderness of
Shur which adjoined Etham.”—/Speak-
er’s Comm.

Marah, “A satisfactory site has
been found for Marah. Howd4rah, at
the head of Wady Amiarah, where even
now caravans halt in their journey to
Sinai, possessing a spring at times so
bitter that neither men nor camels can
drink of it.”—Alford.

lim “is generally acknowledged to be
the present Wady Ghurundel, two and
a-half hours S.E. of Mara, and even
now a famous watering-place of the
Arabs.” —Jbid.

Verse 10. By the Red Sea. This
“must almost certainly be at the de-
scent of the Wady Taiyibeh on the sea,
or in some portion of the plain of
Mirkhah, before they again turned up
into the mountains.”—Stanley.

Verse 11. Walderness of Sin. “The
whole of this district between Elim
and Sinai is probably the wilderness
of Sin” (Alford). Knobel, however,
maintains, and with him Keil agrees,
“that the wilderness of Sin is the
great sandy plateau Debbet er Ram-
leh, between the desert of Et-Tih
and Sinai. This plateau begins near
Elim and stretches S. Eastwards to-
wards the range in which Sinai must
be included.”— Jbid

Verse 13. Dophkah... . Alush,
not mentioned in Exodus, were most
probably situated somewhere in the
northern portion of the wilderness of
Sin ; but their respective sites have not
been identified.

Verse 14. Rephidim=“ rests” or
“stays,” was most probably situated
in Wady Feiran (see Sinat and Palestine,
pp. 38-42).

Verse 15. The wilderness of Sinas.
The Sinai of the Law was most pro-
bably the Ras Stifsafeh, which is not a
distinct mountain, but the northern
portion of Jebel Misa, and is thus
described by Dean Stanley: ‘The
cliff rising like a huge altar in front of
the whole congregation, and visible
against the sky in lonely grandeur,
from end to end of the whole plain, is
the very image of ‘the mount that

00 2


might be touched,’ and from which the
‘voice’ of God might be heard far and
wide over the stillness of the plain
below.” The people were most pro-
bably assembled in er-Rahah, ‘the
most suitable spot imaginable for the
assembling of many thousands of peo-
ple. It is upwards of two miles long
and half a mile broad” (see Sinaz
and Pal., pp. 39 44; Alford on Exod.
xix. 1; and Dr. Smith’s Bibl. Dict. art.
Sinat). ;

Verse 17, Kzbroth-hattaavak (see on
chap. xi. 34; p. 181).

Hazeroth (see on chap. xi. 35, p. 181).

Verse 18. &ithmah, derived from
retem, the broom plant, was in the de-
sert of Paran (chap. xii. 16), and pro-
bably the same locality as “ the Wady
Abu Retemat, which is not very far to
the south of Kadesh, ‘a wide plain
with shrubs and retem,’ ¢.e., broom.
This spot was well adapted for a place
of encampment for Israel, which was
so numerous that it might easily stretch
into the desert of Zin, and as far as
Kadesh” (chap. xiii. 21, 26).—esl
and Del,

Verses 19-36 give the names of the
places of encampment “during the
years of penal wandering. The deter- —
mination of their position is difficult,
because during the period there was no
definite line of march pursued.”—
Speaker's Comm. “Of all the seven-
teen places not a single one is known,
or can be pointed out with certainty,
except Ezion-geber.”—KXeil and Del.

Limmon-parez = “ the pomegranate of


the breach.” The locality has not been
identified.
Verse 20. Mnbnah=“ whiteness.”


“ Probably the Laban of Deut. i. 1, and
situated on or near either the Elanitic
gulf or the Arabah.”—Speaker’s Comm.
Verse 21. Rissah =“ heaps of ruins.”
Probably identical with Rasa of the
Roman tables, “32 Roman miles from
Ailah (Elah), and 203 miles south of
Jerusalem.” — Bibl. Dict.


Verse 22. Kehelathah = “ assem-
bling.” Nothing is known of the
place.

Verse 23.


Mount Shapher =“ beau-
563


CHAP. XXXIII,


tiful mountain.” — Fuerst. Perhaps
“the hill now known as Jebel-esh-
Shureif, about 40 miles north-west of
Ras-el-Ka’a, north-west of Ezion geber,
and west or south-west of el-Beyaneh.”
— Speaker’s Comm.

Verse 24. Haradah=“place of
terror."—Fuerst. ‘ Probably Wady-el-
Kharaizeh, about 15 miles south-east
of Jebel-esh-Shureif.”—Speaker’s Comm.

Verse 25. Makheloth=“* Places of
meeting.” Unknown.

Verse 26. Tahath =“ a depression or
valley.”—Fuerst, The site has not been
identified.

Verse 27. Tarah=“ station.”
uation unknown.

Verse 28. Mithcah=“sweet foun-
tain” (Fuerst); or “place of sweet-
ness "— Bibl. Dict. Unknown.

Verse 29. Hashmonah. The mean-
ing of this word is doubtful; it may be
“fat” or “ fertile soil.” Probably it is
the Heshmon of Josh. xv, 27, and
identical with “ the fountain Ain Hasb,
in the north-west of the Arabah.”—
Speaker’s Comm.

Verse 30. Moseroth=“ place of
chastisement.”—Fwerst. In Deut. x.
6, we have the singular form of the
word (Moserab) instead of the plural,
as in this place. In that place it is
said, “there Aaron died.” Its site has
not been identified.

Verse 31. Benejaakan =“ the chil-
dren of Jaakan” (see Gen. xxxvi. 27;
1 Chron. i. 42). In Deut x. 6, “ Beeroth
(t.e. wells) of the children of Jaakan.”
There it ia stated that “the children
of Israel took their journey from Beeroth
of the children of Jaakan to Mosera ;”
whilst here, it is said, “they departed
from Moseroth, and pitched in Bene-
jaakan.” The two passayes probably
relate to different journeys. This
one to @ Journey during the thirty-
seven years of penal wanderings ; and
that in Deut. to the march in the
fortieth year, when they journeyed
from Kadesh to Mount Hor, where
Aaron died (chap. xx, 22-29). Beeroth-
bene-jaakan “may be identical with
the wells of sweet water now known as
el-Mayein, which lying up high among

564


Sit-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


NUMBERS,


the hills, more than 60 miles due west
of Mount Hor, would be likely to be
visited by the Israelites either imme-
diately before or after their encampment
at Moserah.”— Speaker's Comm.

Verse 32. Hor-hagidgad. “If the
initial letter be Kheth (asin Tex. Recep.,
Syr., and later Targum) the name will
denote the cavern of Gidgad ; if He (as
some few MSS., Samaritan text, earlier
Targ., LXX., Vulg. read) it will denote
the summit of Gidgad. In Deut. x. 7,
we read simply Gudgodah or Gudgod.”
—IJtid. The situation has not been
identified.

Verse 33, Jotbathah =“ goodness.”
“In Deut. x. 7, ‘Jotbath (Heb. Jotbathah)
a land of rivers of waters.’ This place
is perhaps to be identified with Wady
Tabah, six miles south-west of the head
of the Elanitic gulf; where is a broad
plain running down to the sea, contain
ing many palm trees and tamarisks,
and well supplied with water.”—Jbid.

Verse 34. Hbronah; ‘te. ‘ passage.’
This station apparently lay on the shore
of the Elanitic gulf, at a point where
the ebb of the tide left a ford across.
Hence the later Targum renders the
word ‘ fords.’ ”—Jbid.

Verse 35. Ezion Gaber =“ the giant’a
back bone.” ‘ Ezion Geber, which is
beside Eloth, on the shore of the Red
Sea, in the land of Edom” (1 Kings ix.
26). Dean Stanley says, “There is
nothing to fix the precise site of Ezion
Geber.” But it seoms almost certain
that it was at what was then the
northern extremity of the Elanitic gulf,
some miles north of the present head of
the gulf, at Ain-el-Ghudyan.

Verse 36. The wilderness of Zin,
which is Kadesh, See on chaps. xii. 16;
Rili021,5:26 x0 16.

Verse 37, Jfount Hor, &o. See on
chap xx. 22.

Verses 37-40. See on chaps. xx. 22
—xxi. 3.

Verses 41-43. Zalmonah, ... Pw
non, ... Obvth. See on chap. xxi. 10,

Verse 44, Jje-abarim. See on chap.
xx ils

Verse 45. Dibon-gad. See on chap.
xxi. 30,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBEKS.


CUAP. XXXIIL


eee


Verse 46. <Almon-diblathaim is al-
most certainlyidentical with Beth-dibla-
thaim mentioned by Jeremiah (xlviii,
22), im connection with Dibon and
Nebo. Its site is unknown; but “it
is to be sought for to the north or
north-west of Dibon.”

Verse 47. The mountains of Abarim,
before Nebo, “is only another name for
the ‘valley of the field of Moab upon the
top of Pisgah.’” See on chap. xxi. 20,

Verse 48. The plains of Moab, &o,
See on chap xxii. 1.

_ Verse 49. Bethjesimoth =“ house of

the wastes,” a town situated on the
north-eastern border of the Dead Sea
(Josh, xii. 3). Later it was allotted to
the Reubenites (Josh, xiii. 20).

Abel-shittim. See on chap. xxv, 1.

Verse 50—chap. xxxvi. 13. “ This
last portion of the book concludes the
record of the long wandering of the


people by certain directions respecting
that conquest and allotment of the
Promised Land, with which the wan-
dering terminated, These regulations
are divided into two sections by the
re-insertion at xxxv. 1 of the introduc-


_ tory formula with which xxxiii. 50


opens. Of these portions the former -
contains commands concerning (1) the
extermination of the Canaanitish na-
tions, xxxili. 50-56 ; (2) the boundaries
of the Promised Land, xxxiv. 1-15; (3)
the names of the men who should allot
the land, xxxiv. 16-29.”—Speaker’s
Comm.

Verse 52. Pictures, Rather, “idols
of stone” (comp. Ley. xxvi. 1).

Molten images; ‘‘idola cast from
brass.”

High places, where altars were erected
for the worship of idols,


Tue ITineraBy ov IsragL From Eayrt To THE Promisep Lann,


(Verses 1 and 2.)


Moses kept this record of the marches
and encampments of Israel “by the
commandment of the Lord.” There
must, therefore, have been some good
and sufficient reason for it. And it
seems to us that it was intended for a
memorial, which was calculated in many
ways to benefit primarily the Israelites,
but also all others who might make
acquaintance with the history. It is
probable that the history of every
station and march had its suggestions
for the instruction, or encouragement,
or admonition of the people. Of many
of these encampments we know nothing
except the name; but of others we
know something of the occurrences and
events connected with them, and in
these instances we shall endeavour to
briefly point out their moral sugges-
tions. The verses before us, which are
the introduction to the record, lead us
to consider its general uses, and these
as suggested by the fact that it was
commanded by God.

It was calculated to be useful as—


L An incentive to gratitude to
God.

His goodness and mercy to the Israel-
ites are manifest throughout the entire
history. They are especially seen in
His—

1. Emancipating them from bondage
in Egypt. ‘With @ strong baud the
Lord brought them out of Egypt.”

3. Repeatedly delwering them from
their enemies. From the Egyptians at
the Red Sea, the Amalekites at Rephi-
dim, the Canaanites at Arad, &o.

3. Infallibly guiding them in their
journeys. “In the day time He led
them with a cloud, and all the night
with a light of fire.” “He led them
forth by the right way,” &c. (a)

4. Constantly provding for them in
the desert. ‘‘He rained down manna
upon them to eat, and gave them of the
corn of heaven. Man did eat angels’
food; He sent them meat to the full.
He rained flesh also upon tl.em as dust,
and feathered fowls like the sand of the
sea.” ‘He clave the rocks in the

HO8


CHAP. XXXIIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





wilderness, and gave them drink as out
of the great depths ;” &c. (6)

5. Inviolably guarding them from
dangers. Excepting on those occasions
when they forfeited His protection by
their aggravated offences, He shielded
them from the perils both of the desert
through which they passed and of the
evemies whom they encountered. (c)

The recuru which, by sugyestion,
reminded them of so much goodness and
mercy, was eminently adapted to inspire
their warm and deep gratitude to Him
from whom these blessings flowed.
And can we survey the path of our
pilgrimage without discovering many
and cogent reasons for gratitude to
God? ‘What shall I render unto the
Lord?” &. ‘Bless the Lord, O my
soul;” &. (d)

II. An encouragement to obey and
trust God.

The history makes it clearly mani-
fest that in obedience to the Divine will
Israel realized peace, security, and
prosperity. This was a rvason for
continued and complete obedience.
And since God in His dealings with
them had displayed so much kindness
and wisdom, faithfulness and power,
He had surely proved Himself to be
worthy of their unlimited and hearty
confidence. He is unchangeable; there-
fore His past doings are examples of
what we may expect Him to do in the
future. Histcry, properly studied, will
be the nurse of faith and hope (comp.
Psa. Ixxviii. 3-8). (e)

IIL A monitor against sin,


Very impressively the history re-
veals—

1. Man’s proneness to sin. The Israel-
ites sinned at the Red Sea (Exod. xiv.
11, 12), in the wilderness of Sin (Exod.
xvi. 2, 3), at Rephidim (Exod. xvii. 1-4),
at Sinai (Exod, xxxii.), at Kibroth-
hattaavah (chap. xi.), at Kadesh (chap.
xiv.), &c. How sadly in human life to
day is the history of Israel in this
respect reproduced !

2. God’s antagonism against sin.
See this at Sinai, at Kibroth-hattaavah,
at Kadesh, in the rebellion of Korah and
his company (chap. xvi. 31-50), in the sin
“in the matter of Peor” (chap. xxv. 1-9).
God is the unrelenting foe of sin. (f)

3. The great evil of sin. This itinerary
shows by intimation how it had cursed
Israel. All their sorrows and afflictions
had resulted from sin. Many of these
stations would never have been visited
but for their sins. More than thirty-
seven years of their wanderings were
caused by them. ‘They had painfully
proved that sin “is an evil thing and
bitter” (comp. Jer. ii. 19). (g) All
this was calculated to warn them against
committing it. This use of history is
distinctly mentioned in Psa. xxviii. 9.
And this, we think, was one of the ends
why Moses was commanded to keep
this diary of travel. Let the miseries
which sin has caused us check every
inclination to it. (h)

Conclusion.

Every man should remember his own
history, and profit by his own experi-
ences.


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) This pointis illustratedon pp 152-154,164
(6) Mlustrations on the Divine provision are
given on pp. 154, 189, 190, 202.
c) The Divine protection is illustrated on
p. 105, 154, 164, 176,
(d) For illustrations on this point see pp.
101, 276.


(e) This point is illustrated on pp. 407, 416,
417
( Cf ) and (g) For illustrations on these points
see As 327,
(A) An illustration on Discouragements te
sin is given on p. 288,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP, XXXII.


.





Moszs’s Diary oF TRAVELS, AND ITS TEACHINGS,


(Verse 2.)


This chapter is a compilation from
Moses’s diary, recording the journeys
on the way from Egypt to Canaan.
The text tells us that God told Moses
to keep this record, and to publish it.
Human life is not to be forgotten ; it is
a thing of interest and moment to the
person living it, and it is full of instruc
tion to others observing it. God wished
the people to remember these journeys;
and He wishes all ages to know of
them and to learn from them. Let us
notice a few of the lessons God intends
these journeys to teach us.

I. They impress upon us the great
fact of God’s continued presence and
interest in human life.

As we read the incidents recorded of
these journeys, we see God feeding,
guiding, protecting the people. In the
census taken at His command, we see
that He knows every individual and
keeps a record of every life. Then we
see Him giving the people laws, sanitary
and moral, tending to health and com-
fort, purity and hoiiness. These jour-
neys show us that God knew all, was
interested in all, and was the best
Friend of all. He is still the same, &c.

II. They point out to us ‘hat God
is the one safe and true Guide through
life.

The people in the wilderness were
ignorant of the way, exposed to many
dangers, and quite helpless in them-
selves. These journeys show that God
with them was more than equal to all
emergencies. They prove that while
they trusted God, they were never in
want; while they followed Him, they
never missed the way ; and while they
obeyed Him, they never suffered harm.
To us, as to them, the journey of life
is a perilous one: the way is un-
known to us, and we need a guide.
Let the record of these journeys com-
mend to us Israel’s Guide. He knows
the way; He never errs ; He can ever
protect ; He is one we can wholly trust ;
and He is willing to be our Guide.


ITI. They present to us a picture of
human life. and thus tend to give us
correct views of life,

What is life as seen from these re-
cords? <A pilgrimage of varied and
chequered experiences. In no place
had they a “continuing city”; and in
their mysterious wanderings to and
fro, they met with all kinds of experi-
ences. They were constantly finding
fault with God ; and yet He was lead-
ing them in a straight, the best way.
Such is life to us all; and it is well for
us to know it, soas to have right views
of life. ‘ Here have we no continuing
city ;” this is not our rest. God is
often leading us in a way which is
mysterious to us; His paths are to us
often in the deep waters; and we are
often perplexed. But let us look at
these journeys. He is ever doing right
—doing all things well. And the way
He leads His people now, as then, is
the best way to rest. As in these
journeys so in our life; we have Marah
and Elim, storm and calm, trouble and
comfort ; and let us not forget that God
led the people to both. Let none
then build their hopes on the earth ;
let none despair in passing through
trials and afflictions. Our life here is a
mingled one.


“ Bits of gladness and of sorrow,
Strangely crossed and interlaid :


Days of fever and of fretting,
Hours of kind and blessed calm .
Tears of parting, amiles of meeting;
Paths of smooth and rugged life,
Such are our annals upon earth,


Our tale from very hour of birth,
The soul’s true hietory.— Bonar.


IV. They show to us that the
greatest evils of life and its only dan-
gers come from sin.

Journeying through this world can-
not be all pleasant. In the nature of
things, trials and troubles must and do


come ; for we are in an enemy’s land,
567


cHap, xxxi, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


he Le


we are passing through a course of
discipline, &c. But the greatest evils
and the only dangers of life come from
sin, Look at these journeys. Nothing
really injures man but sin. God led
the people to the Red Sea, to Marah,
to the wilderness, &o.; it was often
trying to them ; but God never failed
them; He was equal to all; they lost
not a man ; they wanted nothing while
they were faithful to Him. Invariably
we find that sin was their curse. So
with us. There ig nothing to fear in
poverty, illness, death, &e. They are
hard to bear; we need patience under
them; but they cannot Aurt us. Yea!
God can turn them into blessings for
us. But as for sin, it is ever a curse,
and nothing but a curse ; it ruins body
and soul; injures us for time and
eternity. Yet people love sin, &«.


O that all such would read the record
of these journeys ! &c,

V. They suggest the comforting
though that by trusting in God and
following Him we are sure to possess
the inheritance which He has pro-
mised to His people.

Difficulties, trials, opposition are met
on the way to heaven ; but following


after God, we shall safely reach the


‘good land beyond Jordan,” as did the
people the record of whose journeys
God commanded Moses to write.

We are all jouneying through life ;
soon, soon the journey will end. Let
each ask himself, Whither am I going?
Who is my guide? What will the end
be? And let these journeys of Israel
urge us all to seek for Israel’s God.—
David Lloyd.


Tas DEPaRTURE FROM THE Hovss oF BonpDaas,


(Verses 8, 4.)


Concerning the departure of Israel
from Egypt, the text sets forth the fol-
lowing facts—

I. Their departure succeeded the ob-
servance of a significant and sacred
memorial.

“They departed from Rameses in
the first month, on the fifteenth day
of the first month, on the morrow after
the Passover.” See pp. 139-141.

Learn: The importance of commemo-
rating the Divine mercies to us. Such
commemorations tend to foster our
gratitude to God, to encourage our
confidence in Him, &o. (a)

II. Their departure was public and
triumphant.

“The children of Israel went out
with an high hand in the sight of all
the Egyptians.”

1. Jt was public. “In the sight of
all the Egyptians.” There was no-
thing clandestine or ignominious in the
way in which they left the land of their
oppressors (comp. Isa. lii. 12),

2. It was triumphant. “ With an
high hand.” God had displayed a

‘68


little of the awful might of His strong
right hand to the Egyptians. He
effected the deliverance of Israel, &c.
Learn: The certainty of the accom-
plishment of the Divine purposes, and
the fulfilment of the Divine promises.
Notwithstanding the most powerful
and persistent opposition, He carries
forward His plans to triumphant issues,
A reason for trusting Him, &. (6)
III. Their departure took place
when their oppressors were engaged
in the most mournful occupation,
‘*For the Egyptians were burying all
their firstborn, which the Lord had
smitten among them.” How deep and
keen must have been the anguish of the
Egyptians! The sorrow of “ono that
is in bitterness for his firstborn,” is
spoken of in the sacred Scriptures as
the most sharp and sore. And how uni-
versal was this sorrow! “There wasa
great ory in Egypt, for there was not
house where there was not one dead.”
Learn: The greatest sorrows are the
result of our sins. The anguish of the
Egyptians arose from their oppression


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,





and cruelty to the Israelites, and their
persistent refusal to comply with the
demand of God, and let them go. Shun
sin, &e. (c)

IV. Theirdeparture had been brought
about by the most awful displays of
the Divine judgments.

“ All their firstborn, which the Lord
had smitten among them: upon their
gods also the Lord executed judg-
ments.”

1. On the Egyptians. “The whole
kingdom of Egypt,” says Dean Milman,
‘“had been laid waste by successive
calamities: the cruelty of the oppres-
sors had been dreadfully avenged ; all
classes had suffered in the indiscrimi-
nating desolation. Their pride had
been humbled; their most sacred pre-
judices wounded; the Nile had been
contaminated ; their dwellings polluted
by loathsome reptiles; their cleanly
persons defiled by vermin; their pure
air had swarmed with troublesome in-
sects; their cattle had perished by a
dreadful malady; their bodies broken
out with a filthy disease; their early
harvests had been destroyed by the
hail, the later by the locusts; an awful
darkness had enveloped them for three
days;” and, finally, they were smitten
with a calamity more dreadful than all
these, the instant death of all their
firstborn, both of man and cattle.

2. On their tdols. ‘‘ Upon their gods
also the Lord executed judgments.”
The meaning of this clause is very
doubtful. From the fact that the words
are here connected with the burying of


CHAP. XXXIIl.


ie





the firstborn, “it has been supposed,”
says Dean Alford, “that the destruc-
tion of the firstborn is meant by the
phrase, seeing that among them would
be many animals worshipped by the
Egyptians. Calvin supposes that the
judgment would consist in the demon-
stration of the worthlessness of the
help and guardianship of Egypt’s gods.
But it must be confessed that both
these explanations fall short of any
satisfactory elucidation of the words.
The Pseudo-Jonathan gives a perhaps
more likely interpretation, when he
refers it to a destruction of the images
of Egypt’s gods: ‘The molten images
shall liquefy, those of stone shall be
smitten in pieces, those of earth be
broken up, those of wood shall be burnt
to ashes’ (comp. 1 Sam. v. 3, f,). We
have very similar denunciations in Isa.
xix. 1; Jer. xliii, 13; xlvi. 25; Ezek.
xxx. 13, in three of which places is a
distinct reference to the destruction of
the images. But if this is meant, there
is, of course, far more beneath it: the
gods of Egypt are demoniac powers,
and Jehovah’s discomfiture of them,
beginning with the failure of the ma-
gicians, was consummated ” in the de-
struction of the firstborn.

Learn: The utter folly of any creature
opposing himself to God. “ He is wise
in heart, and mighty in strength: who
hath hardened himself against Him, and
hath prospered?” ‘Hast thou an arm
like God? or canst thou thunder with
a voice like Himt” (da)


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) For i'lustrations on this point, see pp.
407 4145, 417.

(6) For an illustration on this point, see
p. 400.


(c) Illustrations on this point are given on
p. 97, 258, 327,
(d) Lilustrations on this point appear on pp.
252, 312.


Succora anp Ernau: Tae DererMiInaTION oF THe Rout.


(Verses 5 and 6.)


“Suecoth, their first station, seems
to have been the general rendezvous
after their hasty fight, and from thence


their journey proper began.” Here

various Divine instructions seem to

have been given to the Israclites, tha
569


CHAP. XXXIIL.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


Sanne a eee es re ee


consideration of which is beyond the
scope of our work. There is, however,
one question connected with the encamp-
nent at Succoth, which cannot be over-
looked in any satisfactory treatment of
this itinerary, viz. the determination
of the route to be pursued ; for it is in
the account of their brief stay here
that we first read of that route. From
Succoth to Palestine, through the land
of the Philistines, the usual caravan
way, is comparatively a short journey,
“From Rameses to Gaza,” says Kalisch,
“ig a straight and much frequented
way of eight or ten days, either north-
wards, through the pass of Djebel-el-
Tih, or more eastwards, through that
of Djebel-el-Edshmeh ; and the sons of
Jacob journeyed, in not many days,
from Palestine to Egypt to buy corn.”
Why then were the Israelites led by the
long and trying “way of the wilderness
of the Red Sea”? The answer is given
in Exod. xiii. 17.

The following homiletio sketch on
the determination upon this route as
illustrating The tender consideration of
God for His people is taken from
Buddicom’s Christian Exodus.

The Christian life is a growth, and if
assailed by some temptations in its
infancy, the consequences might be fatal.
He, therefore, who commences and
maintains the process of our salvation,
gradually accustoms His soldiers and
servants to the difficulties of their
warfare. Their faith, love, zeal, and
self-denial are thus exercised rather than

essed.

I. The circumstances of the Israel-
ites.

They had been redeemed from bond-
age. They were commencing their
journey to the Promised Land, every
spirit filled with pleasure. They were
confident of their power to endure the
trials of the way. The heart-searching
God knew their deficiencies; and a
variety of circumstances connected with
their feeble faith determined Him in
wisdom to divert their feet towards
Canaan by a devious path.

1. The Philistines, who lay between
them and the promised inheritance, were

570


a brave and warlike people, against whom
the sons of Jacob, numerous as they were,
could not hope to succeed in battle.
Wisely, therefore, did the Lord judge
that they would shrink from such
enemies. Such are the Christian’s foes.
Satan has triurnphed over man in every
age. And thinkest thou, Christian,
that the enemies of the soul are
enfeebled 1 What, then, would be the
consequences if God led thee past them
to Canaan? Wisely and graciously are
you led by the wilderness.

2. The Israelites were unarmed, and
therefore utterly unable to cope with the
Philistines, who were prepared with every
means of offence and defence which a
people whose delight was tn war could
invent. The young believer just es-
caped from the house of bondage is
defenceless. His enemies are armed.
He cannot expect to wield the sword of
the Spirit with the full energy of one
who has been accustomed to fight
with it.

3. In thus estimating the goodness of
God towards the children of Is:ael, we
must add that their spirits were bowed
down by long captivity. The hard
bondage in mortar and brick was not
the school in which to learn courage,
Hence Israel was not fitted to match
against the free soldiers of Philistia.
The slavery of Satan untits for conflict
with the foes of the soul.

II. The dealing of God towards
them.

God might have made Israel at peace
with the Philistines; or have given
them courage to defeat their foes. But
this would have comprehended less of
moral discipline.

1. He avoided the nearest way to the
Promised Land, and led them by the
way of the wilderness. The Israelites
would be astonished at the line of
march; they would be disposed to
murmur. Has not God often contra-
dicted your desires? The passenger
ignorant of navigation cannot direcr
the course of the ship. The ship-maste+
knows the rocks: God knows our path
best.

2. He saw fit that they should pase


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.
a





through the dangers of the Red Sea, and
sojourn tn the wilderness of Sin. Could
this be the result of wisdom? ‘Clouds
and darkness are round about Him.”
It is the exclusive province of unerring
wisdom to draw an exact line between
the discipline necessary for our moral
good, and that severity of affliction
which might overwhelm us We


OHAP, XXXIIL


must confide in our Heavenly Father,

3. Although the journey of the Israel-
tes was contrary to their expectations,
their wishes, and their clouded judgment,
tt was the safest and the best path to
Canaan. “He led them forth by the
right way.” Let us learn, then, to
leave the choice of our course simply
and solely to God.


Pi-saniroTH; on, Stanpine Sriub IN THR Mipst or Danemn


(Verse 1.)


Departing from Etham, “on asudden,”
to quote the words of Dean Milman,
“the march of the Israelites is altered ;
instead of pressing rapidly onwards,
keeping the sea on their right hand,
and so heading the gulf, they strike to
the south, with the sea on their left, and
deliberately encamp at no great distance
from the shore, at a place called Pi-hahi-
roth. The king, recovered from his
panic, and receiving intelligence that
the Israelites had no thought of return,
determined on pursuit: intelligence of
this false movement, or at least of this
unnecessary delay on the part of the
Israelites, encouraged his hopes of
vengeance. The great caste of the
warriors, the second in dignity, were
regularly quartered in certain cities on
the different frontiers of the kingdom,
so that a considerable force could be
mustered on any emergency. With
great rapidity he drew together 600
war chariots, and a multitude of others,
with their full equipment of officers. In
the utmost dismay the Israelites beheld
the plain behind them glittering with
the hostile array ; before them lay the
sea; on the right, impracticable passes,
Resistance does not seem to have
entered their thoughts; they were
utterly ignorant of military discipline,
perhaps unarmed, and encumbered with
their families, and their flocks and
herds. ‘ Because there were no graves
in Egypt,’ they exclaimed, in the bitter-
ness of their despair, ‘hast thou taken
us away to die in the wilderness?’


Their leader alone preserved his caim:
ness and self-possession.”

Let us fix upon some of his remari-
able words to them ag suggesting in-
structive and helpful considerations:
“Fear ye not, stand still, and see the
salvation of the Lord, which He will
show to you to-day” (Exod. xiv. 13).
Consider—

L The deplorable effect of slavery
upon the Israelites.

This, the first peril which they en-
countered, revealed their almost utter
destitution of manliness. Notice—

1. Their cowardice. Soon as they saw
the advancing hosts of Pharaoh “they
were sore afraid.” They were in great
consternation, prepared for anything
mean and unmanly; totally unprepared
for anything noble or brave.

2. Their faithlessness, All the sigus
and wonders of the Divine Hand wrought
on their behalf are lost sight of by
reason of their present difficulty and
danger.

3. Their ingratitude. How disgrace-
fully they reproached Moses! ‘ Because
there were no graves in Egypt,” &o.
What a base return for all his dis-
interested and noble efforts on their
behalf! They go so far as to apostatise
in spirit. ‘Better for us to serve the
Egyptians, than that we should die in
the wilderness.” A man would have
said: “Better death than slavery ;
better anything than to again bow our
neck beneath the yoke of the oppressor.


When freedom anu honour pe more,


CHAP, XXXIIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


NUMBERS.


a


life is not desirable.” But slavery had
crushed the manhood out of them.
The degradation of their position had
done its mischievous work by degrad-
ing themselves, and reducing them in
spirit to mere serfs, In estimating
their conduct, we must thus take into
account their previous disadvantages
and sufferings. And this principle
should be observed in analogous cases
in our own day. Apply it in the case
of the reclaimed drunkard. It is un-
reasonable to complain because he is
pot at once a man of refinement, &o.
lt will take years to repair the waste
and injury of the years of intemperance.
Let us be thankful for the transforma-
tion of the drunkard into a sober man,
and wait with patience for the exhibi-
tion of the characteristics of a noble
manhood. Apply it to the spiritual
life. After we are delivered from the
bondage of sin, we shall often discover
evil results of our former life clinging
to us, and retarding our progress. The
strength and courage of mature Chris-
tian manhood are not attained at once.
Sainthood is a growth. Let us patiently
and hopefully persevere, &c.

Il, The distinguished heroism of
Moses.

Amid all the excitement, danger,
alarm, and reproaches of the people,
Moses was sublimely calm and mag-
nanimous. He uttered no reproach to
his craven-hearted followers; but ad-
dressed to them words of lofty inspira-
tion and encouragement. ‘‘Fear ye
not, stand still,” &c. The crisis that
revealed the mean cowardice and base
ingratitude of his followers, revealed
also the noble generosity and trium-
phant heroism of the leader. That
which brought out their want of faith
in God, also brought out the strength
and firmness of his faith in Him.

IIt. The remarkable exhortation of
Moses.

“Wear ye not, stand still,” &0o, This
exhortation warrants the inference, that
thers are times when our highest wisdom
as to ‘stand still” and wait the Divine
directions ; when the best thing we can do
ts to do nothing but look to God to indt-

&72


cate our course. We do not counsel
indolence either in temporal or spiritual
things. There can be no progress with-
out effort; or attaiament without in-
dustry; or conquest without conflict.
Yet there are seasons in life when it is
the part of the wise man and the
Christian not to exhaust himself in
fruitless efforts, but to “stand still”
and wait with all possible calmness for
the interposition of God. When we
have done all that we can do, and can
do no more, and yet the end is not
attained, we are not extricated from
our difficulties, it is wise in us not to
exhaust ourselves in frantic cries and
efforts which merely beat the air, but
to wait until God shall appear for our
help. (a) This principle is applicable
to—

1. Our personal salvation. We are
commanded to “work out our own
salvation ;” and only by patient and
earnest effort can we advance in the
Christian life. But there is a very im-
portant part of our salvation in which
we can do nothing but “stand still,
and gee the salvation of the Lord.*
Thus it is in relation to our acceptance
with God. Our part in this is not to
endeavour to commend ourselves to
His favour, or strive to justify ourselves
before Him, or labour to merit His
grace. Our part is to accept His grace,
to leave ourselves to His mercy, to re-
ceive Christ as our Saviour, to “stand
still, and see the salvation of the Lofd.”

2. The exigencies of life. There are
seasons when we find human and earthly
resources utterly inadequate to our
need. There are burdens which no
human friend can help us to bear;
difficulties from which no human skill
can extricate us; crises in which we
are thrown either into unmanly, en-
forced submission, or into the frenzies
of despair, or upon the help of God.
In these crises let us “stand still, and
see the salvation of the Lord ;” let us
hopefully appeal to Heaven for help.
Thus did David (Psa. lx. 11; oxlii. 4, 5).
We are exhorted in the Scriptures to
do so (Psa. xlvi. 10; Isa. xxx. 7, 15).
(6) Nor is it less brave, at such times,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP, XXXili,


(a se SS


to “stand still” and wait the help of
God. The coward may struggle franti-
cally in the terrible crises of life; but
only the heroic can wait the time when
action is serviceable, and wait that time
calmly. To stand still in the moment
of supreme anxiety, and wisely estimate
our resources and scan our prospects,
and determine the best mode and time
for action, and cast ourselves upon


God—this demands a brave man, and
one whose courage springs from faith,
There are times when it is more heroio
to “stand still” than to fight, and
crises when it is wiser to wait than to
work, (¢)

The great lesson of our subject is
this, érust in God. “God is our refuge
and strength, a very present help in
trouble,” &.


ILLUSTRATIONS,


(a) One of our hardest lessons is to find out
the wisiom of our hindrances; how we are
to be pnt forward and upward by being put
back and put down; encouraged by being re-
buked; prospered by being baffled. When
the company in the “ Pilgrim’s Progress” had
to sit up watching all night at the house of
Gaius, Greatheart kept them awake with this
riddle, ‘‘ He that would kill must first be over=
come”; and the truth in it has been practi-
cally dug out, by trials that broke sleep,
throngh many a hard fortune, in every Chris-
tian experience since. It needs wakeful
watchers, spiritual eyesight, to read that rid-
die ot life, how defeat helps progress ; how a
compulsory standing still speeds us on; how
humiliation exalts; how putting a cross on
the shoulders lightens the burden of the race,
Bot Christ has solved the wonder of His own
cross, humbling Himself, becoming obedient
untv death, and in His humiliation having His
judgment taken away.

Gradually, to believing eyes, the fact comes
out. Standing still at the right time, in the
right way, for the right purpose, ia the surest
advance. Waiting on God brings us to our
journey’s end faster than our feet. The
failure of our favourite plans is often the
richest success of the soul. Let the pressure
of trouble drive you down from a heights
of health and pride, and you will come upon
the primary foundation, and grow strong out
of the rock. Be exiled from the convivial
fellowships of comfort and popularity,and you
make new acquaintances with stronger friends,
—Christian self-possession, and wholesome
repentance, and a mastery ap es moral forces,
He faith in your Lord.—f’, D. Huntington,


(6) In the midst of our own houses, there
are more secret sorrows than I need to name.
Every life has its own. Perhaps there are
erring, ungrateful, and ungracious children,
with parents’ hearts breaking and bleeding
over them, and agonizing in seg bP for
their return. “ Have faith in God;” every
prayer pierces the Heaven of heavens; the
Intercessor and Mediator pleads with it ; and
ita answer is committed to some strong angels


at the right hand of the Throne, There are
anxieties, alienations, unavailing affections,
crossed desires and hopes. There are memo-
ries running back from pews in this house of
prayer to the graves of those that worship no
more in earthly temples. Rest, mourners, in
the Lord. Seek not the living among the
dead. Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and
all else shall be added. “Let us be still be-
neath God’s hand; for though His hand be
heavy upon us, it is strong and safe beneath
us too: and none can pluck us out of His
hand.” O, impatient griefs, aud sorrows th: t
have no hope, be still; and ye hopes thai
would outrun the wisdom of a healing Provi-
dence and a saving Mercy, be still; all un-
reasonable and rebellious thoughts, be still ;
know that the Lord, He is God. i#emember
that “the darkness is God’s as well as the
light”; and “if we cannot walk” and work
therein, “we can” at least kneel down and
* pray. ’—dbid,

(c) If we learn to measure the bravery of
Christian acquirements rather by the inward
effort they cost than by their display, if we
estimate character more by the standard of
Christ’s beatitudes than by what we short-
sightedly call “results,” we shall find some of
the sublimest fruits of faith among what are
commonly called passive virtues; in the silent
endurance that hides under the shadow of
great afflictions; in the quiet loveliness of
that forbearance which “suffereth long and is
kind’’; in the charity which is “not easily
provoked” ; in the forgiveness which can be
buffeted for doing well and “take it patiently ”;
in the smile on the face of diseased and suffer-
ing persons, a transfiguration of the tortured
features of pain brightening sick rooms more
than the sun ; in the unostentatious heroism
of the household, amidst the daily dripping
of small cares; in the noiseless conquests of
a love too reverent to complain ; in resting in
the Lord, and waiting patiently for Him,
Have you yourself never known the time
when you found it a harder lesson to leary
how to be still in your room than to be busy
in the world? Of mascoline natures that ia
apt to be the special cross. And he —— may


CHAP, XXXII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,





be the point where faith and virtue need to
ral’y their strength, if you wonld be a trinm-
phant disciple. [t is a fact which not all of
us may have noticed, that of the nine beati-
tudes of our Lord, all, unless it be one, pro-
nounce their blessing on what the world would


call tame and passive traits, from ‘the poci
in spirit,” to those who are reviled and perse<
cuted without revenge. So does Christianity
turn upside down the vulgar vanity of on
ambition, and ewpty our worldlinesa of
blessedness,—Ib¢d.


Pi-waniroTH; on, a Lone Sspanarion,


(Verse 7.)


There are other remarkable words of
Moses, spoken at this station, which we
shall do well to consider before we pass
on, Having uttered the words which
we have already noticed, he said:
“For the Egyptians whom ye have
seen to-day, ye shall see them again no
more for ever” (Exod. xiv. 13), In
these words we have an illustration
of—

I. The triumphant faith of Moses.

It rose superior to difficulties and
dangers ; the abject terror of his fol-
lowers could not diminish its vitality
or vigour ; the almost desperate aspect
of affairs could not overcome it; it
was splendidly victorious over all.
Let us emulate Moses in this respect.

II, The suicidal hardihood of the
wicked.

Most terrible was the development
of Pharaoh’s character. His resistance
of the Divine commands although they
were authenticated by the most strik-
ing and dreadful signs ; and his harden-
ing of himself in rebellion against God
—how appalling are these! Madly he
rushed into ruin; blindly he courted
destruction, His is a typical case.
Sin seems to infatuate men—drives
them mad. Spiritually, men are their
own executioners ; they of their own
accord rush into the sea that engulfs
them. Sinismadness. The persistent
sinner is beside himself.

III. The working of God in history.

1, Delivering the oppressed. The
Israelites had long cried unto Him;
and the only result seemed to be that
their position became worse. As we
reckon time, His interposition was
long delayed. Does God hear? Does
He judge amongst men? Yes. ‘He

574


sitteth in the throne judging right.”
“He will avenge His own elect,” &c.,

2. Ketributing the oppressor. Long
time had God borne with Pharaoh;
but at length His forbearance ceases
and He visits him in judgment. “ Be-
cause sentence against an evil work,”
&c. (Eccles. viii. 11). ‘ Though hand
join in hand,” &c. (Prov. xi. 21).
“Thinkest thou that thou shalt escape
the judgment of God ?” (Rom. ii. 3-6).
“He that being often reproved,” &c.
(Prov. xxix. 1).

8. Developing in all His own wonder-
Jul purposes. Consider these Israelites,
—they were cowardly, ungrateful,
preferring to return into slavery than to
die fighting for freedom. How unlikely
that they should ever become a truly
great nation! How unlikely that
through them should come to the
human race the greatest blessings!
the clear revelation of the will and
purpose of God, and the Redeemer of
men! How unlikely! Yet such was
God’s purpose ; towards its accomplish-
ment these events were tending; and
in due season it was realized. History
should be studied reverently, for God
is working in it. In all and by
all He is developing His own glorious
plans,

IV. Separations which are taking
place amongst men in the present.

l. There are many persons whom
having seen them once we “shall see
them again no more for ever.” In the
thronged thoroughfare, in the railway
carriage, at the summer retreat, we
see many persons once, and never more
in this life. Join to this the fact that
we may influence them by act, or word,
or look; and how solemn is the con-


HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP, XXXII.





sideration! What an argument for a
true life at all times !

3. There are persons whom we separate
from to “see them again no more for
ever” in the same circumstances. We
meet them again; but, so changeful
are all things here that, the surround-
ings of their life are altered. The
poor have become prosperous; the pros-
perous, impoverished ; the distressed
have become happy, and the happy,
miserable, d&o. ‘This changefulness
makes many a separation very anxious.
We ask,—‘“Shall we meet again as
well and as happy?” &c.

3. There are persons whom we
separate from to “see them again no
more for ever” inthe same character. We
part from a person who is ungodly and


profane ; years roll away, and we meet
him a reverent and religious man. A
youth leaves home reckless and wild;
he returns a thoughtful and earnest
man. A young man or woman leaves
home comparatively innocent and pure ;
but the man returns with a blasted
character, and the woman a moral
wreck. This is the most separating
separation. Separation of time, or
space, or even of world, does not so
painfully separate as division of cha-
racter. :

V. The great separation which will
take place amongst men in the future.

See Matt. xiii. 30, 39-43; xuv. 31-
46.

In that great final separation, where
shall we be found?


Pi-HaHIROTH; OB, Goina Forwarp In THs Faocp or DiFFicuLTiea,


(Verse 7.)


The time for standing still and wait-
ing was soon at an end. Moses sought
direction from God; and at once received
the Divine answer: “Speak unto the
children of Israel, that they go for-
verd ” (Exod, xiv. 15).

It must have seemed strange to the
Israelites to be commanded to ad-
vance. To “go forward” seemed like
rushing from one difficulty into another.
Pharaoh and his army were an alarm-
ing danger behind them; before them
the sea appeared a danger no less to
be dreaded. Yet the order was, “Go
forward.” Notwithstanding the threat-
ening sea, they were to advance. We
regard this as an illustration of Chris-
tian Progress in the Face of Difficulties.
It is an established fact of the Christian
life, that God calls us to advancement
though there are immense difficulties
in our path. He commands us to
“Go forward” in despite of dangers
which appear inevitable and fatal.

I. In the Christian life advance-
ment is demanded.

Progress is a great law of the uni-
verse. In nature all things move on-
ward. Winds, and streams, aud stars,


are ever advancing. The history of
science, philosophy, and art, is a record
of progress, The Religion of Jesus
Christ also has advanced and grown
constantly. Progress is a law of all
life. Where progress ends decay be-
gins. So in the spiritual life the com-
mand is, forward, upward, heaven-
ward, Godward, Continuance in the
same condition is impossible. Ad-
vancement to higher attainments, and
nobler developments, and more perfect
conditions of being, is ever demanded
of us. Leaving the principles of the
doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto
perfection.” “Grow in grace,” &o.
“Giving all diligence, add to your
faith virtue,” &c. (2 Peter i. 5-7). ‘“‘ Be
ye perfect, even as your Father which
is m heaven is perfect.” ‘Go for-
ward.” (a)

II. In the Christian life advance.
ment is demanded with a full reccg-
nition of the obstacles in the way of
it.

He who commanded the Israelites to
‘“ 90 forward” was perfectly acquainted
with the sea which rolled forbiddingly
before them, and all the A teed


CHAP, XXXIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





difficulties which awaited them; yet
He gave the order to advance. He
does likewise in the Christian life. He
hath forewarned us “that we must
through much tribulation enter into
the kingdom of God.” Yet He ever
summons us to advanoe, ever calls us
to ascend. The path of Christian pro-
gress is seldom an easy one. Dangers
and difficulties are numerous. We
pass from conquest to renew the con-
flict. We throw one foe and advance
to engage another. We surmount one
difficulty, and another challenges us to
effort. Yet knowing all these things,
the Lord says, ‘“‘Go forward.” (0)

III. In the Christian life, obstacles
to progress, manfully encountered,
may be surmounted.

In ordinary life we frequently wit-
ness proofs of this principle. Man, by
the force of a sound and active under-
standing, and iron will, and persistent
effort, is constantly removing mountains,
accomplishing that which is pronounced
impossible,

“ Who breaks his birth’s invidious bar,

And grasps the skirts of happy chance,


And breasts the blows of circumstance,
And grapples with his evil star,”


he can do wonders—almost “ all things
are possible to him.” Let the same
mind and will and activity be under the
guidance of God, and nerved by faith
in Him, and difficulties shall melt away
before them, “ All things are possible
to him that believeth.” “Faith laughs
at impossibilities.” The Israelites moved
forward at the command of God; and
before the majesty of such reliant
obedience, the sea disparted. The
difficulty vanished in the presence of
believing obedience. When God saith,
“Go forward,” though it be towards
the deep sea or trackless mountain,
Jet us advance, and some unseen path
will open before us, or the waters will
divide at our feet.


“Dark and wide the sea appears,
Every soul is full of fears,
Yet the word is onward still,
Onward move and do His will;
And the great deep shall discover
par to take thee over.” (@)
6


IV. In the Christian life, obstacles
to progress, manfully encountered,
contribute to our advancement.

Obstacles are disciplinary. Every
difficulty that has vanished before the
obedience of faith is an argument for
future and greater reliance. Every
conflict, courageously entered upon
and continued, must end in conquest ;
and every conquest fits us for more
severe conflicts, and makes our final
victory more sure. Through the grace
of God, difficulties, dangers, and fves,
are all contributing to our progress. (d)

V. In the Christian life we are
incited to progress, notwithstanding
obstacles, by a host of encouragements.

Here are some of our encourage-
ments.

1. Believing prayer ts mighty with
God. Moses cried unto the Lord ; and
the Lord responded to his prayer by
dividing the sea. Ho still attends to
the requests of men. (e)

2. Glorious examples incite us onward.
Think of Paul: “I count not myself to
have apprehended,” &o. And later in
life : ‘I have fought a good fight,” &c.
Think of that glorious and ever-increas-
ing multitude who by faiih have
triumphed over all hindrances, perils,
and adversaries. ‘Be ye followers of
them who through faith and patience,”
&c. “Wherefore seeing we also are
compassed about,” &o.

3. The character of our great Leader
encourages us forward. His path has
been one of splendid victories; His
career one of constantly increasing
glory. He is equal to every emergency.
With Jesus at our head we need not
fear to advance.

What earnest voices unite in urging
us to “Go forward ”! Voices of the glo-
rified urge us onward. They who have
passed from the semblances of time to
the realities of eternity call upon us to
advance. The rest that awaits us in-
vites us forward. We do not pine for
our rest before God wills it. We long
for no inglorious rest. We are thank-
ful rather for the invaluable training
of difficulty, the loving discipline of
danger and strife, Yet in the midst





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,





of it all, the prospect of rest attracts
aus heavenward. Through all, and
above all, God cries, ‘‘Go forward ;”
Come up hither.”
“Forward! be our watchword,
Steps and voices joined ;
Seek the things before us,
Not.a look behind :


CHAP. XXXKM.


Burns the fiery pillar
At our army’s head;
Who shall dream of shrinking,
By our Capiain led ?
Forward through the desert,
Through the toil and fight :
Canaan lies before us,
Zion beams with light,” —Al/ord,


ILLUSTRATIONS,


(a) Certainly advance is the great law of
the Christian life, as well as of the universe.
All things in nature and history go forward.
The stream moves forward, not a wave of it
turns back, its every eddy even is, in reality,
edvancing. The winds move forward, paus-
ing, indeed, often on their journey, lingerin
amidst the locks of the pine or in the cleft o:
the rock, but speedily resuming their onward
aweep again. The stars—the earth included
—move forward, “hasting not, resting not,”
seeking, it is said, some distant centre. How
we saw the comet of 1858 shooting like an
arrow towards its broad target, the sun!
Science, art, philosophy, literature, every
species of knowledge, move forward; invention
following invention—discovery, discovery ; one
man of genius eclipsing another, to be in his
turn outshone. Time moves forward—oh, how
rapidly ! and how his vast wings seem to say
as they rush along, “I have an engagement at
the judgment-seat. I have an appointment
in eternity, and I must fulfil it. My ‘ King’s
business requireth haste.’” Christ Himself
never rested. He was never in a hurry, but
He was always in haste. The difference
between Him and many of His people is, His
life was short, and He knew it, and did the
most in it; theirs, too, is short, but they
know it not, and do not with their might what
their hand findeth to do. God Himself even,
with all the leisure of eternity, is not losing an
hour, but is carrying on His broad plans with
undeviating regularity and increasing swift-
ness, and surely men should aspire in this
respect to be imitators of, and fellow-workers
with, God. Christ’s religion, too, has been
active and progressive ; sometimes frozen up
for a time like a river, but, like a river, working
under the ice, and when spring arrived, making
up for the time lost by the increased rapidity of
its course. And so with the path of the indi-
vidual ; like the river, the winds, the stars, the
Uternal Himself, it must advance, Our motto


should be “ Excelsior."—G. Gilfillan, M.A.

(6) The progress of the Christian is often
from one difficulty to another, and very idle
for him, in this earth, to expect an unvaried
course of even moderate peace and happiness.
He only exchanges one difficulty for another.
After old obstacles are surmounted, new ones
are sure to arise. The children of Israel
probably thought they had buried all their
difficulties in that ocean. And how lond and
bold rung their psalm, as if it were a challenge .
to the wilderness, on the verge of which the
stood. But the wilderness accepted the chal-
lenge, and what with thirst, hunger, wild
beasts, and, at last, Divinely-appointed death,
it engulfed almost all that, multitude which
had shouted for victory on the shore of the
Red Sea. And go with the desert of this
world. The Slough of Despond is exchanged
for the Hill Difficulty, and that for the Castle
of Giant Despair. We disguise not the
pleasures of the wilderness, its wells, arbours,
angels, Delectable Mountains, but notwith-
standing all this, it is a wilderness at the best,
and grows often more dreary the longer we
pursue our path.—Jbid.

©) Ad an illustration on this point see p.
893 (a).

(d) Illustrations on this point appear on
pp. 893, 894.

(¢) Beloved, if you can conceive of an age
that is worse than another, so much the more
is ita it platform for the heavenly energy;
the more difficulty, the more room for omnipo-
tence to show itself; there is elbow-room ior
the great God when there is some great thing
in the way, and some great difficulty that He
may overturn. When there is a mountain to
be cast into the valley, then there is almighty
work to be done; and our covenant God only
needs to see work to do for His praying people,
and He will shortly do it.—C. H. Spurgeon.

Illustrations on the Power of Prayer appear
on pp. 183, 225.


Tus Drivtpine or tux Rap Sama.


(Verse 8.)


“ And they departed from before Pi-
hahiroth, and passed through the midst
of the sea into the wilderness.”

PP


I. This dividing of the sea wae
miraculous.
1. Because « took place, od the
577


GHAP, XXXII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


NUMBERS


Se SSS


waters closed again, upon the outstretch-
ing of the hand of Moses, and in fulfii-
ment of his word (Exod. xiv 44). ‘he
sea is less manageable by man, perhaps,
than any other force of nature. “The
sea is God’s, and He made it” (Psa.
xcv. 5), and to Him only will it render
obedience, The obedience in this case
to Moses was, therefore, the result of a
supernatural interposition. (a)

2. Because the waters stood upright
on ecther side of thepath. When waves
roll back and leave their bed dry for a
short space of time, they break, and
return again; a strong wind would
drive back the water on one side only
and leave the water perhaps knee-deep
or aukle-deep, but the wall of water
on either side, and the dry land in the
middle, could have been produced by
miraculour power alone.

II. The fact of the miracle is proved
by the present existence of the ua-
tion which was that day born.

No nation in the world, except che
Hebrew, can point to the place and the
day on which it began its national ex-
fistence. All other ancient nations have
lost their identity, but the Jews retain
theirs, and the miracle of the Red Sea
has always been the foundation fact of
their history (Isa. lxiii. 12; Psa. lxviii;
12, &e.).

Lessons,

i. The attainment of moral ends ts more
important than physical convenience,
The Israelites could have entered
Canaan by a much nearer way than
through the Red Sea, but that way
was chosen for them to teach them
many important truths in connection


with God. The shortest way to attain
an end is not always the best way. A
short way to a fortune may not be se
conducive to the formation of a worthy
character as one which it takes much
longer to travel. This truth is taught
in the temptation of our Saviour
(Luke iv. 5-8). Satan proposed a short
way to that universal dominion, which
our Lord knew could only be safely and
truly attained through Gethsemane and
Calvary.

ii. The attainment of moral ends is
more important than the uninterrupted
operation of the ordinary laws of nature.
This is not at all surprising. The laws of
nature are God’s servants, and it is
only reasonable to expect that, when
He can reveal His power and mercy
better by suspending their action, and
operating, as it were, upon the forces
of the world, without their instru-
mentality, He should doso. When the
special end is accomplished they return
to their wonted service. They have
kept the bed of the Red Sea covered
ever since the day when the waters
closed over Pharaoh and his hosts.

iii. The attainment of moral ends is
more important than the preservation of
bodily life. This is an acknowledged fact.
The life of a rebel is considered of less
importance than the upholding of the
law that condemns him to death. The
lives of many men are oftentimes con-
sidered of less importance than the
establishment and upholding of free-
dom, and the downfall of that which
degrades the higher life of the human
race and prevents its development.—
W. Harris,


ILLUSTRATION.


(6) On & sudden Moees advances towards
the sea, extends his rod, and a violent wind
from the east begins to blow. The waters
recede on both sides,a way appears ; at night.
fall, probably about eight o’clock, the cara-
van begins to defile along this awful pass,
The wind continued in the same quarter all
the night ; but immediately they had passed
over, and while the Egyptians, madly plunging
after them, were in the middle of the passage,
the wind s# suddenly fell, the waters rushed

578


back into their bed, the heavy chariot-wheela
of the pursuers sank into the sand, broke and
overthrew the chariots, and in this state of
confusion the sea swept over the whole host,
and overwhelmed the king and all the flower
of the Egyptian army.

Such is the narrative in the book of Exodus,
which writers of all ages have examined, and,
according to the bias of their minds, have
acknowledged or denied the miraculous
agency, increased or diminished its extent,





journey.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; NUMBERS.  cuapP, xxxtm.





At an early period, historians (particularly in
Egypt), hostile to the Jews, asserted that
Moses, well acquainted with the tides of the
Red Sea, took advantage of the ebb, and passed
over his army, while the incautious Hgvptians,
attempting to follow, were surprised by the
flood, and perished. Yet, after every conces-
sion, it seems quite evident that, without one
particular wind, the ebb tide, even in the
narrowest a of the channel, could not be
kept back long enough to allow a number of
people to cross in safety, We have, then, the
alternative of supposing, that a man of the
consummate prudence and sagacity, and the
local knowledge, attributed to Moses, altered,
suspended, or at least did not hasten his march,
and thus deliberately involved the people,
whom he had rescued at so much pains and
risk, in the danger of being overtaken by the
enemy, led back as slaves, or massacred, on
the chance that an unusually strong wind
would blow at a particular hour, for a given
time, so as to keep back the flood, then die
away, and allow the tide to return at the pre-
cise instant when the Egyptians were in the
middle of their passage. . . « -
Wherever the passage was effected, the
Mosaic account cannot, by any fair interpre-
tation, be made consistent with the exclusion
of preternatural agency. Not to urge the


literal meaning of the waters being a wall on
the right hand and on the left, as if they had
stood up sheer and abrupt, and then fallen
back again,—the Israelites passed through the
sea with deep water on both sides ; and any
ford between two bodies of water must have
been passable only for a few people at one
Dota point of time. All comparisons, there-

ore, to marches like that of Alexander, cited
by Josephus idly, and in his worst spirit of
compromise, are entirely inapplicable. That
bold general took the opportunity of the
receding tide to conduct his army round a
bluff headland in Pamphylia, called Climax,
where, during hich water, there was no beach
between the cliffs and the sea. But what
would this, or any- other equally daring mea-
sures in the history of war, be to the general-
ship of Moses, who must thus have decoyed
his enemy to pursue him to the banks of the
sea, and so nicely calculated the time, that the
lowest ebb should be exactly at the hour of
his greatest danger, while the whole of the

ursuing army should be so infatuated, and so
ignorant of the tides, as to follow them with-
out any apprehension of the returning flood ?
In this case Moses would appear as formidable
& rival to the military fame of Alexander, as
to the legislative wisdom of Solon or Lycurgus.
—A, H. Milman, D.D.


Maran; On, ASPEOTS OY TH JOURNEY oF Lirm


(Verse 8.)


“ And they went three days’ journey
iu the wilderness of Etham, and pitched
in Marah.”

Human life in this world is a journey,
which begins at birth and ends at death.
Certain aspects of this journey are
brought before us by the journey of
the Israelites from the Red Sea to
Marah, and their life at Marah.

I. The privations of this journey.

“They went three days’ journey in
the wilderness of Etham.” And we
learn from Exod. xv. 22, that during
those days they “found no water.” We
have already briefly treated this wpic
on p. 366. (a)

Il. The disappointments of our


“And pitched in Marah.” “And
when they came to Marah, they could
not drink of the waters of Marah, for
they were bitter: therefore the name
of it was culled Marah.” How intensely

Pea


painful must their disappointment have
been! (0)

An illustration of some experiences
in our own life. We have looked upon
some thing or some position, and have
felt and said to ourselves: “ When I
attain that I shall be satisfied and
happy.” We have attained it, and
found it unsatisfactory and bitter.
Napoleon III., when an exile, deemed
the throne to be all he needed to
secure his happiness. He attained
it; and in a few years he confessed :
“In changing my destiny, I have
but changed my joys and sorrows.
Formerly I bore the afflictions of exile;
now I have to sustain the cares of
power.” One has looked at wealth as
the one thing needful to his happi-
ness ; secured it ; and been filled with
bitter disappointment. Another has so
judged concerning leisure, and attained
it, with a similar result. ara have


CHAP. XXXIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





thus estimated married life and off-
spring. Countless mothers, on the birth
of their first son, have said, “I have
gotten a man from the Lord.” But how
often, like Cain, has he wrung that
mother’s heart with anguish! How
often has a father’s beloved turned out
a second Absalom! We have looked
upon many things as the pleasant fruit
of our life; grasped them ; and dis-
covered a foul worm at the core. God
disappoints us with the waters of Marah
in order to lead us to Him who can
make them sweet. When we over-esti-
mate things and creatures, He has
ordered that they shall disappoint us
in order to lead us to Him who can
fully meet our highest and vastest
expectation,

IIL The sins of our journey.

When the Israelites found that they
could not drink the waters of Marah,
they ‘murmured against Moses, say-
ing, What shall we drink?” Notice—

1. Thetr unreasonableness and ingrats-
tude towards Moses. Why murmur
against him? Was he responsible for
the lack of drinkable water? Could he
make the bitter water sweet? Their
murmurings were childish. Moreover,
he had been their benefactor. He had
dared and sacrificed bravely for them.
How ungrateful, then, was their con-
duct towards him!

2. Their unbelief and ingratitude to
God. They had soon forgotten practi-
cally their deliverance from Egypt and
their passage through the Red Sea.
Three days ago they were singing the
song of victory; to-day they are mur-
muring. Past interpositions of God on
their behalf should have inspired pre-
sent confidence in Him. Gratitude
should have precluded murmuring.
We also are prone to sin in like manner
in our life-journey; to overlook past
deliverances in present dangers; to fret
and murmur at the inconveniences and
trials of the way; to be unbelieving
and ungrateful, &e. (c)

IV. The all-sufficient Resource of
our journey.

In answer to the prayer of Moses
God made the bitter waters sweet for

580


them (Exod. xv. 25). He is our Re-
source, and he is—

1, All-suficient. He is equal to
every emergency and every need. To
Him there are no emergencies. He
sees the whole of our journey, knows
every step of the way, and has wisely
and amply provided for every need. (d)

2. Always willing to help. We have
not to overcome by our prayers any
unwillingness on His part to bless us.
We have but sincerely to seek His
aid, and He will impart it to us. (e)

3. Hver available. We can approach
Him at all times and in all places. The
cry of supplication or the song of praise
will always reach His ear and secure
His regard.

Brothers, we are all journeying, and
sometimes with weary and aching
hearts. _Life’s changes sometimes
clothe our life in shade, and weigh down
our hearts with sadness. Its disap-
pointments surprise and grieve our
spirits. Our own sins often fill our
hearts with shame and sorrow. But
here is our unfailing Resource. Our
Lord can take away the sin. He can
sanctify changes and disappointments
to our spiritual and eternal advantage.
Let our trust be in Him. We are all
journeying ; but we may each find the
end of our journey to be a secure and
blessed home. In that home there
shall be no more changes saddening our
souls, no more disappointments distress-
ing us, no more sins to harass and
grieve the soul ; but pure and peaceful
life, &o.


“Tuneful is the sound

That dwells in whispering boughs;
Welcome the freshness round,

And the gale that fans our brows,
But rest more sweet and still,

Than ever nightfall gave,
Our yearning hearts shall fill,

In the world beyond the grave,


* There shall no tempests blow,

No acorching noon-tide heat,
There shall be no more snow,

No weary, wandering feet.
So we lift our trusting eyes

From the hills our fathers trod,
To the quiet of the skies,

To the Sabbath of our God.”

—Hemana








oe


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





CHAP, XXXIII.


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) Three days they marched without find-
ing Any. water. We do not, with some, sup-
pose, that during all this time they were
without water. This was impossible. They
must have brought water in their leathern
bottles with them from the last station. But
this time having passed without an opportunity
of replenishing their vessels, the supply was
at length exhausted, and they began to suffer
fearfully from thirst. Let us not think lightly
of their distress. Thirst is a cruel thing; and
it is known to be such even in a humid clime,
where the sensation is rarely and lightly ex-
perienced, and is very easily removed: But
amid the hot sandy waste, under a burning
sky, without any means of relief, the suffering
is horrible, There is nothing like it. If we
reflect that this vast host of men, women, and
children, with numerous herds of cattle, had
to travel over the sandy waste mostly on foot,
with the burning sun over their heads, we
may be able to form some faint and inade-
quate idea of their condition. But if we
endeavour to picture to ourselves the circum-
stances of their case, and the unmistakable
signs of suffering and misery which it pre-
sented, we shill have a more distinct appre-
hension of their wretched condition, They
plod moodily and heavily on, no man speaking
to his fellow. Many cannot speak if they
would. Their tongues are parched and rough,
and cling to the roofs of their mouths; their
lips are black and shrivelled ; and their eye-
balls are red with heat, and sometimes a
dimness comes over them, which makes them
stagger with faintness. There is not one in
all that multitude who probably would not
have given all he possessed in the world, who
would not have parted with a limb or have
given up his life for one cool draught of water.
And this was suffered by a people who had
been used to drink without stint of the finest
water in the world.—Jokn Kitto, D.D.

(6) But lo! their misery, they think is past.
In the distance they behold trees and bushes
clad in refreshing green, and they know
there must be water near. With glad looks


and quickened steps they push joyously on.


“Yor sure through that green meadow flows
The living stream! And lo! their famished
beast
Sees the restoring sight!
Hope gives his feeble limbs a sudden strength,
He hurries on,’’—Thalaba.


What a rush to the water! what eagerness
to gulp the refreshing flood! But whence
that universal groan, and horror, and despair ?
The water is bitter—so bitter as to be loath-
some even to their intense agony of thirst.
Pity them ; but judge them not too severely,
if, in that awful moment of disappointed hope,
with the waters of Marah before their faces,
and the waters of the Nile before their
thoughts, they did murmur, they did complain
that they had been brought trom unfailing
waters to perish in that thirsty desolation.
They should have trusted in God. They had
been rescued from more imminent danger ; and
it was no arm of flesh, but the sacred pillar of
cloud, which had indicated their way and
brought them to that place. They should
have prayed to their Divine Protector to sup-
ply their wants, as He was wel! able to do;
and although there is much in the real misery
they suffered to extenuate thss offence, their
forgetfulness and neglect were most blame-
worthy. Yet, in consideration of their s.ffer-
ings, God Himself excused them in this
more readily than man has done. It will be
seen in the sacred record that He dealt ten-
derly with them. He did not, as on other
occasions, when they sinned in like manner
without the like excuse, reprove them; but
when Moses cried to Him for help, He, in the
tenderness of His great pity, at once healed
the yee! and made them sweet and salutary.
—Ibid.

(c) For illustrations on Murmuring, see pp.
247, 266, 267; on Ingratitude, pp. 247, 868;
and on Unhbelief, p. 252.

(d) An illustration on this point appears on
p. 869 (d)

(¢) This point also is illustrated on p. 869 (¢)


Tos Heratine oy THs Waturs or Maran.


(Verse 8.)


“ And they pitched in Marah.”

I. There are four bitter things of
which Marah’s waters are a likeness.

1. The bitterness of man’s heart. The
heart is by nature a bitter fountain
sending forth its bitter waters.

2. The bitterness of man’s afflictions.
Affliction was intended to be a bitter


thing to flesh and blood, for it was part
of that punishment which sin brought
with it.

3. The bitterness of God's wrath
which we have incurred. The dia-
pleasure of Him whose favour is life,
from whom alone all good cometh.

4. The bitterness of the Rey that

8


CHAP, XXXIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





we must die. This is as the waters of
Marah to an ungodiy man: “ the sting
of death is sin.”

II. Let us see what answers to the
tree, which, being cast into the waters,
made them sweet.

The Gospel is able to sweeten all the
bitters.

1. The wrath of God. Jesus cast
Himself into those bitter waters and
made them sweet. It was the very
God who made the waters bitter, who


pointed out the means of healing them,
It was the very God “to whom ven-
geance belongeth” who hath sent Hig
Son into the world to save us from it.

2. Afflictions, It furnishes a motive for
patience and an example to encourage.

3. The heart of man. The fountain
of the heart is cleansed by grace,

4, Death. To him who cordially be-
lieves in Jesus, the sting of death is
drawn by sin being covered.—Arthur
Koberts,


Eum; Tue Caristran Lirn
(Verse 9.)


Wells of the highest importance in
Eastern countries. Heat, &. Here,
then, where there were twelve wells,
and seventy palm trees, they en-
camped. Make some observations.

I In the journey of human iife
the Lord affords us many kind accom-
modations.

These mercies are—

1. Necessary. What more so than
water? So are His favours.

2. Refreshing. “ Palm trees.” Jour-
ney wearisome. Their shade delight-
ful, &. (a)

3. Various. Fountains and palm
trees. God gives blessings not of some
one kind only, but several Their
variety heightens them.

4, Plentiful. Twelve fountains and
threescore and ten palm trees. They
are plentiful if we compare them (1)
with the enjoyments of others; (2)
with our deserts.

II, Refreshing mercies after seasons
of distress are peculiarly sweet.

Many seasons of afflictions, trials of
mind, family, &c. Then these mercies
sweet—why so %

1, We have a higher relish for them.
So, spring after winter, health after
sickness, &c.

2. They give a proof that God has not
forgotten us. Apt to think so when He
tries us, and we do not receive any
peculiar marks of His favour, Then
He returns, &o.

683


8. They will tnerease our faith tn
future trials, We shall expect in them
fresh displays of power and goodness,—
this will cause us to love Him more—
serve Him better.

III. The blessings with which we
are favoured should be used and en-
joyed.

They encamped, not only drank, but,
&o, All our mercies should be enjoyed.

l. With humility. We do not de-
serve any of them. Are entirely de-
pendent on God for them. God designs
by such dependence to keep us humble
and obedient.

2. With gratitude. Ingratitude hate-
ful to God and man. Gratitude pleas-
ing, and ought naturally to flow to God,
&c. Our mercies are great, and call
loudly for it.

3. With a firm resolution to devote the
strength derwed from them to God, &e.
Thus they will answer the end, &o.
Then may we expect more, Devote
yourselves therefore to His glory, &c.

IV. Amidst all our enjoyments we
should not lose sight of our pilgrimage
state,

They encamped, did not build acity,
&c, Christians are travellers. World
not our rest. We should—

1. Cherish the tdea that all earthly
things are fading, withering. Dew,
flowers, &c. So human life. We know
it; we should act accordingly. (6)

%. Prepare for changes. Changes of


HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XXXIII,





condition, circumstances, feelings,—
these are to be expected—will come.
This generally acknowledged, and yet
how few prepared.

8. Wish to go forward, Arguments
for it deduced from what is said above,
Heaven is at the end,—how worthy of


all our toil,—how refreshing, &o., will
it be! (c)

Address,—1. Such as are now on the
march.

2. Such as are now encamped at Elim.

Remarks arising from the subject —
Thos. Spencer.


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) In eastern countries, where the habit of
hospitality is stronger than with us, the
traveller is sometimes surprised and regaled
by much needed but unexpected wayside
comforts. Yonder husbandman, who is now
afield at his work, was here in the early morn-
ing to leave by the wayside that pitcher of
water that the passing traveller might drink.
This clump of trees, which makes a thick and
welcome “shadow from the heat,” was planted
by one who expected neither fame nor money
for his toil, and who now lies in a nameless
grave. Hands now mouldering in dust scooped
out this cool seat in the rock. Some “ Father
Jacob gave us this well, after drinking thereof
himself, and his children, and his cattle.”
Travellers from the west are much affected b
such instances of pure humanity and unselfis
kindness, And yet these are but feeble types,
mere dim shadows of Divine thoughtfulness
and care. The heavenly Benefactor comes
down in preventing loving kindness upon the
pathway of His people. He foreknows, fore-
casts, foreruns. We think of Jesus as
forerunner of His people only “within the
veil.” In a sense not less true, He is their
forerunner along the journey of every day.
We cannot be up so early that He has not
been waking before us. We cannot run so


fast that He has not far outstripped our speed.
Our to-morrow is His yesterday. He is with
us and yet before us. He has said at one
place and another,—‘‘They are to pass this
way; I will leave these helps tor them ; I will
smooth down the over-ruygedness of life, so
that they shall get through ; I will open rivers
for them in high places, and streams in the
midst of the desert; and for the ever-recurring
weariness of life, for its toil and conflict, heat
and trouble, they shall have ‘quiet resting
places.’”"—Aler. Raleigh, D.D.

(6) The visible felicity of man is of no
continuance, We may frequently observe in
the evening a cloud, by the reflection of the
sun, invested with so bright a lustre, and
adorned with such a pleasant variety of colours,
that in the judgment of our eyes, if an angel
were to assume a body correspondent to his
glory, it were a fit matter for it; but in
walking a few steps, the sun is descended
beneath the horizon, and the light withdrawn,
and of all that splendid flaunting appearance
nothing remains but a dark vapour, that falls
down in a shower. Thus vanishing is the
show of felicity here.—Bates.

(c) Illustrations on this point appear on pp.
163 (6), 409 (g).


Is roe Wivpreness or Sm.


(Verses 10-13.)


All the places mentioned in these
verses were probably situated in the
desert of Sin (see Haplanatory Notes in
loco). The principal events in this
portion of the journey were the mur-
muring of the people, and the giving
of the manna; and these have been
treated in The Hom. Comm. on Exod.


xvi. Moreover, in our own work we
have noticed the base murmuring of
the people on other occasions (see pp.
181, 183, 244, 245, 247, 265-267);
we have also written on the manna
(see pp. 187-190 ; and The Hom. Comm.
on Exod, pp. 308, 309). For these
reasons we proceed to the next verse.


Ruryipm™; on, Warze From “tHe Rock mu Horse.”


(Verse 14.)


The history of Israel at Rephidim
bs remarkable by reason of (1) the want


of water, and its miraculous supply ;
and (2) the battle pee as


CHAP, XXXII.


(Exod. xvii.), A similar want and
supply of water we have already
noticed (see pp. 366-371); and, having
noticed these miracles also in our ex-
position of Psa. Ixxviii. 15, 16 (see
The Hom. Comm. on Psalms, vol. i. pp.
443-446); we will introduce here a
sketch from Outlines of Sermons on the
Miracles and Parables of the Old Testa-
ment,

Notice.

I. That the place of the miracle was
calculated to increase the faith of the
man who was to be the instrument in
performing it—‘‘the rock in Horeb,”

God appeared first to Moses in
Horeb (Exod. iii. 1). The return to
places which God has fixed indelibly
upon our minds by some special manifes-
tation of His providential favour, is very
helpful to every man’s faith. It was
so to Jacob (Gen. xxxii. 10) when God
said to him, “Arise, go up to Bethel”
(Gen. xxxv. 1). He intended to use
the place as a means of arousing him
to increased faith and obedience by
the remembrance of former mercies
received there. So in the case of
Moses. The return to Horeb would
enable him to draw from the past
some compensation for the trying
circumstances of the present (Exod.
xvii. 2-4) The very sight of the
place in which God had given him
promises (Exod. iii. 10-20), which had
since been fulfilled, would give him
hope for the future.

IT. The temptation connected with
the miracle.

The murmuring and chiding of
Israel against Moses is said to be
tempting God. The miracles already
wrought by Moses had been an abun-
dant confirmation of His Divine com-
mission, God had in the past so





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,





identified His servant with Himself,
that to murmur against him was find-
ing fault with his and their God.

III. The nature of the miracle.

1. The water from the rock wasa
miracle, because tt gushed forth at the
moment when Moses smote the rock, as
the Lord had said. The people by their
murmuring had fully admitted that no
water could be obtained from natural
sources. God never supplies our wants
by supernatural means when they can
be satisfied by the operation of the
ordinary laws of nature.

2. But though mtraculous, it was con-
nected with human agency. Moses smote
the rock, and God gave the water. The
rod was in the hand of Moses, the power
in the hand of God. Peter took the
lame man by the hand, and God gave
him the power to walk (Acts iii. 7),

Lesson.

God can bring good to His people
Srom the most unlikely sources. Nothing
seemed more unlikely to yield water
than the barren rock of Horeb. So
God often brings refreshing streams of
comfort to His people out of hard cir-
cumstances. Paul and Silas could
sing in the dungeon, and their impri-
sonment was made the means of
adding to their converts in Philippi.
The lot of John in Patmos seemed
hard and dreary indeed ; but, at the
bidding of Christ, streams of living
water gushed forth there, which re-
freshed the soul of the apostle at the
time, and have followed the Church
until the present. Out of the suffer-
ings of the martyrs came joy to them-
selves and blessings to their descen-
dants. Above all, out of the hard
circumstances of the crucified Lord
of glory, God has brought forth waters
of everlasting life.


ILLUSTRATION,


At Rephidim they again wanted water, their
murmurings were now more violent, and their
conduct more outrageous than at Marah. We
had then some sympathy for them, and were
inclined to plead some extenuating circum-
stances in their behalf. But we have not a

684


word to say for them now. Their misbehaviour
is most flagrant, and the harshest judgment
cannot estimate their offence too severely,
They had lately seen their wants relieved in a
similar emergency ; and at this very time they
were receiving, every morning, from heaven





-


en te ae il


ee ee ad |


ee ee ee ee aT ee ee


their daily bread. Yet so strangely unreasona-
ble was their spirit, that they reproached
Moses for having brought them out of Egypt,
to kill them and their children and their cattle
with thirst ; and their violence of manner was
such as led Moses to cry unto the Lord, say-
ing, “ What shall I do unto this people? they
be almost ready to stone me.” Alas! it had
come to this already. Already—in one little
month—were the ransomed people prepared to
deal thus with their deliverer, all whose toil and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.  cuaP. XXXIIL.





‘thought were spent for their advantege, Thus


soon did they justify the prescient reluctance
with which he had abandoned for these re-
sponsibilities the safe and quiet life he loved
so well. It seems to have been in order that
Moses might not be plunged in deeper dis-
couragement, that the Lord forbore to declare
His own displeasure. He simply indicated
the mode in which He meant to provide for
their wanta.—John Kitto, DD,


REPHIDIM; OR, THE BaTTLE BETWEEN AMALEK AND IsRamh.


(Verse 14.)


We cannot well pass away from Rephi-
dim without noticing the remarkable
battle which was fought there between
the Amalekites and the Israelites, and
which is recorded in Exod. xvii. 8-16.
Before mentioning what appear to us
as its chief teachings, let us attend to
some important preliminary considera-
tions.

i. On the part of the leraelites this
battle was entirely defensive (Exod. xvii.
8; Deut. xxv. 17, 18). It was for the
preservation of their own lives, and the
lives of their people, that the Israclite.,
fought, and Moses prayed on this day,

ii, The part which the Israelites tovk
tn this battle was approved by Jehovah.
It was commanded by Moges, who, as
the minister of Jehovah, was specially
authorised and attested ; and Jehovah
manifested His approval by giving
them the victory to a great extent in
answer to prayer, and by commanding
Moses to write an account of the
battle in a book, and thus transmit it
to coming generations. . This battle
was a righteous one on the part of
Israel, or it would not thus have re-
ceived the Divine approval.

iii, What was the cause of this battle ?
This was probably twofold:—(1) The


fertility of the valley. We accept the


conclusion that Rephidim is Wady
Feiran, of which Dr. Hayman speaks
as, “the well-known valley, richer
in water and vegetation than any
other in the peninsula. It is
the finest valley in the whole penin-
sula.” And Dean Stanley : “ Rephidim,


° . °


‘the resting places,’ is the natural
name for the paradise of the Bedouins
in the adjacent palm-grove;... the
Amalekites may thus have naturally
fought for the oasis of the Desert.”
(2) The recollection of ‘an ancient
injury. The Amalekites were to a
great extent, if not entirely, descen-
dants of Esau (Gen. xxxvi. 12, 16) ; and
is it not probable that the old enmity
between Jacob and Esau had some-
thing to do with their attack upon
Israel? Esau had forgiven Jacob the
injury, and God had pardoned his sin,
yet the memory of his base act was
handed down from generation to gene-
ration of the posterity of Esau,
arousing their hatred against the
posterity of Jacob, Thus the memory
of evil is perpetuated, and thus evil
actions live and work for long ages
after they who did them have passed
away, and the sin of the father in its
penalty falls upon the children of many
following generations. Here is warn-
ing, &e.

Let us now view this brief chapter of
ancient history in three aspects :—

I. As anillustration of the working
of God in human history, or of the
means and methods by which He
effects His purposes.

Notice the steps that were taken
and the means that were employed to
vanquish the Amalekites. Joshua was
appointed general ; he selected the most
suitable men to fight the battle; for
their encouragement Moses ascended
the hill, &e, How, then, x ae give


CHAP. XXXIIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





them this victory, and in so doing
accomplish His own design in the
matter 3

1. By their own efforts. After the
way in which God had dealt with them,
they might not very unreasonably have
thought, when they were attacked, that
without their effort He would deliver
them. He led them forth out of Egypt
without exertion on their part. When
they were pursued by Pharaoh and his
host, they had only to ‘‘stand still
and see the salvation of the Lord.”
But had that treatment been continued,
they would have remained a nation of
slaves or children in spirit. If they
are to become a nation of men, they
must be roused to effort. So they have
to fight the Amalekites.

2. By the efforts of the most efficient.
Amongst the Israelites there were no
trained soldiers; they must have been
ill-armed, and had long been inured to
servitude. In these circumstauces, at
the command of Moses, Joshua selected
the fittest men to fight the battle.

3. By the efforts of the most efficient
under a most skilful and heroic general.
Joshua was a man of remarkable genius
and skill as a leader of men. Con-
sidering his previous condition, his
generalship is very extraordinary.

4. By the efforts of the most efficient
under an able general, with wise arrange-
ments for arousing and maintaining
courage, At this time the Israelites
were anything but heroes: they were
sadly deficient of manliness, The rod
in the hand of Moses would tend to
awaken memory, confidence,and courage.
What wonders had been wrought with
that rod on former occasions! &0. (a)

§. And in addition to all other things,
the victory was obtained by prayer.
Moses on the hill was, doubtless, en-
gaged in prayer to God. His prayer
had power with God, To Him he
ascribed the victory. ‘ Moses built
an altar and called the name of it
Jehovah-nissi; ¢.e., Jehovah my banner.
b
aod works by means. He never
uses supernatural means where natural
ones will accomplish the end. He uses

586


means eminently adapted to secure the
end. He uses men as His instruments ;
and never does for us that which we
can do for ourselves. And in our works
He would have us use our utmost skill
and power. He does not need our
wisdom, and He certainly does not
need our ignorance or folly. The
Israelites planned and fought as if all
depended upon themselves; Moses
prayed as if all depended upon God;
and when victory was attained they
ascribed it to Him, Let us “go, and
do likewise.” (c)

II. As an illustration of the work
and warfare of every good man.

1. The Christian life involves difficulty
toil, and conflict (1 Cor. ix. 24-27 ; Eph.
vi. 10-18 ; Heb. xii. 1-4 ; 1 Pet. v. 8, 9).
We cannot live a Christian life and do
Christian work without battling with
enemies. We must fight against (1
“the world,” or evil in society ; es
“the flesh,” or evil in ourselves ; and
(8) “the devil,” or malign spiritual
influences. (d)

2. In the work and warfare of the
Christian life we need the help of others.
““We are members one of another.”
“The eye cannot say unto the hand, I
have no need of thee,” &. But we are
chiefly dependent on Jesus Christ. He
is our General, our Joshua. “The
Captain of our salvation.” He is our
Intercessor, our Moses. ‘He ever
liveth to make intercession for us.”
His uplifted hands are never weary,
&c. And as the uplifted rod encouraged
the Israelites, so the presence of Christ
nerves the spirit for the fight. “‘ Looking
unto Jesus” is the true attitude of
every Christian both in work and in
warfare.

3. By earnest, believing effort, and the
help of God, the work and warfare of the
Christian life will be ultimately accom-
plished and crowned with victory. Effort,
or no effort ; effort with God, or effort
without God; upon the determination
of these the issues of life’s work
and warfare depend. No effort, or
effort without God, means failure:
personal effort with God means success,
victory.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


CHAP, XXXII.


rere


TIL. As an illustration of the work
and warfare of the Church of Jesus
Christ.

The call of God to the Church is to
take possession of the world in His
name and for Him ; and to accomplish
this its members must battle with the
Amalekites of crime, vice, ignorance,
superstition, religious indifference, &c.
In the prosecution of this work and
warfare—

1. The Church needs leaders. The
Lord Jesus is our great Leader: He is
“head over all to the Church.” But
we need subordinate leaders also. No
leaders means no rule, no discipline, no
order ; but anarchy, incompetence, con-
fusion.

2. The labours of all and every one
are required. In the battle Moses,
Joshua, Aaron, Hur, and all the fight-
ing men, were occupied, while the others
were employed in guarding the women
and children, the flocks and herds, and
the baggage. In the Church there is
work for every one, &o. This is a
correction (1) to those who think they
can do nothing; (2) to those who
think they can do anything and every-
thing. Every one should work, and
every one should do his own work,

8. The Church succeeds in her efforts


tn proportion as she maintains her com-
munication with Heaven. (Comp. Exod.
xvii. 11.) Our great Intercessor ever
prays. But much depends upon our
own prayers. The praying church is
the working church, and the conquering
church.

4, The greatest men in the Church are
dependent upon the help of the smallest
men. Moses needed the aid of Hur. In
these days ministers in some cases are
left to pray alone, work alone, fight alone.

5. Success or ‘fuilure often depends
upon comparatively small and feeble
men. If Hur had not been with Moses,
Israel would probably have been de-
feated. Success in the enterprises of
the Church depends upon every man
doing his own work, however obscure
and humble it may be.

6. The ultimate victory of the Church
ts certain. “Jehovah is my banner,”
The battle is not ours but God’s,
Battle of truth and right against error,
&. (e

fie ae victory will be ascribed to God
in Christ. “Joshua discomfited Amalek.”
“ We are more than conquerors through
Him that loved us.” Unto Him be all
the glory. “ Worthy is the Lamb that
was slain to receive power,” &o. (Rev.
v. 12, 13).


ILLUSTRATIONS,


(a) Joshua led forth his men to the field;
and Moses mounted the hill, accompanied by
Aaron his brother, and by Hur, who is sup-

sed to have been his brother-in-law. Here

oses stood, and held up his hand on high,
with the wonder-working rod therein. It was
no doubt held up, in the first instance, asa
kind of banner or signal, to be seen by the
warring host below, and designed to operate as
® continual incentive to their valour and
prowess while engaged in the contest; and the
sight of this syiwbol and instrament of the
power which had worked so wondrously on
their behalf, could not fail to nerve their arms
with new vigour every time their eyes were
turned towards it. Yet it needed but little
reflection to assure them that, as is very mani-
fest, there was no inherent virtue in the rod to
produce this effect; and that it derived all its
efficacy from the Divine appointment, as a
visible symbol of that unseen succour and
strength which God was pleased to minister to


His militant servants fighting His battle, and
maintaining the high glory of His name.—
John Kitto, D.D.

(6) Moses was eminently an intercessor
with God for the people committed to hig
charge ; and there can be no questior that, in
connection with these external and symbolical
actions, fervent prayer for the Divine aid was
offered ; the uplifting of the rod being thus
merely an accompaniment of the earnest in-
tercessious which breathed from the lips and
hearts of the venerable men upon the moune
tain. And even if this were not the case, the
circumstances and the result are strikingly
analagous to those of intercessory prayer, and
suggestive of them.—ZLbid. ;

in the power of intercession, illustrations are
given on pp. 183, 225.

(c) We notice here grouped together that
hallowed combination of agencies which
ought never to be separated —the dependence
upon Heaven, with the use care


CHAP, XXXIII.





means. The rod in the hand of Moses, and
the sword in that of Joshua; the embattled
host in the valley below, and the praying hand
in the mount above all were necessary in the
Divine economy to the victory of Israel over
his foes. So must it be in our own conflict
with the Amalek that lies ambushed within,
to hinder our progress to the mount of God.
We may expect no manifestation of the Lord’s
power, no interference of His goodness, but as
the result of a blessing upon our own zealous
conflict with temptation. “ Prayer without
active duty ia mockery of God. He who en-
treats deliverance from the onset and power of
evil, yet never makes an effort in his own
behalf, nor strives against the sin that wars
within him, draws nigh to God with his lips,
but is wholly estranged from the fervour of
that supplication that issues from the depths
of the hart.” Yet it was intended to be
tanght, and was most effectually taught by
this example, that the uplifted hand of Moses
contributed more to the safety of the Israelites


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





than their own hands—his rod more than
their weapons of war; and accordingly their
success fluctuates.as he raises up or Jets down
his hands. In like manner will the Christian
warfare be attended with little success, unless
it be waged in the practice of unceasing
earnest prayer. It will never be known on
this side the Lord’s second coming, how much
His cause, and the work of individual salva:
tion, have been advanced by “the effectual
fervent prayer’ of righteous men. And it is
surely a cheering reflection in the heat and
burden of the day of battle, that while we are
contending below, faithful servants of God
have ascended the hill of spiritual prayer, and
are imploring blessings upon our efforts.—Jbzd,

Another illustration on the Divine use of
suitable means in accomplishing His designs,
appears on p. 539. ;

(d) For an illustration on this point, see
p- 416. (6)

(e) Illustrations on the Certainty of the
Christian Vectory appear on pp. 416, 417.


IsnarL anp AMALER,


(Verse 14.)


The Israelites had been redeemed
from Egypt, and were %n their way to
Canaan. This, therefore, is a picture
of the Christian life, and is full of
teaching to all believers, Taking it in
this light, we see—

I. The Christian’s example,

1. To fight. (1) An aggressive fight.
“Go.” (2) To be done wisely. “ Choose
you out men.” (3) Earnestly. “ Fight.”
Hard blows. No parley. (4) Con-
tinually. “ War with Amalek from
generation to generation.”

2. To pray. (1) For those who fight.
(2) Earnestly. Not growing weary. Hard
blows and hard prayers. (3) Confidently.
“The rod.” Symbol of past mercies. (4)
Unitedly. ‘Moses, Aaron, and Hur,”


“Tw tog Deserr or Sinar”:


&c. Promises given to two or three,
II, The Christian’s encouragement,
1. Christ, our Captain (Joshua). (1)

With us to cheer. Wellington’s pre-

sence on battle-field. (2) With us to

direct. (3) With us to defend.

2. Christ, our Intercessor (Moses).
(1) He prays while we work. (2) He
prays continually. Never grows weary.
(3) He prays successfully.

III. The Christian’s prospect.

l. Of certain victory. The result is
sure. Every foe shall be overcome.

2. Of certain glory. While God’s
servants ascribe all the glory to Him
(Exod. xvii. 15), He, nevertheless, de-
lights to honour them (/did, 13).—D.
Macmillan,


Tas Morat Law.


(Verse 15.)


The Israelites were encamped in the
desert of Sinai for the space of nearly a
year (Exod. xix. 1; chap. x. 11, 12).
Although we cannot attempt to consider
their es during that time, yet we

88


cannot pass over this encampment
without a brief notice of two or three
of its principal, events. And here let us
notice the Moral Law (Exod. xx. 1-17).

The moral law which was delivered





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XXXII.





by Moses from Mount Sinai was dis-
tinguished by many peculiar and
blessed characteristics.

I. {t based its precepts upon the
existence and authority of God.

To believe in God is not one of the
‘ten commandments. This fact is pre-
supposed in the preface to them, “I
am the Lord thy God, which have
orought thee out of the land of Egypt,”
_&c. This is the foundation of all that
foliows. And as God is the Lord their
God, and has proved His right to issue
His commands by His wonderful deeds
in their behalf, so it is fitting that the
first four precepts in the code should
concern His own relation to the people
of His choice, referring (1) to the ne-
cessity of having no vther God but
Him; (2) to the spiritual mode in
which He, a spirit, must be worshipped ;
(3) to the reverence in which His ver
Name should be regarded ; and (4) to
the duty of devoting one whole day of
the seven to His worship. The large
space given to God in the ten com-
mandments is quite in consonance with
the theocratic nature of the Jewish
economy. God in it was the leading
thought, man secondary; whereas in
she Christian dispensation, through the
union of the two natures in Christ, it
is hard to say which is made more
prominent. It is, verily, the economy
af the God-man,

II. It was a strict and stern, but
tar from being an unjust or cruel
system.

It denied no enjoyment that was
aatural, and it inculcated no duty that
was harsh. None of the commandments
were “grievous.” All conduced at
once to the happiness of man and to the
glory of God. The first precept secured
the Jews from the distraction of mind
_ and heart connected with the worship
of many gods, The second inculcated
a form of worship less cumbrous and
purdensome, as well as more spiritual,
than idolatry. The third, in consecra-
ting the name of God, taught His wor-
shippers to reverence and love Him
better. The fourth provided for them
a day of grateful rest and refreshment


amid their toils, and held out, typi-
cally, the prospect of a future and
serener existence. The fifth was ex-
pressly sealed by a promise, that to
those who obeyed it, their days should
be long upon the land. The sixth, in
forbidding murder, tended to frevent
the misery which springs from it to all
concerned, either as actors or sufferers,
and to cherish that spirit of love and
mutual forbearance which is productive
of so much true happiness. The seventh
commanded men to shun those ill-
regulated passions and practices which
create such remorse, satiety, hardness
of heart, and family disturbance, The
eighth secured the rights of property.
The ninth taught the value of truth-
fulness, and the duty of regarding our
neighbour’s good name as if it were
our own, The tenth sought to crush,
in the secret recesses of the heart, the
seeds of all evil conduct, and thereby
to cleanse and sweeten the inner
nature.

III. It was singularly well suited
to the age and to the people to whom
it was promulgated.

That age was early, and that people
was rude and child-like. The precepta
of the law required, therefore, to be
dogmatic, to be strict, to be free in
their expression from all abstract terme
and recondite reasonings. to be fre-
quently repeated, “line upon line, pre-
cept upon precept, here a little and
there a little.” All this we find charaoc-
teristic of the law of Moses,

IV. Another evidence of the divinely-
wise applicability of this law to the
Jewish people we find in certain cir-
cumstances which tended at once to
guard, to sanction, to enforce, recom-
mend, and to illustrate it.

One of these was the grandeur and
terror connected with its announcement
from Sinai, . .. The tables of stone
still remained, written by the very
finger of God, and were cherished
with the highest veneration. Moses,
after he had finished the writings of
the book of the law, deposited it with
his people in the following remarkable
words, “he commanded oe ges


OHAP, XXXIII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


—_e


which bare the ark of the covenant of
the Lord, saying, Take this book,” &c.
(Deut. xxxi. 25, 26). . . . The splendid
appurtenances of the Jewish worship
were meant to illustrate the principles
of the law, moral as well as ceremonial,
to the imperfectly developed minds of
the people.... Had the law gone
forth naked, it would have had little
effect upon such a people ; but it went
forth in beautiful costume and in
dazzling armour, and did a great, al-
though a temporary, work.

V. The system itself is the best
proof of its Divine origin.


Its very defects and limitations, ag
well as its glories, showed it to be no
human contrivance; its imperfections
arose not from the miscalculations of
weakness, but from the foresight of
wisdom. .... Life and immortality
were reserved for the illumination of
Christ. But how wonderful, that with-
out these ideas of rewards and punish-
ments in a future life being very pro-
minently brought before the minds of
men, @ national polity was not only
possible, but continued for a long time
powerful and prosperous !—From “ AL
pha and Omega,” by G. Giljillan, M.A.


Ty ras Desert or Srvat; tas Gowen Cat,
(Verse 15.)


Let us see what instruction we can
gather from this impressive portion
(Exod. xxxii.) of sacred history.

L The circumstances of the Israel-
ites were analogous to the circum-
stances of a large portion of mankind
at the present day.

1. The Israelites had witnessed a ter-
rific display of the Divine character. The
attributes of sovereignty, justice, holi-
ness, and truth, had been set forth in
the most impressive manner, so as to
come in contact not only with the
thoughts, the feelings, but the very
senses. Now there is something analo-
gous to this in the experience of most
at some period or other, especially of
those who live under the sound of the
Gospel. The hearer of the true Gos-
pel lives in the atmosphere of Sinai, as
well as of Calvary; he hears of the
justice and truth of God, as well as of
His mercy; and if he do not stand in
awe of the sterner attributes, as well as
rejoice in the milder, then you may be
assured that he is hearing the Gospel
to no purpose: he has not even begun
to comprehend its true import.

2. The Israelites had just given their
solemn affirmative response to God’s cove-
nant, as it had been read to them by
Moses ; and they were bound by every
consideration of honour, of gratitude,


590


of duty, to obey it. In like manner,
there are multitudes at this day, all
over Christendom, who have professed
not only a belief in the Divine testi-
mony, but obedience to the Divine
precepts.

II. The conduct of the Israelites in
making and worshipping the calf, in
those peculiar circumstances, was ana-
logous to much that is passing in the
world around us,

What rendered the conduct of the
Israelites so exceedingly strange and
criminal was, that it should have oo-
curred amidst the awful scenes of Horeb.
You have been sitting under the preach-
ing of the Gospel from the time that
you were able to understand it ; its doo-
trines and precepts, its promises and
threatenings, have been set before you
in every variety of form, while you have
always had the written Word within
your reach, with every facility for study-
ing and understanding it. And what
demonstrations have you made in these
circumstances Why, you have been
guilty of idolatry just as truly as the
Israelites were ; you have worshipped
gold just as truly as they did; and the
fact that they chose the form of a calf,
and you choose some other torm, makes
no difference as to the actual guilt in
the eye of Heaven.


” <— TS


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


CHAP. XXXII





Time has been when God’s hand
rested heavily upon you, and death,
perhaps, came into your very chamber,
and you saw some one carried to the
grave for whom you felt that you could
have given even your life. But this afflic-
tion found you a worshipper of the world,
and it had no effect in rendering you
permanently otherwise.

You have sometimes had your lot
east in the midst of the effusions of
God’s Holy Spirit; and go where you
might, the anxious enquiry on the one
side, and the song of thanksgiving on
the other, was falling upon your ear,
But neither the one nor the other was
heard to escape your lips. You had
your golden calf, and that was enough
for you.

IIL. The guilt of the Israelites in
making and worshipping the golden
calf was not a little enhanced by the
peculiar circumstances under which
the sin was committed; and there is
a corresponding aggravation from a
similar cause attending many of those
idolatrous attachments which are
often witnessed in our day.

Everything around them told of the
Divine presence; everything that they
saw and heard was adapted to dissuade
them from this impious outrage. And
yet they heeded it not,—they became
gross idolators within the sound of
Jehovah’s voice, within the very blaze
of His glory.

Nor is the case dissimilar as it is
often witnessed at the present day
among ourselves. God speaks now by


His Providence, by His Word, by His
Spirit. He has spoken through the
voice of your own conscience. You, not
less than the Israelites, have been
sinning while God has been very near
to you. You, as truly as they, have
been idolators amid scenes which ought
to overwhelm you with a sense of the
Divine presence ; and whether this cir-
cumstance must not materially aggra-
vate your guilt and condemnation,


judge ye.


IV. God did not suffer this sin of
the Israelites to go unpunished;
neither can those who are guilty of a
similar sin at the present day expect
to escape punishment.

The first part of their punishment
consisted in the destruction of their
idol. Does not this conduct of God
towards the Israelites illustrate a gene-
ral principle of His administration %

Moses instituted a terrible work of
death in respect to the idolators. Some-
times God performs a mighty retributive
work in the sinner’s bosom through the
power of cunscience, and months and
years of unmitigated inward torture
seem to change life itself into a living
death. Sometimes persons of this cha-
racter are cut off in so sudden and
striking a manner, that we can hardly
suppress the conviction that there is
something judicial in the circumstances
of their death.

There are a thousand voices charging
you to forsake your idols, and to make
Jehovah your portion.— W. B. Sprugue,


Is tas Desert or Sinai: Lessons FrRoM THe WorsHiP op THE OAaLp,


(Verse 15, with Exod. xxxii. 1-5.)


Human nature being the same, his-
tory is in principle constantly repeating
itself, The facts of Bible history are
recorded that we may get at underlying
truths, such truths being God’s teach-
ing to us. In the event to which re-
ference is here made, we observe—

I. The difficulty to human nature
of faith in the unseen,


‘“‘This Moses, we wot not what is be-
come of him.”

II. The impatience of man at God’s
method of working.

Moses delayed in the mount. The
people would not wait for the man with
God’s Word,

III. That man will have a god.

“Up, make us gods,” gare are


CHAP, XXXII,





often manufactured gods. The man
who would be popular must make gods
to go before the people. It is the ruin
of a people when they worship false
gods. It is the very height of folly,
when men of science, art, or manufac-
tures, say of their own works: “ These
be thy gods, O Israel.”

IV. The effect of slavish adherence
to old ideas.

In one sense, at least, they were not
out of Egypt—the sacred ox. See the
importance of keeping the young from
early impressions of error. Let none
expose themselves to false teaching ; it
may bring them into bondage.

V. Their extravagant expenditure
for the gratification of a fancy (vers.


2, 3).


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





People often spend more in super
stition than Christians for the truth.
Christians spend far more for luxury,
pleasure, fancy, than for Christ. Who
amongst us is willing todo as much for
Jesus as these people did to procure a
golden calf?

VI. How art is desecrated to sinful
purposes (ver. 4).

So in building at Babel; in worship
at Babylon, and Ephesus, and Athens.
Abundant proofs in our picture gal-
leries and museums, and also in our
modern theatres, gin palaces, &c.

VII. That if God is dishonoured,
man is misled, humiliated, ruined.

“When lust hath conceived, it bring-
eth forth sin; and sin, when it is finished,
bringeth forth death."—W. Whale.


In tos Desert or Srnat: Moszs's Communion with Gop mm fas Mount,


(Verse 15, with Exod. xxxiv. 29 35.)


There was a great deal of what was
miraculous, no doubt, in this transao-
tion, but there is much also that,
properly improved, will tend to our
spiritual edification.

I. The cause of that radiance which
appeared in the face of Moses.

The converse which Moses held with
God in the mount, was the cause of
“hat glory which rested on his coun-
tenance. He ascended the mountain
to hold intercourse with God, and while
he talked with Him his face shone. In
the account of this transaction, there
are two particulars worthy of notice.

1. Moses offered sacrifices before as-
cending to hold communion with God
(see Exod, xxiv.). This indicates a
great principle connected with all true
roligion—that religion has always rested
on sacrifice (Gen. iv. 4; Heb, xi. 4).
The Jewish religion, in all its ritual
and services, rested upon this great
principle. The distinctive feature of
Christianity embraces the same prin-
ciple. One of our great Christian
privileges is to ascend the mountain
and hold communion with God. But
to be thus brought together, there

592


must be something done on both sides:
On the part of God there must be
utterance given to the voice of mercy
and love, there must be a way of ao-
cess to His throne ; on the part of man
there must be faith, God in Chris-
tianity has made three great provisions
to this end—a sacrifice, a mediation,
and spiritual influences. (1) The sacri-
Jice of Christ is the standing medium of
communication and fellowship between
God and man. The atonement has
only been offered once, yet the effect is
everlasting. In all His transactions
with us, God has ever regard to the
sacrifice of Christ ; He never pardons a
sinner, but through the atonement;
He never adopts the prodigal, and in-
vests him with the rights, privileges,
and honours of a child, but through the
atonement ; He never confers spiritual
joy, or any other blessing, upon the be-
liever, but through the atonement
(2) There ts a provision of mediation.
Mediation does not merely embrace the
office of intercessor, but it is a greay
sublime scheme of spiritual and provi-
dontial administration. Christ sits upom
the throne ; to Him all power in heavem


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS _ onapP. XxXIil.


and earth is given; it is exercised with


reference to the great purposes of


atonement. (3) Sprritual influence also
ts apart of Christianity. This is in-
separably connected with the great
work of our Lord and Saviour. We
might as well talk of Christianity with-
out a Saviour, as of Christianity without
the Holy Ghost.

These are the provisions which Chris-
tianity makes for our ascending the
mount to hold communion with God ;
let us avail ourselves of them, and go
up confidently with the blood of atone-
ment to hear His voice, to taste His
love, and to receive the fulness of joy.

2. Moses ascended the mountain alone,
This opens to us another principle of
religion : it is this—that in all respects
it is personal. Our devotional exer-
cises are of this nature. It is true
that we meet in public fellowship, but
there is a sense in which the soul sits
solitary in the midst of a mighty multi-
tude. Our emotions are all personal.
In His dealings with us God addresses
us as individuals, Pardon, renewal,
eternal life, are bestowed on individuals.
These blessings are all personal. Duties
are personal : one cannot discharge the
duties of another. Enjoyments are
personal. The closet is the place where
we must test our religious character.
There is something suspicious when
our joy is only connected with public
devotional exercises ; but when we are
alone and enjoy communion with God,
then may we regard our feelings as
genuine.

II. The nature of the light and
glory which rested on the face of
Moses,

There is a great mystery in this, but





it was intended to be symbolical of a
better glory. We shall pass over the
symbolical meaning, and make some
remarks of a practical bearing.

1. Intercourse with God will be pro-
ductive of yoy to the soul. There will
be rapturous joy. How can it be
otherwise when the Saviour first reveals
Himself to the sinner’s heart ? How can
it be otherwise when a man finds him-
self adopted into the Divine family, a
partaker of the love of God, and ad-
mitted to daily fellowship ?

2. Intercourse with God must have
the effect of expanding the capacity and
of enlarging the soul. The religious
man can enjoy every form of truth
and knowledge in the world in common
with the man who is solely devoted to
its pursuits ; but, unlike him, he has
the infinite prospect of the glories of
heaven and eternal life.

3. Intercourse with God will produce
beauty of character. We cannot enjoy
Divine grace, love, sanctification, and
the privileges of the Christian state, but
our internal purity will exhibit itself by
a spotless life.

III. The conduct of Moses when he
descended from the mount.

“He put a vail on his face.” Religion
in this life is often vailed under cir-
cumstances which obscure ita grandeur.
For instance, what a contrast there
exists betwixt the employments of many
Christians and their enjoyments; by
the one they are almost assimilated to
the beasts of the earth, by the other
they are allied to heaven. Poverty,
dark providences, and affliction, often
vail the spiritual state of good men.—
D.,in “One Hundred Sketches of Ser-
mons,”


ILLUSTRATION.


The effect of the vision is 20 great that
when Moses comes down from the mount,
with the new tables of testimony in his hand,
which God had inscribed with the command-
ments of the Jaw, his face is seen to be
shining. He has no need, in faint and feeble
words, to tell with whom he had been convers-
ing ; his face becomes eloquent, and rays out
the tidings. Even as the red cloud, which the


evening sun has coloured, eontinues red after
he has set, so there is a relict radiance on the
face of Moses from that of God. “ The skin
of his face shone,” and it added to the effect,
that he “ wist not that it shone.” Beauty is
never so beantiful as when unconscious,
Strength is never so strong as when lean-
ing on its right arm. Terror is never
so terrible as when it forgets ccan The


CHAP, XXXIII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; NUMBERS.


a eer ee


sun seems so glorious, and the moon go
lovely, and the stars so pure, because
we feel that they know not that they are,
And thus the unconscious shining of the
countenance of Moses struck awe into all
beholders. They were afraid to come nigh
unto him. He seemed insulated in the sea of
glory still, It seemed God’s own face that


they gazed at. Yet it was only from the
terror of others that he learned his own
glorious appearance. And after talking to
the trembling Israelites for a time, he at last
put on a veil, which shaded the splendours of
his face, and which he only dropped when he
entered into the tabernacle to meet with God-
—G. Gilfillan, M.A,


KimroTa-HATTAAVAB,


(Verse 16.)


The history of the people at this en-
campment has already engaged our


attention in chap.
2 1 2.


xl See pp 173


Hazuporg,


(Verse 17.)


This encampment is remarkable as
the scene of the sedition of Miriam and


Aaron against Moses, and its punish
ment (chap. xii.). See pp. 313-227.


RItHMAHi


(Verse 18.)


The history of the people at this
encampment was both momentous and
mournful in a very great degree,


It is recorded in chaps. xiii. and
xiv. See Hzpla Note on the
verse, and pp. 228-269,


Noruine sur Names,


(Verses 19-36.)


We have here the names of the
places at which the people encamped
during the years of penal wanderings.
What took place at any of these
stations we know not; and the piaces
themselves, with the exception of Ezion
Geber, are unknown. The paragraph
is little more than mere names, and
suggests the following reflections.

I, The tendency of sin to deprive
life of any worthy significance,

In the history of this people there
was little worth recording for 38 years,
Sin is prone to rob life of all true
and noble elements, of inspiration and
helpfulness to good, of brave and
earnest enterprize; and to bring

594


people into such a@ state that they
have no history to write, or no history
worth writing.

II. The tendency of sin to retard
progress.

Here area number of journeys, but no
advancetowards their destination. There
was movement without progress. The
unbelief, cowardice, and rebellion of
the people against God caused this
(chap. xiv.). Sin takes the wheels off
the chariots of human progress, so that
they drag slowly and heavily along.
Nay, it even completely arrests pro
gress. This is true of communities
For the space of almost 38 years the
progress of this nation was held back





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS. CHAP. XXXIII.
eeeeeeeSeSeSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSsSsaesesesesesese


by their sins, It is true also of indi-
viduals.

III. The importance of remember-
ing the losses which sin causes us,

For this reason there is some record
of shese seemingly fruitless years—
these penal wanderings.

1, Such remembrance should promote
humility. “Thou shalt remember all
the way which the Lord thy God
lud thee these forty years in the wil-
derness, to humble thee,” &0. (Deut.
viii. 2).

2. Such remembrance should restrain
from sin. The recollection of the loss
and injury which sin has caused us is
calculated to cause us to abhor and
avoid sin. And “hen it involves loss
and trouble to a whole generation of
people, the recollection of it is fitted to
lead the coming generations to shun
the sins of their ancestors (comp. Psa.
Ixxviii. 3-8).

IV. The mutability of earthly and
temporal things,

When this itinerary was written,
these seventeen places were well known ;
but at the present time of only one of
them is anything whatever known of a
certainty. Places great and famous in
days of yore, have vanished almost as
compietely,


“* Cities numberless,
Tyre, Sidon, Carthage, Babylon, and Troy,
And rich Phenicia—they are blotted out,
Half-raz’d from memory, and their very name
And being in dispute,” —A. K. White.


Therefore, “love not the world,
neither the things in the world,” &,
(1 John ii. 15-17). “Seek those things
which are above,” 8&0. (Col. iii. 1, 2). (a)

V. The unsettled character of human
life upon earth.

“They departed from Rithmah and
pitched at Rimmon-parez.... And
they journeyed from Rissah and pitched
in Kehelathah,.... And they re-
moved from Mount Shapher and en-
camped in Haradah,” &o. Such is the
character of the record—a record of
removals, &o. And such is human
life in this world. “This is not your
rest.” “Here have we no continuing
city, but we seek one to come.” (0)


The suggestions of this paragraph
may be developed also with these two
inquiries as the principal divisions.

I. Why have we here nothing but
names %

II. Seeing that we have here no-
thing but names, why are these names
recorded ?


ILLUSTRATIONS,


(a2) God has written it onevery page of His
sreation that there is nothing here which lasts.
Our affections change. The friendships of
the man are not the friendships of the boy.
Our very selves are altering. The basis of
our being may remain, but our views, tastes,
feelings, are no more our former self than the
oak is the acorn. The very face of the visible
world is altering around us : we have the gray
mouldering ruins to tell of what was once,
Our labourers strike their ploughshares against
the foundations of buildings which once
echoed to human mirth—skeletons of men, to
whom life once was dear—urns and coins that
remind the antiquarian of magnificent
empire. To-day the shot of the enemy defaces
and blackens monuments and venerable tem-
ples, which remind the Christian that into the
deep silence of eternity the Roman world has

assed away. And sothings are going. It
4 a work of weaving and unweaving.
passes. Names that the world heard once in


QQ 2


thunder are ey heard at the end of
centuries—good or bad, they pass. A few
years ago and we were not. A few centuries
further, and we reach the age of beings of
almost another race. Nimrod was the con-
ueror and scourge of his far-back age. Tubal

‘ain gave to the world the iron which was the
foundation of every triumph of men over
nature. We have iheir names now. But the
philologist is uncertain whether the name of
the first is real or mythical—and the traveller
excavates the sand-mounds of Nineveh to
wonder over the records which he cannot
decipher. Tyrant and benefactor, both are
gone. And so all things are moving on to
the last fire which shall wrap the world in
conflagration, and make all that has been
the recollection of a dream. This is the
history of the world, and all that isinit, It
passes while we look at it. Like as when you
watch the melting tints of the evening sky—
purple-crimson, gorgeous gold, o8 pulsa-


CHAP. XXXII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


NS


tions of quivering light, and it is all gone :—
“we are such stuff as dreams are made of,”—<
&. W. Robertson, M.A.


(6) For illustrations on this point, see pp.
163 (6), 409 (9),


“From KapesH . ., . UNTO ABEL-SHITTIM IN THB PLaIns oF Moan.”


(Verses 37-49.)


The history of the people m these
journeys and encampments has already
engaged much of our attention in our
progress through this book. In the


Explanatory Notes on the verses the
chapters and verses are given for the
history of each encampment.


Tus Expursion oF THE CANAANITES


(Verses 50-56.)


Consider—

IL The imperative command.

“‘And the Lord spake unto Moses in
the plains of Moab by Jordan near
Jericho, saying, Speak unto the children
of Israel, and say unto them, When ye
are passed over Jordan,” &o, (verses
50-54).

1. To utterly expel the inhabitants of
Canaan, “When ye are passed over
Jordan into the land of Canaan; then
ye shall drive out all the inhabitants
of the land from before you; .. . and ye
shall dispossess the inhabitants of the
land, aud dwell therein.” This com-
mand had been given to them pre-
viously in Exod. xxiii, 31-33; xxxiy,
11-17; and it was repeated in a more
severe form in Deut. vii. 1-6. In this
latter place they are commanded to
“utterly destroy them,” and that with-
out mercy. And both in Exodus and
in Deut. one reason for this stern com-
mand is assigned, viz., that their
presence in the land would be a source
of peril to the Israelites, leading them
to enter into social alliances with them
and to conform to their idolatrous
practices, and so awakening the anger
of the Lord against them to their own
destruction.

Learn: Zhe sin and peril of evil
associations, (a)

2. To completely destroy all tdolatrous
objects and places. “ Destroy all their
pictures "—idols of stone—“ and de-


stroy all their molten images "—~ar
idols cast from copper—“and quite
pluck down all their high places”
(comp. Exod. xxiii. 24; xxxiv. 13-15;
Deut. vii. 5; xii. 2,3). Nothing was
to be preserved for the gratification of
antiquarian tastes, or as curious relics
of foreign customs, There must be an
utter destruction of all and everything
that had been associated with idolatry;
because such things were offensive to
God and perilous to man. “Thou
shalt have no other gods before Me,”
&c. (Exod. xx. 3-5).

Learn: The heinousness of the sin of
idolatry in the sight of God. (b)

3. Z'o equitably divide the land. “ And
ye shall divide the land by lot for an
inheritance among your families,” &o.
(verse 54). We have already noticed
this in chap. xxvi. 53-56 (see pp. 502,
503),

4. The authority by which they were
to do these things, They had the
authority of Jehovah their God. He
gave them the command; and He
assigned this reason for it: “for I have
given you the land to possess it.” He
is the great Proprietor of all things,
“The earth is the Lord’s, and the ful-
ness thereof ; the world, and they that
dwell therein.” He has a right to do
what He will with His own. But ip
addition to this, ‘the iniquity of the
Amorites” was now “ full.” The filthiest
abominations were practised amongst


Sie en


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.  onar, xxxm,





them, they were sunk in the grossest
Immoralities. “ For the wickedness of
these nations the Lord doth drive them
out from before thee” (Deut. ix. 4).
So utterly depraved were the Canaan-
ites that it is said that “the land itself
vomited them out” (Lev. xviii 24,
25). (ce)

II. The solemn warning.

“ But if ye will not drive out the in-
habitants of the land from before you,
then it shall come to pass,” &c. (vers,
55, 56). They are here solemnly
warned that, if they failed to obey the
Divine commands now given to them, —

1. Those whom they spared would be-
come their tormentors. “ Those which ye
let remain of them shall be pricks in
your eyes and thorns in your sides, and
shall vex you in the land wherein ye
shall dwell.” “Under these meta-
phors,” says Dr. A. Clarke, “the con-
tinual mischief that should be done to
them, both in soul and body, by these
idolators, is set forth in a very expres-
sive manner. What can be more vexa-
tious than a continual goading of each
side, so that the attempt to avoid the
one throws the body more forcibly on
the other? And what can be more dis-
tressing than a continual pricking in the
eye, harassing the mind, tormenting the
body, and extinguishing the sight?”
“That which we are willing should
tempt us, we shall find will vex us.”

2. The God whom they disobeyed
would disinherit them. “ Moreover it


shall come to pass, that I shall do unto
you, as I thought to do unto them.”
This solemn warning was repeated by
Joshua (Josh. xxiii. 13): but Israel dis-
regarded it, and reaped the bitter result.
“Subsequent history proves,” as Scott
remarks, “that these denunciations
were real prophecies, which have beev
wonderfully accomplished, even to this
day. During many ages, the remnant
of the devoted nations were extremely
troublesome to the Israelites, even as
‘pricks in the eyes and thorns in the
side,’ which would be a constant and
almost intolerable torture: and at
length, as they persisted in imitating
their idolatries and atrocious crimes,
they were punished as the Lord pro-
posed to punish the Canaanites ; being
expelled from their country with tre-
mendous slaughter, first by the Assy-
rians ani Chaldeans, and at length
more coipletely by the Romans,”

Learn :—

The importance of real and thorough-
ness in waging war against those Ca-
naanites of the heart, our indwelling sins.
“Tf we show any quarter to our sinful
propensities, they will gather strength
by indulgence, mar the comfort of our
lives, and perhaps be ‘pricks in our
eyes and thorns in our sides’ when we
lie upon a death-bed.” “If we do not
drive sin out, sin will drive us out;
if we be not the death of our lusts,
our lusts will be the death of our
souls.” (d)


ILLUSTRATIONS,


i (2) This lesson is illustrated on pp. 308,
2:


(6) All sin is hateful to God, and none but
the cleansed, perfect soul shall stand before
Him in the presence of His glory; nor any in
whom iniquity hath dominion shall stand
accepted in the presence of His grace; but yet
no particular sin is so hateful to Him as
idolatry is. For this is not only a trespassing
against His laws, but a disclaiming or rejecting
His very sovereignty itself. To give a prince
irreverent language, and to break his laws, is
punishable ; but to pull him ont of his throne,
and set up a scallion in it, and give him the
honour and obedience of a king, this is

vother kind of matter,and much more in-


tolerable. The first commandment is not like
the rest, which require only obedience to par-
ticular laws in a particular action; but it
establisheth the very relations of sovereign
and subject, and requires ® constant acknow-
ledgment of these relations, and makes it
high treason against the God of heaven in
any that shall violate that command, Every
crime is not treason; it is one thing to mis-
carry in a particular case, and another thing
to have other gods before and besides the
Lord, the only God. Now, this is the sin of
every worldling: he hath taken down God
from the throne in his soul, and set up the
flesh and the world in His stead; these he
valueth, and magnificth, and nes, in;


CHAP. XXxUL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


a a


these have his very heart, while God that
made it and redeemed him is set light by.—
Richard Baxter,

(c) While, on the one hand, the donation
of this land to the Israelites was an act of the
Jord’s free favour, the denial of it to the
Canaanites was no less an act of His retribu-
tive justice—of such justice as it behoved
the moral Governor of the world to administer
against a people laden with iniquity. Gen.
xv, 13-16 is a passage which proves this
clearly. Abraham is there informed that,
before his posterity would receive that goodly
heritage, a long period of four hundred years
must elapse, great part of which would be
spent by them under oppression in a land
which was not theirs. Eventually they should
be bronght forth with great substance ; and
in the “fourth generation they shall come
hither again.” Why is this return go long
deferred ? Why not until the fourth genera-
tion? Hear the reason: “ For the iniquity
of the Amorites és not yet full.”

These last words ure important for more
than one reason. First, they exclude all
human right of the Hebrews to Palestine ;
for if such a right had existed, why, for its
seing enforced, should the filling up of the
iniquity of the Amorites be required ?
Secondly, if the cause why Abraham's
descendants were not now, but after a long
interval, to obtain possession of the Promised
Land, was, that the iniquity of the Amorites
was not yet full, it is thereby equally inti-
mated that this filling up of their iniquity
would justify, if not demand, the Divine
judgment, which under existing circumstances
would have been unjust—in the same way
as God, before He destroyed Sodom and Go-
morrah by His immediate decree, first of alk
permitted the abandoned depravity of the in-
habitants most notoriously to manifest itself,

When the time was fully come, the Canaan-
ites became a doomed people—doomed to exe
pulsion or extermination by the Israelites, to
whom was committed the sword of judgment,
and who were the destined inheritors of the
land of which the Canaanites had by that time
proved themselves unworthy. This solemn
doom is expressed in the Hebrew by 8 peculiar
word (cherem), which is always applied to
such devotement to destruction in vindication
of the Divine justice; and this is the term
constantly applied to the Canaanites, as to a
peels who, by their enormities, had dis-

onoured the moral government of God, and
were, therefore, to be constrained, by the
judgment inflicted upon them, to glorify that
government, and thereby to set forth the great
truth, that there isa pure and holy Ruler of
the nations,

Then, again, the Israelites, favoured as they
were for their fathers’ sake, were apprised
that even they held the land by no other
tenure thax that which the Canaanites were
to be destroyed for infringing. Over and
over again were they warned, that if they fell

598


into the same dreadful transgressions for which
the Canaanites had been cast out, they would
subject themselves to the same doom—be like
them destroyed—like them cast out of the
good land which they had defiled. We are
not left altogether in the dark as to the nature
of the abominations which pervaded the land,
and which cried to God to show Himself as
one abhorring iniquity, and to prove that the
world was not left fatherless of His care. In
one place, the sacred text, after enumerating
various cases of unchastity and impiety of the
vilest kind, goes on to say, ** Defile not your-
selves in any of these things, for in all these
things the nations are defiled which I cast
out before you. And the land is defiled;
therefore do I visit the iniquity of the
land upon it, and the land itself vomit.
eth out her inhabitants” (Lev. xviii, 24,
25). In another place, the Israelites are
solemnly warned against imitating the con-
duct of their predecessors, lest they incur the
same penalties : “Take heed to thyself that
thou be not snared by following them. Thou
shalt not do so unto the Lord thy God; for
every abomination to the Lord which He hateth
have they done unto their gods ; for even their
sons and their daughters have they burnt in
the fire to their gods” (Deut. xii, 80, 81).
What more emphatic testimony can be re-
quired than this ?—John Kitto, D.D,

God is Sovereign of the universe, He has
a right to dispose of any part of it'as He will,
God is also infinitely just. He governs His
Kingdom in strictest accordance with justice,
To punish the guilty isa just act. The Ca-
naanites were guilty. By a long continued
course of rebellion and abominable crime,
they had become not only altogether corrupt,
but absolutely hopeless, Their iniquity
became full. ‘Then God drove them out to
make room for His own people.

A great truth is sometimes either forgotten
or ignored by the sentimental school of philo-
sophers, that “the punishment of the wicked
is as indispensable a part of moral government
as the reward of the good.” The remarks of
Kalisch on this subject are admirable: “If
we survey the Biblical system with regard to
this subject, we are surprised by its grandeur
and comprehensiveness. The Canaanites
themselves were not the original inhabitants
of the land ; they settled there after having
destroyed most of the earlier tribes—the
Rephaim, the Emim, the Anakim, and others.
They had therefore had a personal experience
of how God punished wantonness and impiety ;
but they were not warned by it : they gradu-
ally fell into the same vices and crimes; and
they were doomed to suffer the same extreme
judgment. But whilst the measure of their
iniquity was filling, God reared in a foreign
land the future occupants of their abode: the
degeneracy of the Canaanites kept with
the increase and development of the Israelites,
However great and awful the former might
have been, the God of mercy protracted and


<a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


SSNS





delayed long the day of judgement ; and how-
ever glorious Abraham’s merit was, on account
of which his descendants were destined to
possess Canaan, the God of justice did not
accelerate their deliverance from the oppres-
sion in Egypt, which they had deserved by
their faithlessness. The Israelites, regene-
rated by their trials in the desert, were the
instruments of chastisement to the Vanaanites ;
as, later, the Assyrians and Babylonians,
though unconscious of their office and mis-
sion, were used as the rod of destruction
against the Israclites. This is the only view


CHAP. XXXIV,


in which the occupation of Palestine by the
Hebrews can be regarded according to the
Biblical allusions."—J. L, Porter, D.D.,
LL.D.

(d) Use sin as it will use you ; spare it not,
for it will not spare you : it is your murderer,
and the murderer of the world: use it, there-
fore, a8 a murderer should be used. Kill it
before it kills you; and though it kill your
bodies, it shall not be able to kill your souls ;
and though it bring you to the grave, as it
did your Head, it shall not be able to keep
you there.— Richard Bazter,


CHAPTER XXXIV,


CritioaL anp Expianatory Norzs,


This chapter consists of two portions :
(1) the boundaries of the Promised
Land (vers. 1-15), and (2) the names
of the persons who were appointed to
distribute the land (vers. 16-29).

Verse 2. Canaan with the coasts
thereof. Keil and Del. : “Canaan ac-
cording to its boundaries.”

Verses 3-5. ‘‘ Render: ‘Then your
south quarter shall extend from the
wilderness of Zin which resteth upon
the side of Edom. And your south
border shall start from the extremity
of the salt sea on the east; and your
border shall turn on the south to
Maaleh-akrabbim, and shall pass on
toward Zin, and the extent of its reach
on the south shall be to Kadesh-barnea ;
and it shall reach forth thence to Hazar-
addar, and shall pass on to Azmon, and
from Azmon the border shall turn to
the river of Egypt, and its reach shall
be to the sea.’” —Speaker’s Comm.

Verse 3. In the former part of this
verse we have a general description of
the southern boundary, which is after-
wards more particularly defined.

The wilderness of Zin. See on chap.
xii. 16; xiii, 21.

The utmost coast of the Salt Sea, &o.;
t.e. from the southern extremity of
the Dead Sea in a south-westerly direo-
tion.

Verse 4, The ascent of Akrabbim, or
Maaleh-akrabbim, the ascent of scor-
pions, or “ the scorpion pass.” Probably
the pass of Safeh. So Stanley, Robinson,


Grove. Scorpions abound in the whole
of this district.

Kadesh-barnea, See on chap. xiii. 26.

Hazar-addar=village of Addar. In
Josh. xv. 3, it is mentioned as two
places, “Hezron and Adar.” The
former was probably “the general name
of a district of Hazers, or nomad
hamlets, of which Addar was one.”
The site of neither of them has been
discovered as yet. Azmon also has not
yet been identified.

Verse 5. The river of Egypt. The
brook of Egypt is the Wady el Arish,
which is about seventy miles distant in
a westerly direction from Kadesh.

Verse 6. The great sea, t.¢, the
Mediterranean.

For a border. Lit., “ with its border,”
s.¢., “ with the border which it makes.”
— Speaker's Comm.

Verses 7-9. “ The northern boundary
cannot be determined with certainty.”
— Keil and Del.

Verse 7. Mount Hor. This is quite
distinct from the Mount Hor upon
which Aaron died (see p. 363). “The
northern boundary started from the
sea. Since Sidon was subsequently
allotted to the most northern tribe—
Asher (Josh. xix. 28), and was, so far
as we know, the most northern town so
allotted, it would seem probable that
the northern boundary would commence
at about that point; that is, opposite
to where the great range of Lebanon
breaks down to the sea. pri next


CHAP, XXXIV,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


eS SSS


landmark, the entrance to Hamath,
seems to have been determined by Dr.
Porter as the pass at Kalat el-Husn,
close to Hums, the ancient Hamath—at
the other end of the range of Lebanon.
Surely Mount Hor, then, can be nothing
else than the great chain of Lebanon
itself.” — Bibl. Dict,

Verse 8. The entrance of Hamath,
Hamath here is the kingdom of Ha-
math, which was named after its chief
city. “By ‘the entrance of Hamath,’
is to be understood the southern ap-
proach to Hamath, from the plain of
Cale Syria, lying between those two
ranges of Lebanon, called Libanus and
Antilibanus, Robinson and Porter un-
derstand it of the western approach
to Hamath, from the Mediterranean.” —
Speaker's Comm. See on chap. xiii. 21,
p. 228,

“ Zedad, now a large village, still
bearing its ancient name (Sadad), about
thirty miles east of the entrance of Ha-
math.”—Jbid.

Verse 9, “‘ Ziphron, now Zifran, has
not been as yet visited by modern
travellers, but is reported to lie about
forty miles north-east of Damascus,
near the road to Palmyra, and to con-
tain extensive ruins,”-— bid.

Hazar-enan, = “ the fountain village.”


Probably “Ayfin ed-Dara, a fountain
situate in the very heart of the great
central chain of Antilibanus.”—Jbid.
Most, if not all, of these conjectures
or conclusions concerning the northerv ~
frontier are, however, disputed.

Verses 10-12. The eastern boundary

Verse 10, Shepham. The site of thir
place has not been identified.

Verse 11. Riblah, on the cast side of
Ain. Not Riblah in the land of Ha-
math. Its exact site is unknown.

Sea of Chinnereth, te, Sea of Gen-
nesaret, or of Galilee.

Verse 12. Down to Jordan, &o. From
the sea of Gennesaret the boundary was
the Jordan and the Dead Sea.

Verses 13-15. Unto the nine tribes,
&c. Comp. chap. xxxii. 20-33.

Verses 16-29. Names of the men
appointed to distribute the land. Of
these, three only are known, viz.,
Eleazar, the high priest, head of the
religious orders; Joshua, the general,
head of the military order; and Caleb,
the representative prince of the tribe
of Judah.

Verse 18. One prince of every tribe.
These princes were “the heads of the
fathers of the tribes” (Josh. xiv. 1),
not heads of tribes (see on chap. xiii.
2; p. 228).


Tus Promiszp Lamp
(Verses 1-15.)


Let us consider the following facts
which are here either suggested or
stated concerning the Promised Land.

I. The boundaries of this land were
determined by God.

He here directs His servant Moses
in this matter. “The Lord spake unto
Moses, saying, Command the children
of Israel,” &c. We have in this an
illustration of His providential ordering
of human life. “He hath determined
the bounds of their. habitation.” “The
lot is cast into the lap; but the whole
disposing thereof is of the Lord.” Thig
may be regarded as—

A reason for contentment. “He
600


shall choose our inheritance for us.”
“The lines are fallen unto me in plea-
sant places; yea, I have a goodly heri-
tage.” (a)

2. A rebuke of selfish greed, whether

o) the part of individuals or of nations.
b

: II, The extent of this land was
small.

Authorities are not agreed as to its
extent ; but even if we take the largest
estimate, it was a small land, and re-
markably narrow. Mr. Grove thus
speaks of its size, and briefly sets forth
its boundaries: “The Holy Land is not
in size or physical characteristics pro-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XXXIV.


re,


portioned to its moral and historical
position, as the theatre of the most
momentous events in the world’s his-
tory. It is but a strip of country
about the size of Wales, less than 140
miles in length, and barely 40 in ave-
rage breadth, on the very frontier of the
East, hemmed in between the Mediter-
ranean Sea on the one hand, and the
enormous trench of the Jordan valley
on the other, by which it is effectually
cut off from the maialand of Asia be-
hind ® On the north it is shut in by
the high ranges of Lebanon and Anti-
Lebanon, and by the chasm of the Li-
tény, which runs at their feet, and forms
the main drain of their southern slope.
On the south it is no less enclosed by the
arid and inhospitable deserts ofthe upper
part of the peninsula of Sinai, whose un-
dulating wastes melt imperceptibly in-
to the southern hills of Judea. .
The country thus roughly portrayed,
and which, as before stated, is less than
140 miles in length, and not more than
40 in average breadth, is to all intents
apd purposes the whole Land of Israel.
The northern portion is Galilee; the
centre, Samaria; the south, Judea,
This is the Land of Canaan which was
bestowed on Abraham ; the covenanted
home of his descendants.” (Bzbl. Dict.)
Dean Stanley, however, makes it to be
larger thanthis. ‘“ The breadth of the
country from the Jordan to the sea, is
rarely more than 50 miles. Its length,
from Dan to Beersheba, is about 180
miles.” But, whatever may be its mea-
su: ements, the glory of this land consists
in its having been the theatre of the
most marvellous and momentous events
iu the history of the world, and is in
inverse ratio to its size. (c)

IIL. The position of this land was
secure,

An examination of its boundaries as
they are here laid down, shows that it
was surrounded by natural fortifica-
tions. In one particular only was the
position of this land perilous. ‘The
only road by which the two great rivals
of the ancient world could approach
one another—by which alone Egypt
could go to Assyria, and Assyria to


Egypt—lay along the broad flat strip
of coast which formed the maritime
portion of the Holy Land, and thence
by the plain of the Lebanon to the
Euphrates.” This road was -ndoubted-
ly a dangerous one for the Israelites.
And through this channel the destruc-
tion of the nation came at length. But,
with this exception, this land was natu-
rally surrounded by almost impreg-
nable defences. (d)

IV. The soil of this land was fer-
tile, '
Its present condition is not to be re-
garded as a representation of its con-
dition when it was inhabited and
cultivated. At present the face of the
country presents a rocky and barren
aspect. For this there are two causes.
“The first is the destruction of the
timber in that long series of sieges and
invasions which began with the invasion
of Shishak (B.C. circa 979), and has
not yet come to an end. This, by de-
priving the soil and the streams of
shelter from the burning sun, at once
made, as it invariably does, the climate
more arid than before, and doubtless
diminished the rainfall. The second is
the decay of the terraces necessary to
retain the soil on the steep slopes of
the round hills. This decay is owing
to the general unsettlement and in-
security which have been the lot of this
poor little country almost ever since
the Babylonian conquest. The terraces
once gone, there was nothing to prevent
the soil which they supported being
washed away by the heavy rains of
winter ; and it is hopeless to look for a
renewal of the wood, or for any real
improvement in the general face of the
country, until they have been first re-
established.” — Grove. Its condition
in ancient times is thus portrayed by
the inspired lawgiver: “A good land,
a land of brooks of water, of fountains,”
&o. (Deut. viii. 7-9). ‘The land
whither thou goest in to possess it, is
not as the land of Egypt,” &c. (Deut.
xi. 10-12). (¢)

V. The Israelites failed to take
possession of the whole of this land
assigned to them by God, Pre


CHAP, xxxIv, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





The territory here marked out for
them greatly exceeded that which they
actually conquered. For example, it
appears that the north-western boun-
dary was to reach “ unto great Zidon”
(Josh, xix. 28), but neither that city
nor even Tyre, which is .about 20
English miles further south, was ever
acquired by Israel. Accho was “the
northernmost city of the Holy Land
on the western coast.” In order to
discover the difference between the ex-
tent of the territory allotted and that
actually taken, in this district of the
land, contrast Josh. xix. 24-31, and
Judg. i. 31,32. Other instances of the
failure of the Israelites to take posses-
sion of the territory given to them by
God are recounted in Judg. i, 27-36,
From this failure arose many of the


ee ee


sins and sufferings of their subsequent
history. In this we have an illustration
of the failure of the people of God in
this day to rise to the height of their
Christian calling, or to realise the ful-
ness and wealth of their Christian pri-
vileges, The treasures of the Divine
blessing immeasurably exceed our as-
Piration and faith, and consequently,
our realization of them. Comp. Psa.
lxxxi. 13-16; Iga. xlviii. 17-19.

In conclusion, the subject presents
an impressive illustration of the great
goodness of God to His people. And
His goodness is even more manifest in
the spiritual privileges and possessions
to which He calls us in Jesus Christ,
Let us show our appreciation of His
goodness by striving to attain unto our
high calling,


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) On this point we have given illustrations
on BP. 48, 70.

(4) The ambition and insatiable greediness
of great men hath put all out of order, and
aothing is 80 holy which can stay them creep-
ming and encroaching upon the bounds and
borders of their neighbours. Thus they break
the law of God and nature, in seeking to
enlarge and increase their own dominions,
‘These justly incur the curse of the prophet,
“Woe unto them that join house to house,
and lay field to field, till there be no place,
that they may be placed alone in the midst of
the earth” (Isa. y. 8; Hab. ii. 9-12; Jer.
xxii, 23; Mic. ii. 2). For wherefore hath
God separated nation from nation, and one
kingdom from another people, but that all
should live quietly and communicate one with
another, and that there might be no confusion
or divisions? And, therefore, ought all to
be contented with their own bounds. God
hath made them great, but they always scek
to make themselves greater: He hath set
them bounds, but they will know no bounds,
So, then, from thence we may gather that the
wars which are taken in hand upon ambition,
and the enlarging of the bounds of their
empire only, are a despiting of God, a shed-
ding of innocent blood, and a perverting of
the order which He hath set in nature and
nations. Every man, therefore, ought to
abide in his own possesion and inheritance,
and not to trouble or molest one another. . .

This reproveth the greedy and covetous
affections of private men that covet to be
rich, they care not by what means. But as
soon aa the desire of getting gain is settled
in them, they are inflamed to rake to them-

603


selves by hook or by crook. ®He that is
greedy of gain troubleth his own house ; but
he that hateth gifts shall live.’ Covetousness
is a corrupt affection of the mind, greedily
desiring, and too much gaping after, the riches
of this life. They dream of long life, for-
getting that no man’s life consisteth in the
abundance of his riches (Luke xii. 15). They
think they shall exceedingly profit them, but
by the just judgment of God they turn to
their hurt. They think they will be as a
shield or buckler to defend them from the
injuries of this life, but they are turned into
swords whereby they are wounded or destroyed.
They have conceived a strong opinion that
they will be as a wall on every side to under-
Prop tne house, but they prove as a double
cannon to cast it down to the ground. As then,
he that eateth moderately is nourished by the
meat, and it abideth in the stomach, but when
it is taken immoderately the stomach is
choked, and it is vomited up again ; so he
that greedily heapeth up riches shall be con-
strained to “vomit them up again” (Job xx.
15). Covetousneas, therefore, is a sin, when
“ man is discontented with the estate wherein
God hath set him, and with those things that
God hath given for the sustenance of this
present life; when he murmureth against God,
and the more he hath, the more he desireth 3
when he heapeth them up and keepeth them,
and bringeth them not forth to any godly or
necessary uses; but he distrusteth the Provi-
dence of God, and putteth his trast and confi-
dence in his riches, as if he could not live ©
without abundance of them, neither be sus-
tained by the hand of God.— W. Attersoll,
(¢) In Palestine, as in Greece, every traveller


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS. oma. xxxiv.


SE


is struck with the smallness of the territory.
He is surprised, even after all that he has
heard, in passing, in one long day, from the
tapital of Judea to that of Samaria; or at
seeing, within eight hours, three such spots as
Hebron, Bethlehem, and Jerusalem. The
breadth of the country from the Jordan to
the sea is rarely more than fifty miles. Its
length from Dan to Beersheba is about a hun-
dred and fifty miles. The time is now gone
by when the grandeur of a country is measured
by its size, or the diminutive extent of an
illustrious people can otherwise than enhance
the magnitude of what they have done. The
ancient taunt, however, and the facts which
suggested it, may still illustrate the feeling
which appears in their own records. The con-
trast between the littleness of Palestine, and
the vast extent of the empires which hung
apon its northern and southern skiris, is rarely
absent from the mind of the Pruphets and
Psalmists. It helps them to exalt their sense
of the favour of God towards their land, by
magnifying their little hills and dry torrent
beds into an equality with the giant hills of
Lebanon and Hermon, and the sea-like rivers
of Mesopotamia. It also fosters the conscious-
ness that they were not always to be restrained
within these earthly barriers, “The place is
too strait for me; give me place where I may
dwell” (Isa. xlix. 20). Nor is it only the
smallness, but the narrowness, of the territory
which is remarkable. From almost every
high point in the country its whole breadth is
visible, from the long wall of the Moab hills
on the east, to the Mediterranean Sea on the
west. Whatever may be the poverty or insig-
nificance of the landscape, it is at once
relieved by a glimpse of either of these two
doundaries.


“‘ Two voices are there—one is of the sea,
One of the mountains,’—


and the close proximity of each—the deep
purple shade of the one, and the glittering
waters of the other—makes it always possible
for one or other of those two voices to be
heard now, as they were by the Psalmists of
old—* The strength of the mountazns is His
also—The sea is His, and He made it.”—
A, P. Stanley, D.D.

d) Look at its boundaries. The most im-
portant will be that on the east. For in that
early time, when Palestine tirst fell to the lot
of the chosen people, the East was still the
world, The great empires which rose on the
plains of Mesopotamia, the cities of the
Euphrates and the Tigris, were literally then,
what Babylon is metaphorically in the Apo-
calypse, the rulers and corrupters of all the
kingdoms of the earth. Between these great
empires and the people of Israel, two obstacles
were interposed, The first was the eastern
Desert, which formed a barrier in front even
of the outposts of Israel—the nomadic tribes
on the east of the Jordan ; the second, the vast


fissure of the Jordan valley, which must always
have acted as adeep trench within the exterior
rampart of the Desert and the eastern hills
of the Trans-Jordanic tribes,

Next to the Assyrian empire in strength
and power, superior to it in arts and civiliza-
tion, was Egypt. What was there on the
southern boundary of Palestine, to secure that
“the Egyptians whom they saw on the shores of
the Red Sea, they should see no more again” ?
Up to the very frontier of their own land
stretched that “great and terrible wilder-
ness,” which rolled like a sea between the
valley of the Nile and the valley of the
Jordan. This wilderness itself—the plat-
form of the Tih—could be only reached on
its eastern side by the tremendous pass of
"Akaba at the southern, of Safeh at the
northern end of the ’Arabah, or of the no less
eyes ascents from the shores of the Dead

ea.

On these, the two most important frontiers,
the separation was most complete. The two
accessible sides were the west and the north.
But the west was only accessible by sea, and
when Israel first settled in Palestine, the
Mediterranean was not yet the thoroughfare—
it was rather the boundary and the terror of
the eastern nations From the north-western
coast, indeed, of Syria, the Phenician cities
sent forth their fleets. But they were the ex-
ception of the world, the discoverers, the first
explorers of the unknown depths ; and in their
enterprises Israel never joined. In strong
contrast, too, with the coast of Europe, and
especially of Greece, Palestine has no inden-
tations, no winding creeks, no deep havens,
such as in ancient, even more than in modern
times, were necessary for the invitation and

rotection of commercial entcrprize, One
ong line, broken only by the bay of Acre,
containing only three bad harbours, Joppa,
Acre, and Caipha—the last unknown in an-
cient times—is the inhospitable front that
Palestine opposed to the western world. On
the northern frontier the ranges of Lebanon
formed two not insignificant ramparts, But
the gate between them was open, and through
the long valley of Cosle-Syria, the hosts of
Syrian and Assyrian conquerors accordingiy
poured. These were the natural sortifications
of that vineyard which was “hedged round
about” with tower and trench, sea and desert,
against the “boars of the wood,’ and “ the
beasts of the field.”—J6id.

e) There is this peculiarity which distin-
guishes Palestine from the only countries with
which it could then be brought into compari-
son, Chaldea and Egypt—the latter of course
in an eminent degree—depend on the course
of single rivers. Without the Nile, and the
utmost use of the waters of the Nile, Egypt
would be a desert. But Palestine is well dis-
tinguished, not merely as “a land of wheat
and barley, and vines, and fig-trees, and pome-
granates, of oil-olive and honey,” but eme
phatically as “a good land, a rr: $ brooks


GHAP. XXXIV,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


SSS,


of water, of fountains and depths that spring
out of plains and mountains,’—* not as the
land of Egypt, where thou sowedst thy seed
and wateredst it with thy foot, as a garden of
herbs; but a land of mountains and plains
which drinketh water of the rain of heaven.”
This mountainous character; this abundance
of water both from natural springs and from
the clouds of heaven, in contradistinction to the
one uniform supply of the great river; this
abundance of “milk” from its “cattle on a
thousand hills,” of “honey” from its forests
and its thymy shrubs, was absolutely peculiar
to Palestine amongst the civilized nations of
the East. Feeble as its brooks might be—
though, doubtless, they were then more fre-
quently filled than now—yet still it was the
only country where an Eastern could have been
familiar with the image of the Psalmist : “He
sendeth the springs into the valleys, which run
among the mountains.” Those springs, too,
however short-lived, are remarkable for their
copiousness and beauty. Not only in the
East, but hardly in the West, can any foun-
tains and sources of streams be seen so clear,
so full-grown even at their birth, as those of
the Kishon, the Jordan, and the whole of the
Jordan valley. Wales or Westmoreland are,
doubtless, not regarded as fertile regions ; and
the green fields of England to those who have


come fresh from Palestine, seem, by way of
contrast, to be indeed “a land of prombess
But transplant Wales or Westmoreland into
the heart of the Desert, and they would be far
more to the inhabitants of the Desert than to
their inhabitants are the richest spots of
England. Far more: both because the con-
trast is in itself greater, and because the phe-
nomena of a mountain country, with wells
and springs, are of a kind almost unknown to
the dwellers in the deserts or river-plains of
the East.

Palestine therefore, not merely by its situa-
tion, but by its comparative fertility, might
well be considered the prize of the Eastern
world, the possession of which was the mark
of God’s peculiar favour ; the spot for which
the nations would contend: as on a smaller
scale the Bedouin tribes for some “ diamond
of the desert,” some “ palm-grove islanded amid
the waste,” And a land of which the bless-
ings were so evidently the gift of God, not as
in Egypt of man’s labour; which also, by rea-
son of its narrow extent, -was so constantly
within reach and sivht of the neighbouring
Desert, was eminently calculated to raise the
thoughts of the nation to the Supreme Giver
of all these blessings, and to bind it by the
dearest ties to the land which He had so mani.
festly favoured.—Jlbid,


Tu ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE DIsTRIBUTION OF THE PRomisap Lap,


(Verses 16-29.)


The two chief rules for the Distribu-
tion of the Land have already been
noticed by us (see p. 502). We have
here the names of the persons to whom
this distribution was committed.
Notice,—

I, The co-working of the Divine
and the human in the distribution of
the land.

1. Here is the Divine agency. “ This
is the land which ye shall inherit by
lot” (verse 13); 4.2, the situation of
the territory of each tribe, and pro-
bably of each family, was to be deter-
mined by lot. The use of the lot was
regarded by most ancient peoples as an
appeal to God, and the result was
viewed as determined by Him. There
are numerous instances of this in Jewish


history (Lev. xvi. 8-10; Josh. vii. 14-:


18; Judg. i. 1-3; xx. 8-10; 1 Sam. x.

20,21; xiv. 41, 42; 1 Chron, xxiv. 3-31),

There is a striking and important ex-

arople of its use in the very early
604


Christian Church (Acts 1, 24-26). The
estimate of it may be gathered from
Prov. xvi. 33; xviii.18. By its use on
this occasion, the families of Israel
would regard their respective inherit-
ances as allotted to them by Jehovah.

2. Here ts human agency. “The
Lord spake unto Moses, saying, These
are the names of the men which shall
divide the land unto you.” The situa-
tion of the inheritances having been
determined by lot, the extent of the
inheritance of each tribe was to be
determined according to their respective
numbers and needs, by the persons
whose names are here recorded. In
this, as in many other things, God calls
man to work, and to work in harmony
with Himself. This is the case in the
cultivation of the earth, in working out
our own salvation, in the conversion of
sinners, &o, Weare “ workers together
with him” (2 Cor. vi.1). (a)

Il, The wise arrangements for the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XXXTV.





performance of man’s duties in the
division of the land.

It is worthy of notice that in the
persons appointed to this work—

1. Each class was represented. On
the commission were “Eleazar the
priest,” the head of the religious
orders ; “Joshua the son of Nun,” the
head of the military order ; and “one
prince of every tribe,” representing the
civilian order,

2. Each tribe was represented, with
the exception of Reuben and Gad,
which had received their inheritance on
the east of the Jordan. This arrange-
ment, by which each class and each
tribe was represented on the commission,
was calculated to inspire the confidence
of the people as to the equitable division
of the land, and to prevent dissatis-
faction on the part of any tribe or
class of the nation.

3. Faithful services already rendered


were recognised, Joshua, the son of
Nun, and Caleb, the son of Jephunneb,
had already served the nation well and
bravely. Their employment on this
commission may be viewed—(1) as an
acknowledgment of the value of their
former services ; and (2) as a judicious
use of persons of approved fidelity.

4. Distinguished abilities were called
into use. Joshua and Caleb were not
only faithful but remarkably able men.
For wisdom and courage they would
have been eminent amongst any people.
Their abilities would be very valuable
in the distribution of the land.

Learn; that tn the arrangements for
the services of God the highest wisdom
should be embodied, and in carrying out
those arrangements the most approved
Jidelity and the most conspicuous ability
should be employed. The work of God
demands our best efforts both of head
and of heart. (0)


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) If men say, “You do not believe in
conversion,’ Ido. If they say, “ You do not
believe in conversion hy Divine influences,”
Ido. If they say,“ But you act as though
you were to produce it yourself,” I reply,
“Not any more than I produce flowers my-
self.”. I believe that God made the earth, I
believe that he made the seed, I believe that
He made the germ in the seed, I believe that
He made the sun and the atmospheric con-
ditions needful to the development of that
germ, but I believe that I shall have no flowers
without my interposition and skilful agency.
I prepare the soil, I plant the seed, I remove
the weeds from them and nourish them; and
yet, after I have done that, I shall not have
flowers by any power that isin me. Thou, O
Sun! hast alone that secret alchemy, thou
alone hast that involving power, by which
blossoming can eome after my skill ceases,
and by which the flower shall reward my toil.
And Thou, O Sun of Righteousness! hast
alone the power to cause the seed to blossom
out. For though man may plant the seed,
and till the soil. the final form of development
comes from the influence of the Divine Spirit
apon the human soul. We work together.
Man carries on his work, and God adds His
influence ; and the two are not in antagonism,
but are coincident and co-operative. They
are not in conflict, but concurrent. Some men
are shocked when we say, “Such a man was
converted by the minister.” You may say that
ia an irreverent way, but you may say it so


as to be conformable to truth I say, “i
raised a harvest.” A person listening to me
says, “No, you did not; God raised it.” I
gay, by way of explanation, “I went ont and
planted my fields, and brought my orchard
into the right condition, and all this wealth
of grain and fruit isthe result of my pains-
taking ;” and in a proper sense that does not
imply conceit or pride, and that does not
exclude the agency of nature or the Divine
constitution of things. I did raise that harvest.
We are accustomed to talk so, and without
irreverence ; and there is a sense in which I
am instrumental in implanting correct views
in a soul, and impressing right influences upon
it, and it is not irreverent for mse to say that I
have converted men from the error of their
ways.—H. W. Beecher.

6) Men have naturally such slight thonghta
of the majesty and law of God, that they think
any service is good enough for Him, and con-
formable to His law. The dullest and deadest
time we think fittest to pay God a service in ;
when sleep is ready to close our eyes, and we
are unfit to serve ourselves, we think it a fit
time to open our heart to God. How few
morning sacrifices hath God from many per-
sons and families ! Men leap out of their beds
to their carnal pleasures or worldly employ-
ments without any thought of their Creator
and Preserver, or any reflection upon His will
as the rule of our daily obedience. And as
many reserve the dregs of their lives — their
old age—to offer up their nr a God, so


CHAP. XXXV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: N UMBERS.


a


they reserve the dregs of the days—their sleep-
ing time—for the offering up their service to
Him. How many grudge to spend their best
time in serving the will of God. and reserve
for Him the sickly and rheumatic part of their
lives.—the remainder of that which the devil
and their ewn lusis have fed upon! Would


not any prince or governor judge a present,
half eaten up by wild beasts, or that which
died in a ditch, a contempt of his royalty ? A
corrupt thing is too base and vile for so great
a King as God is, whose name is dreadful,
Alas! God calls for our best, and we give
Him our worst !—Charnocka,


CHAPTER XXXY;


Critica, anp Expianatory Norms.


This chapter contains directions for
the appointment of (1) cities for the
Levites to dwell in; and (2) cities of
refuge for the manslayer; and laws
concerning wilful murder and uninten-
tional homicide.

Verse 2. Suburbs.
“Pasturage or fields,”

Verse 3. For their cattle, 8&0. “More
strictly, ‘ for their large cattle, for their
sheep and goats, and for all their
beasts whatsoever they be.’ "— Speaker's
Comm.

Verses 4, 5, The directions given in
these verses as to the extent of the
“suburbs” have much perplexed ex-
positors. They seem to us to mean
that the suburbs should extend 1,000
cubits, or nearly one-third of a mile,
from the city wall in every direction
(ver. 4), and that at their outward ex-
tremity they should present on ever
side a frontage of not less than 2,000
cubits in length (ver. 5),

Verse 6, And to them ye shall add.

Margin: “And above them ye shall
give.” Or, “and in addition to them,”
&o.
Verse 8. From them that have many
ye shall give many. From the large
inheritance of Judah and Simeon, the
Levites received nine cities > from that
of Naphtali three, and four from each
of the other tribes. On the east of
Jordan they had ten, and in Canaan
proper, thirty-eight,

Verse 11. At unawares. Margin:
“Heb., by error.” Or, by accident.

Verse 12. The avenger. Heb. Goél,
redeemer, kinsman, &o. Stand before
the congregation, &e. Or, “before the
essembly,” which consisted of the

606


Keil and Del.


elders of the city. Comp. verses 24, 25,

Verse 15. Unawares. By accident,
or, unintentionally,

Verse 16. Instrument of tron, 46, a
tool, ¢.g., hatchet, hammer, &o.

Verse 17. With throwing a stone.
Margin: “ Heb., with a stone of the
hand,” ¢.e., a large stone, which filled
the hand.

Verse 18. A hand weapon of wood.
Or, “a wooden instrument of the
hand,” eg. a club. “The suspicion
would rest upon anyone who had
used an instrument that endangered
life, and therefore was not generally
used in striking, that he had intended
to take life away.”— Knobel.

Verses 22,23. Comp. Deut. xix, 4, 5.

Verse 25. He shall abide in it, He
was safe only within the walls of the
city.

Unto the death of the high priest.
“The atoning death of the Saviour
casts its shadow before on the statute-
book of the Law and on the annals of
Jewish history. The High Priest, as
the head and representative of the
whole chosen family of sacerdotal
mediators, as exclusively entrusted with
some of the chief priestly functions, as
alone privileged to make yearly atone-
ment within the Holy of Holies, and
to gain, from the mysterious Urim
and Thummim, special revelations of
the wiil of God, was, pre-eminently, a
type of Christ. And thus the death of
each successive high-priest pre-signified
that death of Christ by which the cap-
tives were to be freed, and the re-
membrance of transgressions made to
cease.” — Speaker's Comm.

Verse 30, The murderer shall be put to


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.
cee a a ti a SY





death, The cities of refuge were not
instituted to screen the guilty from
deserved punishment ; but to secure a
just sentence,


CHAP. XXXY.,


By the mouth of witnesses, &0, Comp
Deut. xvii. 6 ; xix. 15.

Verse 31. Satisfaction. Rather, re
demption money, or ransom,


Tae AppoinTMENT or CrT1es Fork THE ReEsIDENCE ov THE LEviITES.


(Verses 1-8.)


The Divine provision for the main-
tenance of the priests and Levites has
already engaged our attention twice
(see pp. 84-86, and 339-342) ; and, in-


asmuch as most of the homiletical sug-

gestions of this paragraph were noticed

there, it is needless to point them out’
in this place.


REFUGE,


(Verse 6.)


“Among the cities which ye shall
give unto the Levites, there shall be six
cities for refuge.”

Some types of Christ appeared for a
brief season, and then vanished. The
guiding cloud, the manna, ended on
Jordan’s banks. But here is a sign
which lived through Canaan’s history.
It never failed until the Cross was
reared,

The story of the ordinance is brief.

Sinner, this type displays your case.
The slayer is your counterpart. There
may be carnage of duties—talents—
time —souls. No day passes in which
this guilt is not incurred, As the man-
slayer did not plot his deed, so sinners
blindly commit these murders through
ignorance and unwatched thought.

Take now the sinner awakened to a
sense of this guilt. He is,as the slayer,
rushing in terror from the kinsman’s
wrath,. He knows himself to be pur-
sued.

One kinsman only hunted the slayer.
But many adversaries threaten the
guilty soul God’s justice takes the
lead. It has strong claims, Its wrongs
are many. Its wrath is righteous. The
law is in pursuit winged with ven-
geance. It demands pure, unblemished
love, from the cradle to the grave, in
every child of man, All who trans-


gress become its prey. And who trans-
gresses net? This law must have its
dues. It follows sternly. The truth
of God, too, points an inexorable sword,
It has decreed that every sinner must
die. Can it be false? Satan moreover
follows with huge strides. He claims
the sinning soul as his, His hate is
bitter.

These adversaries rush on apace,
Who, undismayed, can hear their near-
ing footsteps? Do any ery, Whither
shall we flee? Is there a Refuge? Yes,
The sheltering cities represent our
Refuge. A Refuge is prepared, full—
complete—secure. It is Christ the
Lord. Flee to Him. All in Him are
everlastingly secure. ‘ There is there-
fore now no condemnation,” dé. (Rom.
viii. 1).

Let faith now calmly gaze on this
city, and mark its towers. Christ’s
person is the grand pillar of security.
While Jesus lives, and lives the mighty
God, this safety is complete. His
finished work builds up the Refuge.
The walls—the bulwarks of this city—
are red with blood. ‘There is inscribed
above each gate, “‘ Christ died.’ Justice
draws near. It sees this mark; and
asks no more. The law’s stern curse
falls harmless here. Christ receives
its weight. Satan pursues up to these
gates. But here he pauses. Pie within


GHAP, XXXV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


SS |


these walls are purified and beautified.
{ie must confess that they are no more
his. Blessed be God for thia sure
Refuge |

Mark, too, this Refuge is at hand.
In Israel the slayer had to flee oft-
times along a tedious road. Our city
stands beside us, “‘ The righteousness
which is of faith speaketh on this
wise,” &o. (Rom. x. 6-8). The gates
are close. Enter this hour.

Believer, you are within this Refuge.
- Set not one foot beyond the holy pre-
cincts. Abide in Christ. Would you
be safe through life—in death—for


ever? Then cleave to Christ, as ivy to
the tree, as limpet to the rock.

And when you realize your mercies
and your safe retreat, can your heart
fail to love—your lips to praise—your
life to serve? Can you now see such
multitudes exposed to wrath, and not
allure them to your loved Refuge?
Strive by every means to call them in.
Above all, agonize in prayer, that God’s
all-conquering Spirit may fly speedily
throughout earth’s bounds, opening
blind eyes to see their danger, exciting
anxious hearts to rush to this caly
Refuge.—H. Law, D.D.


Tus Diving Guarpiansuie ory Human Live.


(Verses 9-34.)


“ Wuman life,” to use the words of
Dean Milman, “in all rude and bar-
barous tribes, is of cheap account ; blood
is shed on the least provocation ; open
or secret assassination is a common oo-
currence, The Hebrew penal law en-
forced the highest respect for the life
of man. Murder ranked with high
treason (é.¢., idolatry, blasphemy),
striking a father, adultery, and un-
natural lust, as a capital crime: the
law demanded blood for blood (Exodus
xxi, 12; Lev. xxiv. 17, 21,22). But it
transferred the exaction of the penalty
from private revenge, and committed
it to the judicial authority. To effect
this, it had to struggle with an inveter-
ate though barbarous usage, which still
prevails among the Arabian tribes. By
a point of honour, as rigorous as that
of modern duelling, the nearest of kin
is bound to revenge the death of his
relation: he is his Goél or blood
avenger. He makes no enquiry; he
allows no pause ; whether the deceased
has been slain on provocation, by acci-
dent, or of deliberate malice, death can
only be atoned by the blood of the
homicide. To mitigate the evils of an
usage too firmly established to be rooted
out, Moses appointed certain cities of
retuge, conveniently situated. If the
homicide could escape to one of these,

608


he was safe till a judicial investigation
took place. Ifthe crime was deliber-
ate murder, he was surrendered to the
Goél ; if justifiable or accidental homi-
cide, he was bound to reside within the
sanctuary for a certain period; should
he leave it and expose himself to the
revenge of his pursuers, he did so at
his own peril, and might be put to
death.”

The various provisions of this law
afford an impressive illustration of the
Divine regard for human life.

I. In the institution of the cities of
refuge as a provision that the life of
an innocent person should not be taken
away.

“The Lord spake unto Moses, saying,
Speak unto the children of Israel,” &.
(Verses 9-15, 22-25).

The adaptatiop these cities for
this purpose apreac, m—

1. Their accessibility from all places,
“Ye shall give three cities on this side
Jordan, and three cities shall ye give
in the land of Canaan, which shall be
cities of refuge.” “And they appointed
Kedesh in Galilee,” &0. (Josh. xx. 7, 8).
A reference to the map of Canaan will
show that these cities were so situated
that one of them could be reached in a —
few hours from any part of the country.

2. Their accessibility to all persons.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; NUMBERS.


CHAP. XXXV.


LL ns ir ennn—


“These six cities shall be a refuge for the
children of Israel, and for the stranger,
and for the sojourner among them: that
every one that killeth any person una-
wares may flee thither.” God’s regard
is not simply for the life of the Israelite,
but for the life of man as man.

II. In the laws by which the trial
of the manslayer was to be conducted.

The Divine guardianship of human
life is manifested in these laws at
least in two respects :

1. In the clear discrimination between
intentional and unintentional man-
slaughter. “If he smite him with an
instrument,” &c. (vers. 16-24).

2. In the absolute necessity for the
evidence of at least two witnesses before a
man could be adjudged guilty of murder.
““Whoso killeth any person, the mur-
derer shall be put to death by the
mouth of witnesses: but one witness
shall not testify against any person to
cause him to die” (ver. 30; comp. Deut.
xvii. 6; xix. 15). One witness might
be mistaken in his view of the case, or
might be prejudiced against the homi-
cide ; hence the importance of the tes-
timony of at least two witnesses in the
trial of such cases.

III. In the punishment of the in-
tentional manslayer.

“The murderer shall surely be put
to death” (vers. 16,17, 18, 21, 30).
As an evidence of the regard of God
for human life, this punishment has
additional weight from two facts :-—

1. It could not be averted by any
ransom. ‘‘ Ye shall take no satisfaction
for the life of a murderer, which is
guilty of death ; but he shall be surely
put to death.” The crime was too
heinous to be expiated by anything
less than life itself.

2. It was insisted upon for the most
solemn reason. “So ye shall not pollute
the land wherein ye are; for blood it


defileth the land,” &c. (vers. 33, 34).
The argument seems to be this: that
the shedding of human blood defiled
the land, that such defilement could be
cleansed only by the blood of the mur-
derer ; that the Lord Himself dwelt in
that land, and therefore it must be
kept free from defilement; if murder
were committed, the murderer must be
put to death. To spare the life of the
murderer was to insult Jehovah by de-
filing the land wherein He dwelt.

IV. In the punishment of the un-
intentional manslayer.

“'The congregation shall deliver the
slayer out of the hand of the revenger
of blood,” &. (vers, 25-28). When it
was proved on the trial that the man-
slayer was perfectly free from guilty
designs, that he had slain another en-
tirely by accident, even then he had to
bear no light punishment. He must
leave his estate and his worldly inter-
ests, his home and his family, and
dwell in the city of refuge. His dwell-
ing there closely resembled imprison-
ment; for if he left the city, and its
divinely appointed suburbs, the Goéh,
if he should come upon him, was at
liberty to put him todeath. He must
remain there throughout his life, or until
the death of the high priest should bring
him release.

What striking witness does all this
bear to the sacredness of human life in
the sight of God! (a)

Conclusion,

i. Respect human life—that of others,
and your own also, (6)

li. Guard against anger ; for it leads
to murder, and in the estimation of
Heaven it is murder, ‘ Whosoever
hateth his brother is a murderer ”
(1 John iii. 15).

fii. Cultivate brotherly kindness and
Christian charity. Where these are,
anger cannot come.


ILLUSTRATIONS


(a) In the precepts delivered to the sons of
Noah, and, therefore, through them, to all
their descendants, that is, to all mankind, that
against murder is thus delivered: “ Whow


BR


sheddeth man’s blood, by man shall his blood
be shed; for in the image of God made He
man ” (Gen. ix. 6). There is in this reason a


Manifest reference t) the pies), ig npoa


CHAP, XXXV,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


a a in


human nature, by its being endowed with a
rational and immortal spirit. ‘The crime of
murder is made to lie, therefore, not merely in
the putting to death the animal part of man’s
nature, for this is merged in a higher con-
sideration, which seems to be, the indignity
done to the noblest of the works of God 3 and,
particularly, the value of life to an immortal
being, accountable in another state for the
actions done in this, and which ought, for this
very reason, to be specially guarded, since
death introduces him into changeless and
eternal relations, which were not to lie at the
mercy of human passions. Such moralists as
the writer above quoted (Dr. Whately), would
restrein the essential characteristics of an act
of murder to the “hurt done to a neighbour
in depriving him of life,” and the “ insecurity ”
inflicted upon society ; but in this ancient and
universal law, it is made eminently to consist
in contempt of the image of God in man, and
its interference with man’s immortal interests
and relations as a deathless spirit ; and, if 80,
then suicide bears upon it these deep and awful
characteristics of murder. It is much more
wisely said by Bishop Kidder, in his remarks
upon this passage, that the reason given—“ for
in the image of God made He man ”—is a
further aggravation of the sin of murder. It
is a great trespass upon God, as it destroys
His likeness ; and self-murder, upon this ac-
count, is forbidden ag well as the killing of
others.— Richard Watson.

But more than this Man, the immortal,
is man, the sinful, the guilty; and for this
immortal, sinful, guilty creature, a Saviour has
been provided; and it depends on hia having,
or not having, an interest in this Saviour,
whether his never-ending existence is to be one
of happiness or woe. And it is now, and here
—in the present life and the present world,
that this interest in the Saviour must be
effected, this connection with Him formed.
And it is here, and now, too, that a certain
change of heart and character must be
wrought, a change such as alone can fit for
the only description of happiness that is at all
to be found in the world, and the eternity
beyond. How precarious, then, is life ! Short,
vain, passing as it is, a vapour, a shadow, a
handbreadth, a dream! Yvt, viewed in this,
its relation to eternity, it acquires a worth
which it is far beyond all the powers of human
aritiimetic to compute. And it becomes, in
this view of it, the more solemnly important
that, though brief even when most protracted,
its limit, in each case, is every moment un-
certain. For when the time is precarious on
which any great event materially affecting our
interests depends, and every moment may be
that which is to determine for us the evil or
the good, the preciousiess of every moment
ie mightily, oppressively felt. With the sar-
castic coolness of a scofting scepticism, Mr.
Home asks: ‘* Where is the crime of diverting


610


& few ounces of blood from their channel
The question is based on the assumption of
there being no hereafter ; no deathless spirit
lodged in the frame througn which that blood
circulates ; no moral acconntableness ; no
judgment to come. It is the language of a
narrow-minded, heartless materialism. It ig
the language of an ethereal spirit endowed
with divine capacities, and prostituting its
Heaven-bestowed powers to disprove its own
immortality ; to rob itself of the highest ele-
ments of its dignity ; to disfranchise itself of
the noblest of its chartered privileges; to
debage itself to a level with the “beasts that
perish.”—Ra/ph Wardlaw, DD.

(5) On suicide, our modern moratists HAVE
added little to what is advanced by the ethica)
writers of Greece and Rome to prove its un-
lawfulness; for, though suicide was much
practised in those ancient states, and some-
times commended, especially by the Stoics, it
was occasionally condemned. “We men,”
says Plato, “are all by the appointment of
God in a certain prison or custody, which we
ought not to break out of or ran away.” So
likewise Cicero : “ God, the Supreme Governor
of ali things, forbids us to depart hence with-
out His order. All pious men ought to have
patieuce to continue in the body, as long as
God shall please who sent us hither; and not
force themselves out of the world before He
calls for them, lest they be found deserters of
the station appointed them by God.” . . . .

Whatever weight may be due to the con-
siderations urged by moralists against this
crime—and every motive which may deter
men from listening to the first temptation to
so direful an act, is important—yet the guards
of Christianity must be acknowledged to be
of a more powerful kind. For the principles
of our religion cannot be understood without
our perceiving, that, of almost all other crimes,
wilful suicide ought most to be dreaded. It
fs 4 sin against God's authority. He is “the
God of our life” ; in “ His hand our breath
is”; and we usurp His authority when we
presume to dispose of it. As resulting from
the pressure ot mortifications of spirit, or
the troubles of life, it becomes a sin, as
arraigning His providential wisdom and good-
ness. It implies either an atheistic denial of
God’s government, or a rebellious opposition
to His permissive acts or direct appointments ;
it cannot be committed, therefore, when the
mind is sound, but in the absence of all the
Christian virtues, of humility, self-denial,
patience, and the fear and love of God, and
only under the influence of pride, worldliness,
forgetfulness of God, and contempt of Him.
It hides from the mind the realities of a
future judyment, or it defies them; and it is
consummated by the character of unpardon-
ableness, because it places the criminal at
once beyond the reach of mercy.—Aichard
Watoon,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP, XXXV.


rere


Taz Cries or Reruas, aW ILLUSTRATION OF THE SALVATION oF Jesus CuRist.


(Verses 9-34.)


There are certain respects in which
the analogy between the cities of refuge
and the salvation offered to man in
the Gospel does not hold good; e¢g.—

i. The cities of refuge afforded no
lasting protection to the guilty. By their
means @ fair trial was secured for the
manslayer ; but if he was found guilty
of murder, he was given up to the Goél
to be put to death. They were an
abiding refuge for those only who had
accidentaily slain a fellow creature.
But Christianity is a refuge for the
guilty. “Christ Jesus came into the
world to save sinners; of whom,” saith
St. Paul, “I am chief.” ‘ This man
receiveth sinners.” “ Him that cometh
to Me I will in no wise cast out.” The
guiltiest soul that flies to Jesus Christ
is inviolably secure.

ii. The cities of refuge did not exempt
even the unintentional manslayer from
death, but simply postponed tt. They
rescued him from the vengeance of the
Goél ; but they could not screen him
from that death which ‘is appointed
unto all men.” But the spiritual death,
which is the penalty of sin, Christianity
abolishes for the believer by bestowing
upon him a life which is immortal and
blessed. In the city of refuge the un-
intentional manslayer obtained bodily
security fora time ; in Christ the guilty
sinner obtains spiritual security and
joy for ever.

There are other respects in which the
analogy is not quite cumplete ; but in
three most conspicuous features it is
both clear and striking.

I. A great peril.

Under this head there are three
points of resemblance.

1. A broken law. The manslayer had
broken the law which guards human
life. “Thou shalt not kill.” Every
man has transgressed the holy law of
God in some respects. “All have
sinned,” &c. (Rom. iii. 23), “ If we say

BR 2


that we have no sin, we deceive our-
selves,” &c. (1 John i. 8, 10).

2. The penalty of death. “At the
hand of every man’s brother wi]] I re-
quire the life of man. Whoso sheddeth
man’s blood, by man shall his bio“ be
shed ; for in the image of God sade
He man.” “ The murderer shall sureiy
be put to death.” “The soul that sin-
neth, it shall die.” “Sin, when it is
finished, bringeth forth death.” (a)

3. The peril of the exaction of the
penalty. The Goél of the slain person
allowed no time to elapse before setting
forth to avenge the death on the man-
slayer; and if he overtook him before
he gained the city of refuge, he put him
to death. The manslayer was fleeing
for his very life. And the dire penal-
ties of sin follow hard upon the heels
of the sinner. Conscience pursues him
with its condemnations, and will not be
silenced. Divine Justice follows bim
closely, crying, “Cursed is every one
that continueth not in all things which
are written in the book of the law to do
them.” And the wrath of God, which
burns with unquenchable fire against
sin, speeds swiftly on the track of the
guilty sinner. (6)

IL A gracious provision.

By Divine command six cities were
appointed cities of refuge; to either of
these the manslayer might flee, &c.

1. The provision was of Divine ap-
pointment. “ Jehovah spake unto Moses,
saying, Speak unto the children of
Israel, and say unto them, When ye be
come over Jordan,” &c. It was this
fact, that they were appointed by God's
command, that made these cities a
secure refuge for the homicide ;—not
the strength of their gates or walis,
not the authority of their governors,
but the authority of Him who had in-
stituted them for this purpose. Jesus
Christ is the Refuge appointed by God
for the sinner. “ The aie that


SHAP, XXXV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.





is in Christ Jesus ; whom God hath set
forth to be a propitiation,” &. “ Him
hath God exalted with His right hand, a
Prince and a Saviour,” &c. Hence, they
who flee to Him are perfectly secure. (c)
2. The provision was adequate to the
need. Six cities were appointed; and
were quite sufficient for the entire
country. In each there was ample
room, &c. The provisions of Christi-
anity for the salvation of the sinner
are enough for all the needs of all men
in allagesandalllands, “A great mul-
titude which no man could number”
have found a secure and blessed refuge
in Jesus Christ ; “and yet there is room.”
3. The provision was accessible from
all places, Three measures were adopted
to secure this :—(1) The cities were
suitably situated, “They appointed
Xedesh in Galilee,” &e. (Josh. xx. 7-9).
ur Saviour is everywhere present. He
isa Refuge alwaysnear. (2) The roads
leading to these cities were kept in good
condition. Moses “took care,” says
Dr. Jahn, “that roads leading to them
in straight lines should be laid out in
every direction, which were to be dis-
tinguished from other streets.” (Comp.
Deut. xix. 3.) And, according to the
Talmudists, (3) where two or more roads
met, posts were put up with the word
0 2/2'), Ruruas, clearly marked on them
for the direction of the fugitive. All
this may be viewed as illustrating the
accessibility of Jesus Christ to the sinner,
‘‘Say not in thine heart, Who shall as
cend into heaven?” &c. (Rom. x. 6-9),
4, The provision was accessible to all
persons. ‘'T'hese six cities shall be a
refuge for the children of Israel, and
for the stranger, and for the sojourner
among them ;” &c. They were accessi-
ble to every person in the land. Jesus
Christ “is the Saviour of all men”
(1 Tim. iv. 10). “ Whosoever believeth
in Him should not perish,” &c. (John
iii, 15-17). ‘ Him that cometh to Me
I will in no wise cast out” (John vi.
37). “Whosoever believeth in Him
shall not be ashamed. for there is no
difference,” &c, (Rom. x. 11-13), (d)
6. The provision was exclusive. No


614


other city, except the six appointed ones,
had authority to shelter and protect the
manslayer. For the sinner there is no
refuge but Jesus. “ Neither is there sal-
vation in any other,” &c. (Acts iv. 12).

III. The urgent obligation.

The cities of refuge were of no ad-
vantage to the manslayer unless he
gained an entrance into one of them
before the Goél overtook him. It was
his highest interest and imperative
duty to make his way to the nearest
city of refuge. It is yet more the
duty and interest of the sinner to
hasten to the Lord Jesus as his refuge.
This obligation is—

1. Personal. No one could escape
to the city of refuge for the homicide;
he must go himself, or be put to death.
Salvation is a personal concern and duty.
Repentance, faith, self-consecration, are
things which no one can do for another,
“Work out your own salvation,” &c.

2. Prompt. The manslayer had to
escape at once or to perish. To linger
was to be lost. Salvation must be
sought at once. “ Behold, now is the
accepted time,” &o. “Ye know not
what shall be on the morrow,” &c,


3. Pressing. The manslayer may
not loiter on the way, or slacken his
pace until he was safe within the city.
The words which were addressed to
Lot were applicable to him: “Escape
for thy life ; look not behind thee,” &c.
(Gen. xix. 17). And the sinner must
put forth earnest effort. Christ must
be sought zealously and with all the
heart. (Comp. Jer. xxix. 12, 13,) Salva-
tion must be pursued diligently. “So
run, that ye may obtain,” &c. (1 Cor.
ix. 24-27). “Fight the good fight of
faith,” &o. “Let us lay aside every
weight,” &o. “Give diligence to make
your calling,” &o.

4. Persevering. The homicide must
press eagerly on until he entered the
city. There was no safety for him if he
stopped short of the end. ‘He that


endureth to the end shall be saved.”


“Be thou faithful unto death, and I
will give thee a crown of life.” Hasten,
then, O sinner! to the Refuge, &o.


_ el


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XXEV.


a


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(@) “All have sinned, and come short of
the glory of God.” If then you have come
short of the glory of God, you must be lost ;
it cannot be denied, nor disputed. J tell to
every man now present, that he is guilty of stn-
ming against the Almighty—that if there be no
intervention of mercy so mighty and so majes-
tic as to satisfy the demands of justice, to
quench her fire, and sheathe her sword—if
there be not mercy, free, boundless, omnipo-
tent, and eternal, every human being will
stand before the judgment bar of God to re-
ceive the sentence of his condemnation. He
must be banished for ever from the presence of
the Lord, and from the glory of His power;
and he must go down to those abodes of tor-
ment where there are agonies unspeakable and
inconceivable ; where the smoke of torment
ascendeth up for ever and for ever. Go, my
hearers, to the brink of eternity, contemplate
in imagination the scenes of that horrible pit
which the word of revelation has presented to
your view—contemplate the worm that dieth
not—contemplate the fire that has been pre-
pared for the devil and his angels—contem-
plate the blackness of darkness—contemplate
the smoke of torment that ascendeth up for
ever andever! What was it that gave to that
worm its fang but sin? What was it that
gave to that fire its intensity but sim? What
was it that gave to that blackness its shadows
but sin? What was it that gave to that tor-
ment its woe but sin? The voice is from the
abyss uttering one wild cry, “It was sin; st
was sin; IT WAS BIN!” Man would sin, and
therefore man must suffer. There is a rigid
equity between the one and the other. “ Death
has passed upon all men, for that all have
sinned.”—James Parsons.

(6) No closer doth the shadow follow the
body than the revenge of self-accusation fol-
lows sin. Walk eastward in the morning, the
shadow starts behind thee; soon after it is
upon thy left side; at noon it is under thy
feet; lie down, it crouches under thee; to-
wards even it leaps before thee. Thou canst
not be rid of it while thou hast a body and
the sunlight. No more can thy soul quit the
conscience of evil. This is to thee instead of
a hell of fiends, that shall ever be shaking
firebrands at thee; ever torturing thee with
affrighta of more I pate than thy nature can
eomprehend.—Hall, ;

(c) In Samoa, the manslayer, or the deliber-
ate murderer, flies to the house of the chief of
the village, or to the house of the chief of
another village to which he is related by the
father’s or the mother’s side, In nine cases


out of ten, he is perfectly safe if he only re-
mains there. In such instances, the chief
delights in the opportunity of showing his
importance, In Samoa, a chief’s house is
literally his fortification, except in times of
eee and actual war.—G@. Turzer,


(d@) Our Lord is the Saviour of all men, for
that He hath rendered all man salvabiles, capa-
ble of salvation; and salvandos, designed to
salvation, for that He hath removed all obsta-
cles peremptorily debarring men from access
to salvation, and hath procured competent
furtherances to their attainment of it. He
hath performed whatever on His part is neces-
sary or fit in order to salvation, antecedently
to the acceptance and compliance with those
reasonable conditions, which by God’s wia-
dom are required toward the instating men
into a full and immediate right to salvation,
or to a complete and actual fruition thereof.
He made the way to happiness plain and passa-
ble ; levelling the insuperable cliffs, and filling
up the chasms, and rectifying the obliquities,
and smoothing the asperitics thereof, as the
prophet foretold; so that all men, who would,
might conveniently walk therein. He set the
doors of paradise wide open, so that who
pleased might enter therein; all the bonds
and restraints under which men lay, He
so far loosed, that any man might be free, who
would concur to his own liberty and enlarge-
ment. All the protection and encouragement
which were needful toward obtaining salvation,
He afforded and exhibited to every one that
would embrace and make use.of them. In
respect to which performances He might be
truly called a Saviour, although all men do
not in effect become saved. For the estimae
tion and denomination of performances are to
be grounded upon their own nature and de-
sign, not upon events depending upon the
contingent and arbitrary behaviour of men.
As he that freely offers a rich boon is no less
to be accounted a benefactor, and liberal,
although his gift be refused, than if it were
accepted ; as he that opens the prison is to be
styled a deliverer, although the captive will
not go forth; as he that ministers an effectual
remedy, although the patient will not use it,
deserves the honour and thanks due to a phy-
sician; so is our Lord in regard to what He
hath performed for men, and offered to them
(being sufficient to prevent their misery and
promote their happiness), to be thankfull
acknowledged their Saviour, although not a
men, yea although not one man, should receive
the designed benefit.—Isaae Barrow, DD,


618


CHAP. XXXV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


CL


Tus Cirms oy Rervas, as Lecisiative ENACTMENTS, AND a8
Resigious INsTiTUTIoNs,


(Verses 9-15.)


The system of redemption as revealed
in the Gospel is often exhibited to our
notice as bearing decisive marks of
Divine wisdom. It is styled “ the
wisdom of God” —“ the wisdom of God
in a mystery, the hidden wisdom...
which none of the princes of this world
knew.” The Apostle thus intimates to
us that the Gospel would bear the
closest inspection in all its parts; that
it was worthy of our admiration, as
well as of our love; that our redemp-
tion was not to be effected either by
blind force, or by blind affection ; that
it should be accomplished in such a
manner as that no rights were to be
compromised, no perfections outraged,
no interests overlooked, but, on the
contrary, that a perfect harmony and
balance should be maintained between
the apparently rival attributes of the
Divine character, and the apparently
rival interests of earth and Heaven.
Thus God was to be just, and yet the
justifier of him that believeth ; Mercy
and Truth were to meet together ;
Christ crucified in humility and weak-
ness was to present a most eminent
illustration both of the wisdom and of
the power of God ; and thus the count-
less multitudes saved by grace should
have reason to exclaim in time and
eternity—Herein “ He hath abounded
toward us in all wisdom and prudence !”

But while these remarks are readily
admitted respecting the Christian dis-
pensation, they might be extended with
equal propriety to the Jewish dispen-
sation also. While the Gospel claims
our homage on account of the wisdom
it displays, we are prepared to make a
similar demand on behalf of the Law.
Both are the product of the same
Author; both are the offspring of the
same covenant of mercy ; both conduce.
to the same happy result ; and, though
the Gospel confessedly has “the glory
that excelleth,” yet the same authority

614


assures us that “that which is done
away was glorious” also. There are
two points of view expressly in which
wisdom shines in the departed econo-
my :—

Tiret : As tts leading tnstitutions were
particularly adapted to the state of the
Jews in the infancy of the Church.
Their ceremonial rites and observances
were particularly suited to the climate
in which they lived, to the circum-
stances in which they were placed, and
to the evils to which they were exposed.
Ignorant and uncultivated as they
were during their four hundred years’
bondage, they required a relizion ad-
dressed to the senses, as well as to the
intellect ; and hence they have a visible
glory, “a worldly sanctuary,” animal
sacrifices, symbolical institutions. Hav-
ing recently been brought out of the
midst of an idolatrous people, many of
their regulations were intended to pre-
serve them from a relapse into idolatry,
and to keep constantly before them the
worship of one God, and faith in a
promised Messiah. And having to
wander for forty years in the wilder-
ness without fixed habitations, without
regular communities, and without the
arts and ornaments of life, some laws
were enacted suited to their unsettled
condition, and some preparatory to
their establishment in the Promised
Land. In many instances Moses adap-
ted himself to the customs and usages
which had prevailed among them from
patriarchal times; in some, his insti-
tutions were altogether new; in all,
there was a perpetual reference to their
moral a:.d religious interests-—to en-
courage virtue, to diminish crime, to
induce them to walk humbly with God.

Secondly: As tt was expressly calcu-
lated to point to the coming of Christ,
and introduce the Gospel dispensation.
The Law was a shadow—a figure for
the time then present—e schoolmaster


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS. cmap. xxxv.


SN atten


to bring them to Christ. Unto them
was the Gospel preached, as well as
unto us, Their history in the wilder-
ness and their worship in the Temple
alike prefigured the times of the Mes-
siah, Their sacrifices pointed to Him;
the “Rock that followed them” was a
type of Him; the scapegoat, the brazen
serpent, the cities of refuge, and the
manna in the wilderness, prefigured the
nature of His offices, the design of His
death, or the spiritual blessings of His
kingdom.

These observations apply with pecu-
liar force to our present subject—the
Cities of Refuge. As civil appointments,
they were calculated to prevent much
mischief and misery ; as religious ordi-
nances, they serve to illustrate Gospel
blessings. We shall consider them—

I. As legislative enactments adapted
to the habits and customs of an Eas-
tern people in an early age of the
world.

Two things require notice—

1. The office of the avenger of blood
and the evils consequent upon tt. This
office probably had a very early origin :
it may be a relic of the earliest state
of civil society, for where there was no
magistrate or public tribunal, murders
would have been frequently perpetrated
had there been no process of this kind
among surviving relatives. Cain evi-
dently was in dread of summary
vengeance for his murder of Abel.
(Comp. Gen. iv. 14.) Rebecca probably
dreaded a similar retaliation in case
Esau had murdered Jacob ; for “ why,”
says she, “should I be deprived also of
you both in one day?” It has been
common among the wandering Arabs
from Ishmael’s time to the present
hour. It probably arose out of the
original law,—‘“‘ At the hand of every
man’s brother will I require the life of
man,” &c. (Gen. ix. 5, 6).

It is evident that such a practice
must give rise to many very serious
evils. Besides that it fostered a spirit
of relentless hatred and revenge, it was
often accompanied with flagrant injus-
tice and wrong. The Goél is governed
only by his passions; and it may be


that the person he suspects is not the
murderer; thus an innocent person
suffers, and instead of avenging one
murder he commits a second. One
such deed never fails to give birth to
another; and so ten murders have not
unfrequently their origin inone. The
families on both sides take part in the
quarrel, and thus under the pious
pretext of avenging innocent blood,
two families may be in a state of con-
stant warfare, and transmit feuds and
enmities from father to son, even to
the tenth generation. Thus the office
of the avenger of blood, though proper
in some states of society, was subject
to many abuses, and required to be
placed under strong restrictions. Moses
could not have abolished it altogether,
at least on a sudden, he therefore adopted
regulations which neutralised the evil.
2. The appointment of the cities of
refuge, in order to secure the ends, both
of mercy and of justice. Six cities of
refuge were appointed—three on the
one side of Jordan, three on the other
—to which the manslayer might im-
mediately repair, and in which the
individual might be safe, &e. . ,
Thus provision was made both for
justice and mercy—for justice if the
fugitive were guilty, for mercy if he
were innocent. And in order to give the
innocent person every reasonable hope
of escaping, the cities were placed at
easy distances, to which persons might
have access from any part of the land,
the roads were straight and plain,


But even in the mercy that was
shown an accidental manslayer, we see
how sacred life was in God’s esteem ;
for the fugitive must be a prisoner and
an exile, apart from all his friends, till
the death of the High Priest, perhaps
for many years. This was intended to
punish that imprudence which had cost
another man his life, and could not
fail to make the people cautious agairst
the recurrence of such accidents; for
as no compensation could be taken for
the life of a murderer, so no sum could
rescue an innocent manslayer from tne
city (vers. 31, 32

y¢ » 32). 615


CHAP, EXXV,


TI, As a religious ordinance de-
signedly employed by the apostle to
illustrate the wisdom and goodness of
God in the methods of our salvation,

Here we see clearly depicted the cha-
racter and office of our great Redeemer.
This Redeemer is our near Kinsman ;
for “He is not ashamed to call us
brethren.” To this the apostle alludes :
“God sent forth His Son made of a
woman,” &c. (Gal. iv. 4, 5). This
illustrates the sublime passage in the
book of Job: “I know that my Re-
deemer liveth,” &c. He is here com-
pared to the Goél, &e. (Comp. Hos.
nil. 14; Zech. ix. 12.) The apostle
says: “That I may win Christ, and be
found in Him,” for which, like the
manslayer, he would count all things
loss. And he describes Christians as
having “fled for refuge.” “There is


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS


a a





omen


therefore now no condemnation,” &c.

1. A state of exposure ts dmplied.
Every man who reflects upon his past
life, upon the holiness of God's law,
upon the inflexibility of His govern-
ment, and upow the sentence He has
pronounced against sin, must be aware
that he is in a state of jeopardy. The
sentence has been promulgated from
age to age with awful solemnity,
“Cursed is every one,” &. If wa
carry the thought to its extent, it is
Jehovah Himself who is the Avenger,
His law we have broken, &c.

2. A method of rescue has been pro-
vided. Christ has undertaken our des-
perate cause. We are to flee for refuge.
It is the only one. It is open to the
Gentile as well as the Jew.


: ‘ : Samuel Thodey.


Tus SzouriTy oF THOSE wHo FLEE TO THE City or Reruam


(Verses 24-28.)


That the Mosaic law had a spiritual
meaning, is placed beyond all doubt
from the clear allusions of Scripture
(Zech. ix. 12 ; Heb. vi. 18). Observe—

I. Our natural state is one of im-
minent danger,

We are all criminals, having, igno-
rantly and in unbelief, rebelled against
the Almighty Sovereign. As criminals,
we are justly exposed to the infliction
of the threatened penalty of death
(Ezek. xviii. 4; Rom. vi. 23; Rev. xxi,
8). Truly, then, we may observe in
the situation of the manslayer a great
resemblance to that of our own, as pur-
sued by the inexorable Justice of One
whose wrath we have so much pro-
voked (Rom. i, 18; John iii. 36).

II. Nothing can deliver us from
this danger but a zealous and timely
flight.

We may sit at ease, bless ourselves
in our heart, and feel secure ; but if
death overtakes us loitering in our sins,
we must perish in them; and it will
be vain to trust to anything as our
covenant and hope, so long as we re-

616


main under that indifference to our
spiritual interests, which demonstrates
us to be still unchanged (James ii. 10).

III, There is a place of safety to
which we can flee.

Christ is our refuge :—

1. A Refuge Divinely appointed. God
8o pitied, so deeply and intensely com-
passionated our state, as to plan and
provide a way of deliverance for us by
His only begotten Son (John iii, 16).

2. A Refuge free and open to all.
None are shut out from it, but those
who, by their impenitence and ob-
stinacy, shut out themselves. No
stage, no state of guilt, can make any
difference ; but sinners of every rank
and description, without limitation or
reserve, have a place prepared in which
they may find security (1 Cor. vi. 11).

3. A Refuge everywhere near to resort
to, Christ is set before us in the Gos-
pel, and to find Him we need neither
climb up into heaven, nor descend
into the bottom of the sea (Rom. x. 8).

4. A Refuge easily accessible, Every
obstacle is effectually removed, God


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


GHAP, XXXVI.


_— eee


being reconciled, His justice satisfied,
_ and His law magnified ; so that nothing
need hinder our trusting in Christ, the
great God, and our Saviour,

5. A Refuge containing an ampls
supply for owr wants and necessities.
For here are to be found wisdom,
grace, life, liberty, peace, and joy.

IV. Having once entered this place
we must abide there.

It was not enough that the man-
slayer fled to the city of refuge. Hav-
ing gained this place, he must remain


in it till the death of the high priest.
Nor is it sufficient to have once be-
lieved in Christ. We must abide in
Him, renouncing for ever all thoughts
of going into any forbidden region
(Isa. xxx. 15). And woe be unto us, if
we dare to be found without (2 Pet.
fi. 20, 21).

Let us hence seek after a sight of
our danger, abandon ail means of re-
lief not warranted in the Scripture,
and resign ourselves up to Christ.—
William Sleigh,


CHAPTER XXXVL


Tus Law ror THE Marriage or HEIRESS,


(Verses 1-12.)


Let us notice—

L The case stated.

“ And the chief fathers of the families
of the children of Gilead, the son of
Machir,” &. (vers. 1-4). The daugh-
ters of Zelophehad were heiresses, ac-
cording to the law stated in chapter
xxvii, 1-11 (see pp. 509, 510). There
was a probability of their marriage, and
it might have been to persons of some
of the other tribes. (a) And, as
Matthew Henry points out, it is pro-
bable that the heads of the tribe of
Manasseh knew, that “‘at this time,
great court was made to them by some
young gentlemen of other tribes, be-
cause they were heiresses, that they
might get footing in this tribe, and so
enlarge their own inheritance. This
truly is often aimed at more than it
should bein making marriages, not the
meetness of the person, but the con-
venience of the estate, to ‘lay house to
house and field to field.’ ‘Wisdom
indeed is good with an inheritance ;’
but what is an inheritance good for in
that relatioa without wisdom? But
here, we may presume, the personal
merit of these daughters recommended
them as well as their fortunes.” But
if they married to persons of another
tribe, their inheritance would pass away


from the tribe of Manasseh to the tribe
or tribes to which their husbands be-
longed. It was in order to guard
against this that the heads of the
fathers’ houses of the family of Gilead
the Manassite appealed unto Moses.
In so doing they were actuated, not by
selfish concern for their personal in-
terests. Their respective inheritances
would not be diminished by the mar-
riage of these heiresses. But they
urged that, if they married to persons
of any of the other tribes,—(1) The
Divine allotment of the land would be
invaded. “They said, The Lord com-
manded my lord to give the land for an
inheritance by lot to the children of
Israel,” &o. (2) The territory of the
half-tribe of Manasseh would be dimin-
ished. “If they be married to any of
the sons of the other tribes,” &o. (vers.
8, 4). In this way the wealth and im-
portance and power of the half-tribe
would be lessened.

These proceedings of the heads of
this family were orderly, respectful,
reasonable, and commendable,

II, The case adjudicated.

“ And Moses commanded the children
of Israel according to the word of the
Lord,” &c. (vers. 5-9).

1. SS Se ee

1


CHAP. XXXVI.


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


—


acknowledged. ‘The tribe of the sons
uf Joseph hath said well.” The conduct
of the elders was commended, &o.

2. The difficulty of the case was removed,
The law by which the difficulty was re-
moved comprised two simple clauses :—
(1) That the daughters of Zelophehad
were not to be coerced in marriage.
“This is the thing which the Lord doth
command concerning the daughters of
Zelophehad, saying, Let them marry to
whom they think best.” ‘“ Now if God
left them to their liking,” asks Bishop
Babington, “should men force their
children against all love and liking?
No, no, it is a sin, and not a small one,
bitter to the child all the days of life,
and not very sweet to the parents after
they see the fruits of their violence.
Let children dutifully regard parents,
and parents charitably and religiously
regard their children, who will beg
with better will where they like than
live without love in world’s abundance.
We have known too often the child
cry, the father cry, and the mother die
for this fault, when it was too late.” (6)
(2) That the daughters of Zelophehad
were to marry persons of their own
tribe. “ Only tothe family of the tribe of
their fathers shall they marry. So shall
not the inheritance,” &c. Thus, while
the former provision secured to them
freedom in their marriages, this pro-
vision, by restricting the extent of their


choice, secured their inheritance to the
tribe of Manasseh.

3. The decision in this case was made
the law for all similar cases “ And
every daughter that possesseth an in-
heritance in any tribe,” &c! (vers. 8, 9).

4. The decision of this case was of
Divine authority. “ Moses commanded
the children of Israel according to the
word of the Lord, saying, .... This
is the thing which the Lord doth com-
mand,” &o. Hence the decision was
binding both in the case which gave rise
to it, and in all similar cases in subse-
quent times.

III. The adjudication acted upon.

“Even as the Lord commanded
Moses, so did the daughters of Zelo-
phehad,” &o. (vers. 10-12). “They
married their fathers’ brothers’ sons. By
this it appears,” says Matthew Henry,—

“1, That the marriage of cousin-ger=
mans 18 not in itself unlawful, nor within
the degrees prohibited, for then God
would not have countenanced these
marriages. But,

“2. That ordinarily tt ts not advisable;
for, if there had not been a particular
reason for it (which cannot hold in any
case now, inheritances being not dis-
posed of as then by the special designation
of Heaven), they would not have mar-
ried such near relations. The world is
wide, and he that walks uprightly will
endeavour to walk surely.”


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(@) Marriage has in it less of beauty, but
more of safety, than the single life; it hath
not more ease, but less danger; it is more
merry and more sad ; it is fuller of sorrows
and fuller of joys ; it lies under more bur-
dens, but is supported by all the strenuths of
love and charity ; and these burdens are de-
lightful. Marriage is the mother of the
world, and preserves kingdoms, and fills cities
snd churches, and heaven itself. Celibacy,
like the fly in the heart of an apple, dwells
in perpetual sweetness, but sits alone, and is
confined, and dies in singularity ; but mar-
riage, like the useful bee, builds a house, and
gathers sweetness from every flower, and
labours and unites into societies and republics,
and sends ouc colonies, and feeds the world
with delicacies, and obeys their king, and
keeps order, and exercises many virtues, and

618


promotes the interest of mankind, and is that
state of good to which God hath designed the
present constitution of the world.—Jeremg
Taylor.

(6) The marriage life is always an insipid,
& vexatious, or a happy condition. The first
is, when two people of no genius or taste for
themselves meet together, apon such a setile-
ment as has been thought reasonable by
parents and conveyancers, from an exact
valuation of the land and cash of both parties.
In this case, the young lady’s person is no
more regarded than the house and impzove-
ments in purchase of an estate; but she goes
with her fortune, rather than her fortune with
her. ‘hese make up the crowd or vulgar of
the rich, and fill up the lumber of the human
race, without beneficence towards those below
them, or respect towards those above them.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP, XXXVI, -





The veratzous life arises from a conjunction
of two people of quick taste and resentment
pat together for reasons well known to their
friends, in which especial care is taken to
avoid (what they think the chief of evils)
poverty, and insure to them riches, with every
evil besides. ‘(hese good people live in a con-
stant constraint before company, and too great
familiarity alone. When they are within
observation, they fret at each other’s carriage
and behaviour ; when alone, they revile each


other’s person and conduct. In company,
they are in purgatory; when only together, in
a hell.

‘The happy marriage is where two persons
meet and voluntarily make choice of each
other, without principally regarding or ne-
glecting the circumstances of fortune or
beauty. These may still love in spite of
adversity or sickness: the former we may, in
some measure, defend ourselves from ; the other
is the portion of our very make.—Sir RB. Steaie.


MAKRBIAGE.


(Verse 6.)


We may notice briefly, by way of in-
troduction, —

i. That marriage is a Divine institu-
tion. It was ordained by God (Gen. i.
26-28 ; ii. 18-24 ; 1 Cor. xi. 9). It was
solemnly confirmed by our Lord Jesus
Christ (Matt. xix. 3-12), and by His
Apostles (1 Cor. vii. 2; Eph. v. 22-33;
1 Pet. iii. 1-7).

ii. That the obligations involved in
marriage are binding and sacred. Mar-
riage itself is not obligatory. There
are circumstances in which celibacy is
undoubtedly commendable (Matt. xix.
12; 1 Cor. vii. 8). But when the mar-
riage relation has been entered into,
obligations of the most tender and
sacred character have been incurred.
These obligations are not simply those
imposed by the civil authority, but
those which pertain to it as an ordi-
nance of God: Divine in its origin,
it is Divine also in its obligations (Gen.
ii, 18, 24; Mal. ii. 14-16; Matt. xix.
4-6; Eph. v. 22-33; 1 Pet. iii. 1-7).

But, to confine ourselves to the text,
two observations are here warranted on
marriage in general :—

I. That persons should not be
coerced in marriage.

“This is the thing which the Lord
doth command... . . saying, Let
them marry to whom they think best.”
Here we have—

1. Personal choice as opposed to com-
pulston, Parents “who force their
daughters into marriage,” said Lord
_ Rochester, “are worse than the Am-
monites, who sacrificed their children


to Moloch—the latter undergoing a
speedy death; the former suffering
years of torture, but too frequently
leading to the same result.”


“For marriage is a matter of more worth
Than to be dealt in by attorneyship ;
For what is wedlock forcéd but a hell,
An age of discord and continual strife?
Whereas the contrary bringeth forth

happiness,
And is a pattern of celestial bliss.”
— Shakespeare.


Moreover, such coercion is a sad de-
gradation of marriage; a grievous
wrong to the persons coerced ; and a
heinous sin against God. But further, it
seems to us that the text suggests that
marriage should be entered into from—

2. Personal affection as opposed to
mere convenience, In the clause now
under consideration, it is the person,
not the property, which is spoken of.
“Let them marry to whom they think
best.” Marriage is far too sacred a
thing to be treated az a matter of mere
convenience and arrangement. “I
regard a man and a woman that come
together in the marriage state as coming
together in the most sacred of all possible
conjunctions before God.” And to enter
into this union without pure and strong
affection, is an injury to the person
married, and, as we said of marriage
by coercion, a degradation of marriage
itself, and a sin against God. (a)

IL That there are important con-
siderations which should regulate the
choice in respect to marriage.

One such consideration is A apa


CHAP. XXXVL


7


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


nr


in the text. The daughters of Zelo-
phehad must marry whom they liked
best; but they were not to marry
any one of another tribe; for if they
did so they would injure their own
tribe by diminishing its Divinely al-
lotted territory. ‘Only to the family
of the tribe of their father shall they
marry.” The inference is a just one,
that while persons are to be free in
their marriage, they are not to be rash
or thoughtless ; they should not over-
look either their own true interests or
the interests of others. (6) In the
marriage choice, due weight should be
given to considerations—

1. As to property. By this we do not
mean that in marriage, money or other
possessions should be a primary consi-
deration, or that persons should not
marry until they are in “ well-to-do”
or easy circumstances. (c) But in
marriage persons should pay due at-
tention to the temporal interests of
themselves and their families, No one
is at liberty to injure by his marriage
the interests of his family or of others.
On this point the teaching of our text
is indisputable.

2. As toconsanguinity. In the Bible
marriage is prohibited between “any
that are near of kin” (Lev. xviii. 1-18),
with the exception of first cousins; and
marriage between them as a rule is not
desirable. (d)

3. As to health, Persons having
within them the seeds of hereditary
disease, should think long and deeply
and unselfishly before they determine
to enter the marriage state. It is an


awful thing for any one to transmit
disease to the next generation in hig
own children.

4. As to suitabihty. This applies to
age, to tastes, to tempers, to station,
to pursuits. In innumerable instances
where there has been no open dis-
agreement, no bitterness or strife,
lives have been impoverished, disap-
pointed, and beclouded by unsuitable
marriages. (e)

5. As to character. The rule for
Christians is expressly laid down b
St. Paul: “She is at liberty to be
married to whom she will; only in
the Lord” (1 Cor. vii. 39). And ex-
positors, both ancient and modern, are
almost universally agreed that the ex-
pression “only in the Lord,” means,
“within the limits of Christian con-
nexion. .. . let her marry a Christian”
(Alford). And Barnes ; “ That is, only
to one who is a Christian ; with a proper
sense of her obligations to Christ, and so
as to promote His glory.” Many and
weighty reasons may be adduced to en-
force this. We mention only two—(1) In
marriages in which this rule is violated,
the deepest and holiest aspects of the
relationship are unrealised ; because in
such unions there can be no mutual
sympathy on those subjects which are
most important and most precious to
the heart of the Christian. (2) Such
unions involve the most serious peril
to the Christian character. (f)

Consider well the ancient inquiry,
“Can two walk together, except they
be agreed?” And let Christians “ mar
to whom they will; only in the Lord.”


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(@) How thoroughly unprincipled are fre-
nently the inducements to this connexion. I
enounce every marriage a8 unprincipled that

is not based on mutual esteem and love—
every marriage that is not a bond-fide union of
hesrts. When such a connection is entered
into for the sake of external symmetry and
beauty merely, the selection beirg made solely
by the eye, which sees no more, and looks for
no more, than the well-proportioned form or
“the blooming tincture of the skin,” without
regard to the qualities of the mind and heart,
620


“the spirit of the union” is, in such cases, a
false fire, without the hallowed purity and
warmth of genuine heart love : and itis many
a chance to one that it speedily cools down
even to extinction, leaving only the cold,
heartless, lifeless form, without a spark of the
living and glowing fire—the spirit, the soul, of
connubial love and joy. What, indeed, could be
left remaining of that which never had any
real existence ? And money ! money ! money !


what shall I say of that vilest of degradations -


and abuses, by which the most sacred, inti-


is


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.  ouaP, XXXVI.





mate, tender, and indissoluble of earth’s rela-
tions, one which ought to be cemented and
secured by the very finest and most delicate
sensibilities and most inviolably honourable
seutiments and feelings of the heart, isreduced
to a base and sordid summing up of cash
columns and bank interest, or a problem in
land measuring and farm stock. ‘The love
of money” (not money, observe, but the love
of money) is said, by the highest authority, to
be “the root of all evil”; and of the many
evils that have sprung from this productive
root, the one I am now noticing is assuredly
none of the least. A money marriage is a
marriage in form only ; recognised indeed in
human courts, but hardly owned as legitimate
in the court of heayen. It is a mere mercan-
tile bargain, a trading co-partnery, a union of
purses (and hardly even that, for purses are
Kept with great jealousy where money is the
object, and that object is to get a purse
rather than to give one—the eager and covet-
ous aspirant having often none to give), and
not at alla union of affections. Now, if men
and women will be thus unprincipled, as well
as foolish, in forming the connection, is it
wonderful that they should find but little
happiness in it? Wouald not the greater won-
der be that they found any at all ?—Ralph
Wardlaw, D.D.

(6) With what hasty, light, foolish incon-
sideration do men and women jump at random
into a connection that is to last for life, and of
necessity most intimately and most unceas-
ingly io affect the happiness of all their future
days. How often is this done as if it were a
mere holiday frolic, which could be broken off
at will, a8 soon as they get tired of it! They
hope they are to be happy. They have no
doubt of it. But the reason of their having
no doubt is their never having bestowed a
single reflection on the grounds that exist for
the hope. Had they done so, they might have
found them much more scanty than those for
fear. But it isa wedding, and that is enough.
They have got married. The charm is in the
word. As to congeniality of sentiment, and
feeling, and desires, and habits, and pursuits,
with all else that comes amongst the likeli-
hoods of social harmony and happiness, auch
things have never entered into the calculation.
Indeed there has been nothing of calculation
or forethought in the matter. And is it to be
wondered at, then, that they who thus wed in
haste should repent at leisure ?—Jbsd.

(ec) I do not believe any man was ever hap-
pier than when, having married early (and
early marriages are usually virtuous mar-
riages), and married for love, he and his com-
panion went down into life together, and every
day wasa day of engineering to fit their means
to their necessities, in their single slenderly
furnished room, where they conferred together
how to put scrap with scrap, and eke out
pittance with pittance, and everything was
ealculated by reas How often, in later
life, when people become rich, do the husband


and wife look at each other and say, “ After
all, my dear, we never shall be happier than
when we first started out together.” Thank
God, a man does not need to be very rich to
be very happy, only so that he has a treasure
in himself. A loving heart, a genuine sym-
pathy, @ pure, unadulterated taste, a life that
1s not scorched by dissipation or wasted by
untimely hours, a good sound body, and a
clear conscience—these things ought to make
a man happy.—H. W. Beecher.

(d) The use of such expressions (as, “ near
of kin,” Heb. “flesh of his flesh,” Lev. xviii,
6), undoubtedly contains an appeal to the
horror naturals, or that repugnance with
which man instinctively shrinks from matri-
monial union with one with whom he is con-
nected by the closest ties both of blood and of
family affection. On this subject we need say
no more than that there is a difference in kind
between the affection that binds the members
of a family together, and that which lies at
the bottom of the matrimonial bond, and that
the amalgamation of these affections cannot
take place without a serious shock to one or
the other of the two; hence the desirability
of drawing a distinct line between the pro-
vinces of each, by stating definitely where the
matrimonial affection may legitimately take
root.— W. L. Bevan, M.A., in Bibl. Dict.

(e) In this great whirligig of the world,
there is nothing stranger than the mating and
mismating of men and women. There is no
question that is more insoluble, and more
often asked, than this, “ What on earth ever
tempted that woman to marry that man ?”
You cannot answer it, I cannot, and she can-
not. There is but one other question like it,
and that is, “ What on earth tempted that man
to marry such a.woman?” He cannot tell,
and she cannot, and nobody can. §o it is, and
80 it will be, all the time, here and there, and
everywhere. And, whilethere are some who,
disappointed, rebound and break away into
immoralities, or into an indifference which is
an immorality in the realm of love, there are
others of a greater soul, who give their whole
life to fidelities in their relation, They know
that they do not love. They know that there
is that in them which is capable of develop-
ment, but which they have never known.
There are prophecies in themselves, which
they do not want to awaken, of what their
soul is capable of. If they read a book where
the heroism of love is described, they shut the
book, and tears flow from their eyes, and they
say, “Oh! what might have been.” But that
is not safe, and they banish it, and go on in
the usual way. Tarly and late they are faith-
ful—H. W. Beecher,

(7) I need not say that much of the happi-
ness of human life depends upon the marriage
unions which are formed. It is one thing to
view the subject of marriage in the light of
passion or convenience, and another to regard
it as an institution by which human life may
be developed and trained to the highest uses


621


CHAP, XXXVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


SN,


and enjoyments. I donot hesitate to lay down
the broad principle that where there is incon-
gruity of religious conviction between man
and woman, happiness of the deepest and
purest kind is eutirely out of the question.
This principle is impartial in its application,
having equal reference to the woman as to the
man, and to the man as to the woman. Take
the case of a young woman who has deep
religious convictions and sympathies; she has
been trained under religious influences, her
habits have been identified with the sanctuary
from very early life: she has taught in the
school, she has served in connection with many
agencies of the Church, and altogether her
name has become honourably associated with
benevolent operations; she is sought in mar-
riage by a young man who has no religions
sonvictions or sympathies, who, in fact, is
worldly-minded, grovelling, earthly; he may,
indeed, be a man of education, literary refine-
ment, of good social position, of captivating
address; nay, more—I will go further, and
say, he may be a man against whom society is
unable justly to point the finger of reproach,
Wherever he is known he is respected for
many social exceilencies, Viewed in a worldly
sense, the young man may be pronounced an
eligible candidate for the lady’s hand, yet, in
the presence of such conditions, I have dis


Man’s Neep or Moran Directions,


tinctly to give it as my opinion that happiness
of the highest kind is impossible in such a
connection. There must, on the woman's
part, be more or less of sacrifice of the zon-
victions and sympathies which have dis-
tinguished her whole life. Her religions
emphasis will be modified; more or less of a
chill will subdue her Christian zeal; her works
of benevolence will be in some degree im-
paired ; there may not be any great outward
difference in her manner, but her soul must
have felt the desolation of an impoverishing
influence.

We know the ordinary excuse that is made
when the Christian marries one who has no
devotional sympathies: the generous, hopeful,
self-sacrificing woman openly avows her belief
that in a very little time she will be able to
bring her intended husband toa right decision;
she knows (poor’creature!) that there is some
thing good in him; she has heard (O mocking
ear!) him say words which she construed
into a noble intention on his part ; she is sure
all will be right by and by ; a little patience,
a little humouring, and a little instruction—
then all will be right! This is the dream of
her love, the inspiration of her ill-directed
hope. Don’t account me cruel when I de
nounce it as an imposition—a deceit—a lie.—
Joseph Parker, DD,


AND Gop’s Communications To Man.


(Verse 13.)


This verse refers to all the laws
which were given in the plains of Moab
(chap. xxv.—xxxvi.), and concludes the
record of that legislation in the same
way as the record of the legislation at
Sinai was concluded (Lev. xxvi. 46;
xxvii, 34). The text suggests—

I, Man's need of moral direction.

It is here implied that man requires
“commandments and judgments” from
the Lord. He needs moral guidance.

1 Conscience ts not a reliable guide.
Conscience has been deteriorated by
sin. It sometimes slumbers, as in the
case of David after his great crimes
(2 Sam. xii. 1-6). It sometimes leads
astray, as in the case of Saul the perse-
cutor (Acts xxvi. 9). “It is a safe
guide only when it is directed by the
commandment of the Lord.” (a)

2. The light of nature is not an ade-
quate and reliable guide. It seems to
us that many persons ascribe to the

622


light of nature what unassisted human
reason would never have discovered,
had it not been previously revealed in
the Scriptures. (0)

But taking “natural religion to
signify that religion which men dis-
cover in the sole exercise of their
natural faculties, without higher assist-
ance,” we pronounce it an inadequate
moral and spiritual guide for man.
There are great obligations which the
light of nature does not reveal; €9.,
that of worship to God, and that of
universal benevolence to man. Human
nature has deep cravings to which
natural religion offers no response. We
cry out for forgiveness of sin; but
natural religion can afford no satisfuc-
tion to our anxious hearts. Over the
graves of our beloved dead we ask
earnestly and importunately, “If a
man die sball he live again$” but
nature is silent as those graves, The


—


‘


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS.


CHAP. XXXVI.





state of religious knowledge amongst
even the most distinguished minds,
who had not been blessea with a spiri-
tual and Divine revelation, affords
conclusive evidence of the inadequacy
of natural religion for man’s moral and
spiritual guidance. (c)

II. Man's need of special direction
when entering upon new enterprises
and experiences.

The commandments and judgments
referred to in the text were given to
“the children of Israel in the plains of
Moab by Jordan near Jericho.” They
were about to set forward to take
possession of the Promised Land; and
these commandments and judgments
were for their guidance and control in
the novel scenes and engagements to
which they were advancing. And as
we go forward into untrodden ways
and new undertakings, we need direc-
tions from Heaven. We may obtain
such directions by studying the re-
vealed will cf God ; by seeking for them
at the throne of grace ; and by carefully


observing the indications of Divine
providence. (d)

III, God’s communications to man.

The Lord met Israel’s need of gui-
dance and control by His gracious
communications.

Notice—

1, Their nature. “Commandments
and judgments.” This implies His
supreme authority. He has a right to
command men, This right rests upon,
—(1) His relations to man. He is our
creator, &c. {e). (2) His personal
character. He is infinitely righteous
and wise and kind. He is supreme in
authority because He is supreme in ex-
cellence.

2. Their method. “The Lord com-
manded by the hand of Moses.” He
makes known His will to man through
man, “ Holy men of God spake as they
were moved by the Holy Ghost.”

Since God has graciously revealed
His will for our guidance, it is both
our obligation and advantage to follow
it fully and at all times,


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) Conscience, as an expression of the law
or will and mind of God, is not now to be im-
plicitly depended on. It is not infallible.
What was true to its office in Eden, has been
deranged and shattered by the Fall, and now
lies, as I have seen a sun-dial in the neglected
garden of an old desolate ruin, thrown from
its pedestal, prostrate on the ground, and
covered by tall rank weeds. So far from being
since that fatal event an infallible directory of
duty, conscience has often lent its sanction to
the grossest errors,and prompted tothe greatest
crimes. Did not Saul of Tarsus, for instance,
hale men and women t» prison ; compel them
to blaspheme; end imbrec hie hands in saintly
blood, while conscience approved the deed—he
judging the while that he did God service ?

hat wild and profane imaginations has it
accepted as the oracles of God! and as if
fiends had taken possession of a God-deserted
shrine, have not the foulest crimes, as well as
the most shocking cruelties, been perpetrated
in its name? Read the “Book of Martyrs,”
read the sufferings of our own forefathers, and
under the cowl of a shaven monk, or the
trappings of a haughty churchman, you shall
see conscience persecuting the saints of God,
and dragging even tender women and chfldren
Bike bicoky senittld onthe burning stake.


With eyes swimming in tears, or flashing fire,
we close the painful record, to apply to Con-
science the words addressed to Liberty by the
French heroine, when passing its statue, she
rose in the cart that bore her to the guillotine,
and throwing up her arms, exclaimed, “ O
Liberty, what crimes have been done in thy
name!” And what crimes in thine, O Con-
science! deeds from which even humanity
shrinks ; against which religion lifts her loudest
protest ; and which furnish the best explana-
tion of these awful words, “ If the light that is
in you be darkness, how great is that dark-
ness!”

So far as doctrines and duties are concerned,
not conscience, but the revealed Word of God,
is our one only sure and safe directory.—Thos.
Guthrie, DD.

(6) When truths are once known to us,
though by tradition, we are apt to be favour-
able to our own parts, and ascribe to our own
undersianding the discovery of what, in reality.
we borrowed from others; or, at least, finding
we can prove what at first we learned from
others, we are forward to conclude it an ob-
vious truth which, if we had sought, we could
not have missed. Nothing seems hard to our
understandings that is once known; and be-
cause what we see we see with i ie eyes,


CHAP. XXXVI,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NUMBERS,


A SY


we are apt to overlook or forget the help we
had from others who showed it to us, and first
made us see it, as if we were not at all beholden
to them for those truths they opened the way
to, and ledusinto, For knowledge being only
of truths that are perceived to be so, we are
favourable enough to our own faculties to con-
clude that they, of their own strength, would
have attained those discoveries without any
foreign assistance; and that we know those
truths by the strength and native light of our
own minds, as they did from whom we received
them by theirs; only they had the luck to
be before us. Thus the whole stock of human
knowledge is claimed by every one as his pri-
vate possession as soon as he, profiting by
cther’s discoveries, has got it into his own
mind; and so it is; but not properly by his
own single industry, nor of his own acquisi-
tion. He studies, it is true, and takes pains to
make a progress in what others have delivered ;
but their pains were of another sort who first
brought those truths to light which he after-
wards derives from them. He that travels the
roads now, applauds his own strength and
legs, that have carried him go far in such a
scantling of time, and ascribes all to his own
vigour, little considering how much he owes to
their pains who cleared the wood, drained the
bogs, built the bridges, and made the ways
passable, without which he might have toiled
much with little progress. A great many
things which we have been bred up in the be-
hef of from our cradles, and are now grown
familiar and, as it were, natural to us, under
the Gospel, we take for unquestionable, obvious
truths, and easily demonstrable, without con-
sidering how long we might have been in doubt
or ignorance of them had Revelation been
silent. And many others are beholden to
Revelation who do not acknowledge it. It is
no diminishing to Revelation that reason gives
its suffrage, too, to the truths Revelation has
discovered ; but it is our mistake to think that,
because reason confirms them to us, we had
the first certain knuwledge of them from thence,
and in that clear evidence we now possess
them.—John Locke,

(¢) They who speak of the sufficiency of
human reason in matters of morals and religion,
owe all their best views to that fountain of in-
spiration from which they so criminally turn
aside. For how otherwise is ir, that those
fundamental principles in morals and religion


which modera philosophers have exhibited as


demonstrable by the unassisted powers of the
human mind, were either held doubtfully, or
connected with some manifest absurdity, or
utterly denied, by the wisest moral teachers
among the Gentiles, who lived before the
Christian revelation was given? They had
the same works of God to behold, and the
same course of providence to reason from; to
neither of which were they inattentive. They
had intellectual endowments, which have been
the admiration of all subsequent ages; and
their reason was rendered acute and discrimi-
native by the discipline of mathematical and
dialectic science. They had everything which
the moderns have, except the Bible; and yet
on points which have been generally settled,
among the moral philosophers of our own age,
as fundamental to natural religion, they have
tu just views, and no settled conviction. “The
various apprehensions of wise men,” says
Cicero, “ will justify the doubtings and de-
murs of sceptics; and it will then be sufficient
to blame them when others agree, or any one
has found ont the truth. We say not, that
nothing is true; but that some false things
are annexed to all that is true, and that with
so much likeness, that there is no certain note
of judging what is true, or assenting to it.
We deny not that something may be true; but
we deny that it can be perceived so to be; for
what have we certain concerning good and
evil? Nor for this are we to be blamed, but
nature, which has hidden the truth in the deep.”

On this subject Dr. Samuel Clark, though
so great an advocate of natural religion, con-
cedes that, “of the philosophers, some argued
themselves out of the belief of the very being
of a God; some by ascribing all things to
chance, others to absolute fatality, equally sub-
verted all true notions of religion, and made
the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead,
and a future judgment, needless and im-
possible. Some professed open immorality;
others, by subtle distinction, patronised par-
ticular vices, The better sort of them, who
were most celebrated, discoursed with the
greatest reason, yet with much uncertainty
and doubtfulness, concerning things of the
highest importance,—the providence of God
in governing the world; the immortality of
the soul; anda future judgment.”’—Rickard
Watson.

(d) For notes and illustrations on this point,
sce pp. 152-154, 164,

(¢) This point is illustrated oa pp, 88, 89,


LIST OF SUBJECTS


pacy

Aanox and his sons: Parente andchildren 45
i An incidental illustration of the
exalted personal character and

Divine mission of Moses _ ..... 45
ii. An intimation that the duties of
the ministers of religion demand
for their faithful discharge their


entire consecration thereto ..... 45
iii. An example of wicked sons des-
cending from a godly parent aw 45


iv, An example of the widest differ-
ence of character and destiny in
children of the same parents a «46

Aaron’s rod, an illustration of the true
Christian ministry (See Ministry) 327
Aaron staying the plague... =... au. 823

i. The willingness of Aaron to intercede 323

ii. The nature of Aaron’s intercession 323

iii, The success of Aaron’s intercession 322

Aaron, the death of (See Darn) _..... 878
Aaron, the Divine plan for vindicating
the high priesthood of, and its moral
teaching (See VINDICATING) ~. 825
Access to God, man’s, and God’s word to i
12


fe ee ee —
Acknowledgment of an extraordinary

favour, a noble (See Favour) wee 545
Affliction: its trials and consolations _..... 503
Aggravated rebellion of the people, the,

&c. (See REBELLION)


Aims at perfection Se ay ies
Alarm, needless... pat OY ipa — 421
i, this alarm was great ~ ~- 421
ii. seemed to be justified Ree Ms 421


iii. led to the formation of an alliance
t Israel od <= soeee 1421


AV WHS, MECORICHS,. . \ierakh Wax» lisiow 422
Altar, the covering of the, and its teach-
ings (See Coverine) heii S wate 814


Altar, the offerings for dedicating the, and
their moral suggestions (See OrrurR-
INGS) u ST ra be

Amalek, Israel ARAL. 4 ox: . 588

i. the Christian’s example =. . 588
ii. the Christian’s encouragement _ ..... 588
iii. the Christian’s prospect. .... we 588

Ambition faithfully rebuked, wicked .. 293

i. the greatness of the privileges con-
ferred upon the Levites __ ....

fi. the unrighteousness of the ambition
cherished by them wn, mm wee 294


: eeea
fii. the heinousness of the rebeliion in
which they enguged .... 294
Answer of God to the appeals of | men, the 196
i, His answer to the appeal of His much-


tried servant .. wwe 196

ii. His answer to the appeal of His per-
verse people .... 197
1, Recognises the sinful character of
Bho APCs aa Wasson et oteseg Miers 197
2. Demands preparation “for the


granting of their appeal .. wn 19

8. Promises the abundant bestowment

of that which they had so sinfully

desired s.sehs i. Ailes wwe 197
Answer of the Lord. to the. intercession of

Moses, the 15 wesea dass meer Li y4


i, Pardon in answer to prayer... .. 257
ii. Punishment for aggravated sing ... 257
iii, Reward for eminent service wn 258
iv. Judgment for cowardice — wwe 258


Antidote, a deadly plague and a Divine


(See PLacun) . 894
Antidote, the unbelief of { good m men and
its Divine (See UNBELIEF) 199
Apology, Balak’s anger and Balaam’s (Bee
Bawak) satay he cust Peteew isl cag h08.
Apostasy ~ 434
i, Balaam n apostatized through ¥ worldli-
(eT Nea Seer sense os woe 435
ii. progressively as wwe 435
iii, despite the greatest ; obstacles 435
iv. His apostasy was not only sad but
Label ys) | acon) 4 lesesa, J aes, eaves
Appeals of men, the answer of God to the
(See ANSWER) ... 196
Application of an ancient incident, the
modern


i. The possession mn of the greatest gifts
does not exempt men from the lia-
bility to meanness and sin sass 217

ii, The most eminent servants of God
are not exempt from the pepponcties ty


OE ON Dy Plat, Ae pois 5 bisa
iii, Our greatest t trials sometimes arise
from most unlikely quarters wwe 218


iv. The Lord takes cognisance of the
reproaches which are cast upon His
BCEVAM IME Uses Peters. > sce hi geras 218

y. The servants of the Lord do well
in bearing patiently the reproaches
which are cast upon them .. =. 218


fi. INDEX.





PAGE
Army of Israel, the first, an illustration
of the Church militant =... w= 17


L The necessity of this army .. ral ied
ti. The authority for organising gee lyf
iii. The composition of it... mo 1S
iv, The conquering spirit of it sap 8


Arrangements for currying out the pro-
osal of the Reubenites and Gadites 560
he arrangements of Moses for carry-
Mine out the agreement into which he
had entered with the Reubcnites and
Gaditese) Mise sean tae aw. 560
ii. The renewal of their promise _ ..... 561
iii. The inheritance of the half-tribe of


Manasseh pote ees 4s eae .. 561
iv. The alteration of the names of places 561
Aspects of honour (See Honour) a. 80
Aspects of human pilgrimage (See Pr-
GRIMAGE) (O23. TS ee ers 164
Aspects of the Christian Ministry (See
MINISTRY) .. 63
Atonement, the great day “off its moral
suggestions (See Dar) on a. 526
Audacity in wickedness ..... 297
i. Defiance of the authority of the ruler
appointed by God nn, sane neem 297


ii, Reviling the ruler appointed by God 297

iii. The solemn appeal to God which
this conduct called forth from the
ruler which He had appointed 898


Bazaam and Balak, the meeting of (See


MEBRTING) ng ue 441
Balaam and Balak, the parting of (See
PARTING) 3) Pe We at eat teas 484


Balaam and his ass; Divine checks on
man’s downward course (SeeCHECKS) 436
Balaam and his ass; a lesson on obstruc-


tive providences sea ae we 439

i. The lessons it taught Balaam . 4389

ii. Lessons to us... sean) Mees 440
Balaam, Balak’s first application to: man

and the supernatural... ©. ssw 423

i. Men seeking su; ernatural help __..... 423


ii. Man conscious of supernatural
powers and of subjection to Divine


authority in the use of them wwe 424
iii. Man receiving a supernatural visita-
LOM Marat hence Anes wwe 424
iv. Man dealing unfaithfully ‘with a
Divine communication oan wee 425
v. Men dealing unfaithfully as messen-
fie nthe otitis. MeeSroailcsn yy "ap hcnt 425
Balaam, Balak’s second application to:
the decrease of resistance to evil _.... 432
i, The repetition of the request of Balak
FOUDAIGATIN cess tance Tae Mian 432
ii, The repetition of guilty delay by
alanmuey Vise SS. hol 432
iii. The repetition of the Divine visit to
Balaam) Seg) 6 ut we 433


iv. The setting out of Balaam.... woe 483
Balaam ee his irae history of—
Nol = 429
{, How the career and fortunes of the
Tsraclites were made known in those
=. 4239


el EP ICE A A SI I TT SD


PAGs

ii, The needless fear of the Moabites..... 429

iii. A word or two about Balaam- .... 429
Balaam au his prophecies, history of—

INGooUM eet ase saard ww. 430

i, The aoe false step Balaam took .. 431

ii. The warning Balaam received .. 431

iii, The refusal God gave tohim .. 431

Balaam, history of, No. III. <n. © eee

Balaam, the counsel Olea a. 543
Balaam, the sacrifice of Balak and (See


Sacriricy) — = <= =. 446
Balaam’s ass icet ww 440
i. The historic character of the 1 miracle 440
ii: The miracle itself 2. ex. oe 440
iii, The object of the miracle .. ww. 440


Bulaam’s declaration of Israel’s security
(See SECURITY) wee 465
Balaam’s final parables : national revolu-
tions (See REVOLUTIONS). ..... wwe 480
Balaam’s first parable : the blessedness of
the people of God (See bLEssEp-
NEAS) i. OES Src eee ae
Balaam’s fourth parable: the Star and
Sceptre of Israel (See Stan) .... 476
Balaam’s second parable : the constituents
and the irreversibleness of the
blessedness of Israel (See Consti-


TUENTS) cad WSS ee 458
Balaam’s third parable : the glory of the
people of God (See Grory) ..... wwe 469
Balak’s anger and Balasm’s apology ... 473
i. The anger of Balak ..... — wwe, 478
ii, The apology of Balaam  _. .. 473


iii. The lessons to be deduced..... wee 474
Battle between Amalek and Israel, the .... 585
An illustration —
i. of the means and methods by which
God effects His purposes _.....
ii. of the work and warfare of the good
man j 757 Ren eee .. 58
iii. of the work and warfare of the
Church et OST
Battle of Edrei, the, an illustration of the
Christian confliet (See Conrurcr) 415
Benefit of reverses, the (See Reverses) 892
Bereavement, the surrows of...
i. A great and good man had been re-
moved ¢2) 4240" ee wn! | eet OOS
ii. while toiling for their welfare; ..... 885
iii. when apparently his services could


hardly be spared. _..... 4 . 385
iv. In his removal many had parted
fromatrue friend ..  .... .. 886
Blessedness of the people of God, the ;
Balaam’s first parable oes wn 448


i, is beyond the power of their enemies 449
ii. consists in separation from the an


godl Yoam | inant Les Reape 449
iii. consists in their vast numbers... 449
iv. consists of righteousness of charac-

ter. “26205 ee con wen 450
y. is desired by the ungodly ws wwe 450


Blessedness of the people of God, the .... 472
In proof of this appeal to—
i. the testimony of men of this world; 478 —
ii. the nature of the blessings of reli-
gion}. 23. ae) Se eee


~~ 385 .


INDEX. fil,





PAGH

ifi. the experience of men;  ... 473

iv. the design of Divine dispensations 473
Blessing of God, the, and the acknowledg-

ment which it demands a woe £66

i. the Source of effectual blessing __..... 466
ii. the time from which His interposi-

tion is remarked De, ipiine sae 466

iii. the acknowledgment it demands ..... 466
Blessing, the preacher’s; or the happy


new year es a = ~~ 106
Blessing, the priestly  — ese we, LOS
i, The Divine direction — w= 103
ii. The Divine benediction eeLOS
i its significant form sas w- 103
2. its Divine fulness a — 104
fii. The Divine ratification .. 105
Budded rod, a type of Christ, the -. 831
Budding of Aaron’s rod, the __..... ~. 830
Burdens of leadership, the (See Leap-
ERSHIP) ore pee wos LOL
Burdens of life, the ee ae 2 OS
i, distributed to all men — 68
ii. distributed variously ss
iii. distributed Divinely Bap ey CH
iv, patiently borne .. W—, — 69


CauamitY and an earnest prayer, a ter-
FID IOUS ie eae ilieon Ney fo) a 899
i. A terrible calamity ; “the just conse-
quence of sin .....
ii, An earnest prayer; 3 the result of
sanctified affliction ....
fii, A mysterious appointment ; the
result of Divine grace sae .. 400
Caleb: A call to inquiry and courage ..... 240
4. The kingdom of heaven challenges


she inquiry of all men 240
fi. Different reports will be brought by
the inquirers .... a AY)


Caleb: the man for the times _... . 260
i. His faithful following of his God —. 260
ii, His favoured portion os ~.. 261


iii. His secret character ps wm 262
(Calf the golden) nae aes .. 590
Calf, lessons from the worship of the — 591
Camp, the .... as aati rant, Gomes oo

Bhe tents — co — ess 29

Mee ONG OlGC cme eas les aw SO

iii, The position aes oo ae ffi)

iv. The standard = 80
Camp of Dan, the : aspects of Divine eer-

vice (See SERVICE) .... 40
Camp of Ephraim, the, and its. ‘sugges
tions ..... 0 enaee me HS

An illustration of —

i. the Divine sovereignty ; ani ee


ii, the sacredness of family ties a Oo
iii. the Divine regard for the weak .... 88
Canaan, the ancient, a type of heaven ..... ” 239
Canaanites, the expulsion of the (See
EEXPULSION) wm 596
Candlestick, the golden, ¢ an emblem of
the Church of God (See Cuurcn)..... 128
Celebration of the goodness of God in
harvest, man’s a 522
The goodness of God to man calls for—
i. religious celebration from man; .—. 522


as2


Paew
fi. confession of man’s sin to God _..... 522
iii, the thanksgiving of man to God ; 3 522
iv. the consecration of man to God; 522
vy. goodness from man to his fellow-
AMAT hye Bosces eae wn 623
Census and its teachings, the. =< Se
i. God’s personal interest in each W 16
ii. His faithfulness to His word oe 6
ili. His power to keep His word corse aly
Certainty that sin will find us out, the .... 556
i. In what manner we have sinned
against the Lord ass
ii, What assurance we have that our
Sin: will’ find us0ut (0) cs fun 556
Checks on man’s downward course, Di-
vine; Balaam and his ass ..... a 436
These checks are—
i. sometimes in operation when un-


. 556


_ Perceived by man; — .. .. 436
NUMETOUB; ~~ ome we 436

iii, of various kinds; — pen ea nee: 3.0)
iy. graduated in force; = a CSI"
vy. limited in their effects OES nt 437
Cherubim and the mercy-seat, the ww, 125


i The relation betwixt law and grace 125

ii. The relation betwixt the dispensa-
tion of grace to man, and the
heavenly world

iii. The presence of God crowning the


Whole) Dec ahessielience es niece 126
Christ, the brazen serpent | a type “of Jesus
(See: SERPENT)) | co. spuec in can 401
Christ, the red heifer an analogue of the
(See FEL TR EE) Dg i cies ieee mesh 364
Christ, the rock at Kadesh an emblem of
(See Rock) .... we 870


Christ the star spoken of by Balaam ... 479
i, The introduction to the prophecy .... 479
ii. The prophecy itself..... ns . 479

Christ’s death a proof of His Divinity .. . 308

Church and its enemies, the _.... 178
i, The Church has had enemies in

every age soy Nf
i The enemies of the Church are con-
sidered the enemies of God ..... ... 178
iii. When God rises up to judgment
the destruction of His enemies is
easy, terrible, and complete... —.... 178
iv. The constant abode of God with
His Charch is an object of their su-
preme desire .. wu. 179
Church militant, the first army of Israel
an illustration of the (See ARmyY).... 17
Church of God, the golden candlestick,
an emblem of the __.... se
i, Its preciousness and sacredness _.... 128
ii, Its light Bh eae ces 129
iii. Its ministers and their function ... 129
iv. Its function... «.. 129
Church, the stability of the, and the se-
curity of believers a. ue saen 468
Church work and workers—the dedication
OL, the, WOVE as see, sete
L The offices of the Church are institu-
ted by God _.....
fi. There are different ranks in these


al


iv. INDEX.





PACs


fii. The lowliest labour in the service
of God is sacred and blessed a. 48

iy. God appoints the persons to the
various offices in His Church _..... 49
v. Intrusion into sacred places and
duties awakens the displeasure of the
Lord aim en an ee 49
appointment of ee eae Bee? 607

Cities of refuge, the, an illustration of the


salvation of JesusChrist .. ... 611
ieAvereat peril san een Som ae OLD
ii, A gracious provision eee OLA
iii An urgent obligation ~.. 612


Cities of refuge, the, as legislative enact-
ments aud as religious institutions... 614
City of refuge, the security of those who


have fled to the as ge ww. 616
i, Our natural state is one of eminent
danger... (ae 616


ii, Nothing can deliver us from this
danger but a sealous and timely


flightisteosae™ NEE ERATED: 616

iii. There ia a place of safety to which
we can flee _..... re = -. 616

iv. Having once entered this place we
must abide there... fee 617
Claims of God, the supreme . .... 542
i. illustrated; — ‘wins =e se OLE
ii, enforced = ay Pie w. 848

Claims, the completeness of God’s, and
the dignity of His service ... —..... 59
i, The completeness of Hisclaims _..... 60
ii, The dignity of His service... _..... 61
Claims upon man’s service, God's ie 180
i. Are incontestable _ ..... healing | 8) pokcsumal 16

ti, There is a correspondence between
His gifts and claims .... ie eae ih

fii, His arrangements are ever marked
by infinite wisdom and kindness .. 51
Cloud tarrying, the, pte cond ww 155
i. A word of description ae LOD
ii. A word of exhortation . 155
iii. A word of caution .... etal wwe 156

“Come thou with us, and we will do thee
BOOK cea oe) can 171


i. God’s privileges and gifts are never

intended to be exclusive .. Sake

ii, The invitation, “ Come with us” .... 178

1, To the house of God won LOS

2. To the word of truth  ..., =- 173

8. To the living Saviour... melts

4, To our Father’s home .... .... 178
Common-place, the distinguished rising

out of the (See DisTineurIsHEp) ..... 499
Common-place, the interesting hidden in

the .. oy = nos wee 497

i, The common-place pede fai 497

ii, The interesting in the common-place 497

iii. The importance of the common-place 498
Communications to man, man’s need of

moral directions, and God’s ~. 622

i. Man’s need of moral directions _..... 622
ii, Man’s need of special directions
when entering upon new enterprises

and experiences... see eo 623

iii. God’s communications to man _.... 623


PAG)
Communion with God in the mount,
59:


Mowes’a”) 0° (See ke ag
i. The cause of the radiance on the face
of Moses can omen ow. 592


ii. The nature of the radiance... a. 598
li. The conduct of Moses when he des-

cended from the mount nae Oo Vea 593
Companionships, God’s interest in man’s
(See Inrur3Esr) Se eae es
Completenesz of God’s claims, the, and
the dignity of His service (see


Craims) ae as ae ee 59
Condescension of God, the, and the privi-
leges of man. ..., os sant LD


i. The condescension of God ... — ..., 120
1, The place in which He speaks .... 120
2. The medium through which He
Speaks an) ea. foe oe =. 120
8 The purpose for which He speiks 121

i. The privilegesofman s,s 121
1. We may speak unto God, and .... 121
2. receive communications from Him 121


iii, The consequent duty of man _..... 123
Conflict, an illustration of the Christian,
the battle of Edrei <2 2) 415
i. The Christian has to contend against
a formidable adversary; _..... vee 415
ii. is inspired with the most encouraging
assurance at a 415


iii. shall obtain a complete victory _..... 416
Conflict the condition of attainment, and
suffering the consequence of sin ..... 554
i, A truth tobeconfirmed aw. 554
ii. A warning to be applied — we 555
iii. An application to be made we B55
Consecrated, sin in the, the involuntary
defilement of the Nazarite (See Naza-
RITE) ..... ce. con = anne OF
Consecrated, the sacrifice of the, the
offering of the Nasarite (See Naza-
RITE) ..... = con eee 0 eee
Consecration of the Levites, the, aspects
of acceptable consecration to God .... 131
i. A practical recognition of the neces-


sity of moral purity }..... =| om OE
ii, and of atonement forain —  ., 132
iii. Must be nnreserved..... a) oe
iv. Must be open is = wwe 182
v. Is followed by religious service ..... 133


Consecration to God, acceptable, the vow
of the Nazarite (See Nazarirr) ... 90
Consequences of sin, the mercy of (iod in


relation to the Pore es, |
An example of—
i, the continuance of the consequences

of singum | hoe . O44


ii. the exercise of the Divine mercy in
mitigating the consequences of sin... 84
Constituents and the irreversibleness of
the blessedness of Israel, the, Ba-
laam’s second parable n,n
i. The constituents of this blessednegs 458
1, Their covenant relation with God 458
2. His presence with them .... .... 458
8. His doings for them ee, wwe 458
4, The revelation of His willtothem 458
5. The power He bestows upon them 458


Ne


INDEX. w.


A ST YR Sa RE NS ASE EERE SORTS EX LV RE LR Nee al!


PAG
i. The irreversibleness of this blessed-


ness $59
1, It rests up»a ‘the unctangeableness
(eis LENG, te ERY gh li CS 459
2. It is beyond: the power of their ene-
mies... — . 459
Contentment and obedience. .... 42
i, Contentment with the Divine appoint-
ment ..... 42


ii. Obedience to the Divine commands 48
Co-operation of all in the service of God,
the responsibility of each and the .... 58
i. God has a work for everyone to do,


ard He expecta each one to doit ... 58

ii, He expects all to co-operate in His
service see = aoe
Counsel of Balaam, Gilimy Ay ec et . 543


ep orerine of the Altar. the, and its teach-


i. now futile it is to oppose God _.. B14
ii. God wishes one age to learn from


MNGLhORe Ws Sc es ee wn 815
ili. Sacred things r must be treated rever-
ently ..... Sg ese SNES 2S 815


iv. The sinner ever injures himself _. 315
of the subdued rebels, the .... ww. B31
i, Sinners are prone to pass from one
extreme of evil to the opposite one..... 831
fi, Divine judgments may produce out-
ward submission while the heart re-
mains rebellious; 2. seme see 832
fii. and while the mind entertains most
erroneous nioral opinions ..... woe B32
iv. The most stout-hearted rebels
against God must submit to Him ...... 332
Curiosity, Divine secrets and human (See
BEGETS) oo a ee, (66


Dax, the camp of: aspects of Divine


service (See SERVICE) 40
Day of Atonement, the great; its moral
suggestions Nice BM areeeae tak cesses vitibhecs 526


i, It is our duty to set ‘apart some time
for serious reflection upon our sins... 526
ii, Reflection upon our sins should lead
to humiliation because of them _.... 526
iii, Such humiliation should lead to the
mortification of our carnal appetites 526
iv. True penitence leads to gratitude
and personal consecration to God ..... 527
v. Our penitence, at best, is imperfect,
and needs the merits of the Saviour’s
BLCUUS CO mmm err eres art ES, Sects 527
vi. The sacrifices of the e ceremonial law
were unable to take away sin . 527
Death, a proof of His Divinity, Christ's. oes 308


Death of Aaron, the see pe . 878
i. The death of Aaron. nn mee ” 878
1, As aconsequenceofsin.. . 878
2. By the appointment of God =~... 878

8. Ws introduction to life and to con-
genial society... . 879

iL. The appointment of Aaron’s suc-
CessOr ..... “as . 379
1A kindness to Aaron w= 379


2. A guarantee of the continuance of


PAGB
et deg mourning because of Aaron’s
1. The worth of faithful ministers...
2. The appreciation of blessings when
they are withdrawn .... ioc a» 880
Death of Miriam, the ee
i. Death terminates the most protracted
NEG Pe . 863
ii. Death terminates the most event-
ful life ..... ces
iii. Death terminates the most distin-
guished life... ian
iv. Death, by reason of sin, sometimes
terminates life earlier than it other-
wise would have done ia
vy. Death sometimes terminates life with
suggestions of a life beyond . 364
Death of the righteous, the : . 454
i. A character that we must define... 454
ii, An event that we must illustrate .... 455
iii. A desire that must be regulated ..... 455
Death, the crown of life 2.0 a sas 482
Declaration of judgment because of the
rebellion of Israel, the Divine wane 250
i The Divine view of Israel’s sin _..... 250
x. The Divine judgment for Israel’s sin 251
ii’. The Divine regard for His covenant 251
Decrease of resistance, the : Balak’s second
application to Balaam (See BaLaam) 432
Dedicating the altar, the offerings for


(See OFFERINGS) oases 114
Dedication of the Levites, the—Church
work and workers (See CHURCH) .... 48


Defeat of the people that delight in war,
the overthrow of the Amorites, or the
(See OVERTHROW) we wunn . 411
Defilement of the Nazarite; the involun-
tary, or sin in the consecrated (See
NAZARITE) ... re 4th)
Departure from the house of bondage, the 568
i. succeeded the observance of a signifi-
cant and sacred memorial ; ..... wom 668
ii. was public and triumphant ; ~ 568
iii. took place when their oppressors
were engaged in¢ mournful occupa-
TAO gE ees ee eos ae eaees
iv. had been brought about by the most
awful displays of Divine Judgments 569
Desert, in the: an illustration of the life
of the good in this world... ae a |
i, The natural trials of the desert .. 7
ii. The Divine Presence in the desert 8
iii. The Divine uses of the desert .. 8
Determination of the route, the ..... wn 569
i. The circumstances of the Israelites 570
ii. The dealing of God towards them 570
Diary of travels and its teachings, Moses’s 567
i. God’s continued presence and inter-
est in human life wee 567
fi, God is the one true guide through life 567
iii. A picture of human life... von 56F
“s ees greatest evils of life come from
v. “Trusting in God and following Him
we are sure to possess the promised
inheritance .. pa 6 ges wn 568
Die well, how to 2. 9 meets oem


vi INDEX,





PAGH

Discouragements of pious men, on the .... 397

i, The discouragements of the way ..... 897
ii. Considerations to remove the dis-

couragements ... pak And 398
Distinguished rising out of the common-


place, the _..... = scat nes 400)
i, Distinguished rebels 5 a bene S)
ii. profaners of sacred ordinances; .. 499
iii, leaders and ruler ;_ ow wwe. 499


iv. heroes __..... Sh at wn. 500
Distribution of the Promised Land, rules
for the..... ced oe aes wee 602
These iliustr. *e—
i. The sovereignty of God in bestow-
ing His gifts ..... msi eases mas
fi, The truth that in the arrangements
of God provision is made for all His
creatures shane iM eS a opal 502
Distribution of the Promised Land, the


502


arrangements for the... _..... «-. 604
i, The co-working of the Divine an
the human in the distribution -. 604


ii. The wise arrangements for the per-
formance of man’s duties... «=. 605
Distribution of the spoils of war, the . 543
In this distribution—
i. the claims of all classes were recog-
nised ; ..... ay Pann | ora: wwe 544
fi, the claims of each class were equita-
bly dealt with ; ee oes on
fii. the claims of the Lord were prac-


tically acknowledged ... ot ww 5644
Dividing of the Red Sea, the eee) DLT
i, was miraculous; Retain faster ol loys ae 577


ii. the fact of the miracle is proved by
the present existence of the nation


which was that day born .., w» 578

Doom of the double-hearted, the...  .. 639
Balaam wanted—

i. to serve two masters; — ew. 540

ii. to earn two kinds of wages; ~.. 540


fii. to do two opposite things at the
same time; _..... —_ oan
iv. twokinds of friendship; .. — 540
v. to have two religions. ae ~.. 540
Dough, the offering of the first of the
(See OFFERING) eee wn 274
Duties, allotted  .... aa jew’ mes OT,
Dwelling with His people, God ..... =e) SO
i. God is present with His people .. 80

fi, God is present “in the midst” of
His people .... pa tae eo

fii. God’s presence in the midst of His

peor should exeit a great and
essed influence upon them... . 80


Karta filled with the glory of the Lord,

the (See Grory) _.... ise we, 259
Elim : the Christian Life (See Liurm) —. 582
Enterprise and its disastrous termination,


& presumptuous CA ee Mire
vy cs wm me ews L0G
i, issadlycommon; 2. wo. wa. 206
ii. extremely foolish ; —. meee wn. 206


iii, heinously sinful —. nes 207
Ephraim, the camp of, and its suggestions
(Bee Camryere os ee





— 540 |


CReeeew ser Se fact a ee


PAG

Eshcol — “me —_ omen wee 235
Every man by his owr. standard (See

STANDARD) .... wu. aes eo, Yt
Exclusion from religious ordinances, un-

Willin ey se eee ace won 148


i, The need of porsonal fitness for a
acceptable observance of religious
ordinances _..... ae = om

ii. The unwilling exclusion of men
from religious ordinances... we 144

iii. Enquiry concerning the reason of
such exclusion be ta wwe 144

iv. Exemplary conduct of religious
teachers in answering enquiries .... 144

v. Divine arrangement for the compen-
sation of those who are unwillingly
excluded from religious ordinances 145


Exclusion of the unclean, the ... cose RTD)
i. a sanitary measure; ..... = | oon
ii. a spiritual parable ofsin —. WW 76

1, As a defiling thing = coves add
2, As a deadly thing ee may fH
%. Asaseparating thing w. .. 77
Execution of judgment, the ne woes OL
i. God vindicates the character of His
servants neste — ott ae OL
ii, Divine chreatenings are certain of
fulfilment  ..... a ee ~. 811
iii. Everything in the universe may be
emp!oyed by God as the instrument
of His judgments .. ..... -. S11


iv. The wicked often involve the inno-
cent in the consequences of their sins 311

v. Hardened rebels are prone to ery

out when the judgment of God falls
upon them  ..... os = — 811

vi. The judgmerts of God occasion

alarm amongst men ..... <_ seas

Exemplary invitatiin, an (See Invita-
TION) .... st eet — — 166

Exploration of the Promised Land by the

spies, the, an illustration of human
inquiries into Divinerealms.... __ ..... 288
i. The exploration was thorough; .... 233
ii, led to the discovery of difficulties ; 233
iii, led to the discovery of rich treasures 234
Expulsion of the Canaanites, the ~~ 596


i. The imperative command .. a. 596
ii, The solemn warning Pe [S18
Farruruness of God, the pe = 50f


i. to His threatenings 5 oe wee 507
ii. to His purposes; es Li
ni. to His promises... es won OY)
Fayour, a noble acknowledgment of en
extraordinary... S0' ee wae “45
i, An extraordinary favour received... 54%
Lis re », acknowledged... 545
iii. The acknowledgment accepted _..... 546
Feast of Passover, the, a memorial and @
type (See Passover) ww 189
Feast of Tabernacles, the; its meaning
and lessons case eee en
L A menorial of their emancipation
from Egypt 0.00 un = eet
ii. A memorial of their life in the wil-
@ermess eens


INDEX. vil


ss eeneeeeeemietnatepmemmmeneeeeniitennaidli ima here eh EE


Paé
fii. A thanksgiving for rest and settled
abode in the Promised Land
fv. A thanksgiving for the completed
harvest Sea ee EEE 18, 530


Fidelity of one, the safety of ae , the..... 339
First sacrament of the year, t é (See
SACRAMENT) 00 wae ues ww. 520
Forgiveness, fraud and (See FRavp) ... 81
Forward in the face of difficulties,
going ..... sa, wwe £75
In the Christian life—


L, advancement is devnanded, .. 575
fi. with e full recognition of the ob-
stacles in the way of it; woe O76
iii. obstacles to progress, manfully en-
countered, may be surmounted; .... 576
iv. and contribute to our advance-


ment ; .... =e . 576
y. we are incited onward by many en-
couragements.... nen, — — 576
Fraud and forgiveness — =e =
i. The sin of fraud; .... pan "81
1, assuming many forms; ex, fll
2. awrong doneto God... nade hil
ii. The conditions of its forgiveness —. 81
1, Consciousness of guilt .. 81
2. Confession. Bee es EY
8. Restitntion cm os a YJ
4. Sacrifice — 82


Fringes, the ordinance of the: “Gracious
reminders of Divine commands _.... 287
i, The proneness of man to forget the
commandments of the Lord..... cue 287
fi. The arrangements which God has
made to remind man of His command-
BIER ES) teecers ns Nceses casos, wn ecpesce
fii. The grounds | upon \ which God re-
quires recollection of and obedience
toHiscommands .. wo — 288


Gumpses of the betterland .  ... 282
Glory of the Lord, the earth filled with
the | os oe 209
i. ‘The import of the promise es 259
ii, The reasons we have for believing
it will be realized... “
iii, Our present duty in relation to it....
Glory of the people of God, the: Balaam’ 3


287


” 260


third parable .... ww 469
i. The preparation of the e prophet to de-
clare the Divine will... toes


fi. His declaration of Israel’s glory w. 470
1, Their beautiful appearance .. 470
2. Their prosperous condition ww. 470
8. Their exalted position —. w-. 470


4. Their conquering power... — .... 471
God dwelling with His people (See

DWELLING) 1. oa -. 80
God of the spirits of all flesh, the .. 513
God’s blessing irreversible = wen 462
God’s knowledge of His people (See


KNOWLEDGE) us wen, 14
God’s pardoning grace in the past an ene
couragement ‘to seek for the same in

the present _..... . 256
{, God is as able and willing to ) forgive
new asever He hasbeen — mm





PAGB

ii. Maia ts now, as much as ever he has
been, the object of God’s s compassion 256

ili, God's purpose with regard to man is
now what it ever has been ..... wwe 257

he Aes to man, man’s access to God,
seo MR essth batt eas 124

God, “he faithfulness of (See Farrurcr-
NESS) ee 507
God, the supreme claims of (See ¢ Crarms) 842

God, the veracity of a tk Mat OF


God will bless Hia own ordinances - 108
Good, the resting and the rising of the
(See RESTING) __ ..... 162
Good in the path of duty, the sufferings
of the (See SUFFERINGS) ..... wee 198
Graves of lust, the - ww 212
i. The tendency of Inst to bring men to
untimely graves oe sm 212
ii, Our feelings as we contemplate these
QYAVEB nn. yan


Guardianship of human life, the Divine 608
i. in the institution of the cities of
refuge as a provision that the life of
me sng should not be taken
a 608
ii Pa ‘the laws by which the trial of the
man-slayer was to be conducted; .... 6
iii. in the punishment of the intentional
MAN-SlAVON ie -.8) Melee eth enya, 609
iv. in the punishment of the uninten-
tional man-slayer .. = =. == 609)


Hanp of the Lord, the gloriousright .. 200
Hand, the question concerning the Lord’s
(See QUESTION) ee eee
Healing of the waters of Marah, the (See
MaraH) ahs wee 581
Heaven, the ancieut Canaan a type of ..... 239
Heifer an analogue of the Christ, the red 354


1. In its characteristics .... .. waee BO4
ii, In the treatment to which it was
subjected


iii. a ae purpose for which it was de-
Heifer fecespe the law of thered  .... 852
i, Liability for social evil ww wee 853
ii, The ignominy of death wm a. BBB
iii. Freedom from the consequences of
sin is by application of a prepared
PO TIOU Yk Mistery Bai ceases SN cecal BI Gears 85
iv. To be without fitness for “standing
before God acceptably is inexcusable
and irretrievable __..... zis
Heifer, the ordinance of the red; a para-
ble of the pollution of sin, and the
pine method of cleansing there- Cie
i. The defiling nature ofsin ww 849
ii, The necessity of cleansing from sin 850
iii. The provision for cleansing from sin 850
iv. The application of this provision... 351
Heifer; the xed a. © ess, 0 oe
i, Even the true Israelite is the subject
of daily defilement ...  ....
te A purification has been provided .... a. BOF
. The red heifer sexs forth the daily
anda fordaily sin ..  o- 357


vii,


INDEX.


EY A IT EE A A Na NE RS TE EOE ES ESE A ST RE


PAGE
Heiresses, the law of the marrisgeof (See
MaRRIAGE) 2. ph we 617
High priest standing between the dead
and the living, the ... .... wits, ODL


i, Aaron as the lover of the people ..... 821
i » » great propitiator .... 322
i » » Mterposer ... — 822
iv. »  » saviour eae) Meee

divider at WEIB22


Vv. ” ”
Hints on the law of jealousies .. — 90
Holy singularity divinely honoured _... 262
i, The relation Caleb bore . =». 262
ii. The disposition he possessed ~~ 262


iii, The course he pursued .. ... 262
iv. The recompense he obtained wee 262
Home, pilgrims nearing (See Piterims)..... 419
Honour, aspects of Rae WS 80


i. Honour wisely conferred ; .... eo OL
ii. in relation with duty and responsi-


ULity 5... Sie en, eee ww. 82
iii. as connected with parentai in-
fluence; eons ave eaaer:y |
iv. as related to future greatnes . 82
Honour to Moses, greats: honour to
Ohr ist) cone Soe Maik ae a 228%
Iurorranon of little things, the (See
Littir) wuts pee pat eee
Inquest of the Lord into the sin of Miriam
and Aaron, the a... saa tlc 219
i, The solemn convocation .. ... 219
ii. The splendid vindication .. .... 219


iii. The unanswerable interrogation ..... 220
iv. The Divine anger ...... sates .. 220
Inquiry and courage, Caleb—a call to
(See Canes)... —..... oh ees 240
Institutions, the support of religious (See
SUPPORT) © 32s Ses eerie 118
Intercession of Moses for the doomed
nation, the sam Get MAP ek 258
i. The petition which he presented _..... 258
ii. The pleas by which he urged his
tition . ATS 2 wm 253
. The honour of the Divine name..... 258
2. The Divine character as revealed
to him..... essa Le eae Sas wun 253
8. The truth of the Divine word .... 254
4, The forgiveness already bestowed 254
Intercession of Moses, the answer of the
Lord to the (See ANswER).... wwe 257
Interest in man’s companionships, God’s.. 427
An indication of—
i, the Divine solicitude for the well-


being of man; on sd wwe 427
fi, the importance of our companion-
REPS ae, TP a esol ER teas 427


fii. our responsibility to God for them; 428
iv. the danger of dallying with tempta-
tion .... been eS RA ued 428
Interesting hidden in the commonplace,
the (See ComMONPLAOR) ..... meee eke
Invitation, an exemplary... . «166


L ‘The jGutney ce se ees em LOE
fi. The invitation eee ite ee LOT
fil, The inducements ~. wn ws 167
Irreversible, God’s blessing oe ee 462
Israel and Amalek (See AMaLEx) ww 588


; PAga
Itinerary of Israel from Egypt to the
Promised Land; the..... wis ~~ 565
i. An incentive to gratitude to God ...... 565
ii, An encouragement to obey and trust
Him _..... Gn ee eee ee NDE
iii, A moa‘tor against sin .  o- 566


JEALOUSIES, hints on the law of wos
Jehovah, the unchangeableness of (See
UNCHANGEABLENESS) mn ieee
Joshua and Caleb: a noble effort to
arrest a nation’s rebellion .. wwe 247
Joshua and Caleb—
i, were deeply grieved by reason of the


rebellion; __..... pa ane ne 247
ti. nobly endeavoured to arrest the re-
bellion ; oa ee 247


iii. were in danger by reason of their
effort to arrest the rebellion ; wun 248
iv. rescued from danger by the inter-
position of God Bel) i ee
Joshua and Caleb’s encouraging declara-
tion... ee se
i. A supposition = aw ae 2a
fi. An inference eae ES a 250
Journey of Life, Marah, or aspects uf the 579
i. The privations of the journey _..... 579
ii, The disappointments of the journey 579
fii, The sinsof the journey .  ... 580
iv. The all-sufficient Resource of the
journey a


Judgment, s memorial of (See Mz-
MORIAL) es... om = ww. 813
Judgment of Korah, the =o we 812


Judgment, the execution of (See Exrcu-
MILON) coc F lly occ) yee re a

Judgment, the preparation for (See Prz-
PARATION) .. a on we 805


KaprsH . .. unto Abel-shittim, from 596
Kibroth-Hattaavah: striking illustrations
of solemn truths __..... ae <a
i. The sovereignty of God .. W. 208
ii. The eagerness with which men toil
in the pursuit of temporal and
material good mr a)
iii. The gratification of the desires of
men resulting in their ruin..... w. 208
iv, A sin, which in its first commission
was mercifully passed over, if re-
peated may call forth the judgment
of Godiaw eee


v. The sins and punishments of ove
generation should be remembered as
a warning to future generations ..., 209
Kibroth-Hattaavah: the graves of lust... 209
i, There are perpetual resurrections of
easily-besetting sins... 1. ~» 210
ii. There comes a point in the histo
of the indulgence of besetting sins,
when God ceases to strive with us
and for us against them, and lets
them have their way...  .. «210
fii. The end of that way is a grave . 211
Knowledge of His people, God’s on 145
i, The great truth implied  ..., ala
ii. The practical bearings ot this truth 14





INDEX. dx,


Korah and his company, the base re-
bellion of (See REBELLION) ase
Korah, the judgment of ... 0 nse


291
812


Lanp, glimpses of the better .... wee 282
d, the arrangements for the distribu-
tion of the Promised (See Disrer-
BUTION) Ravin Dinas it ete,

Land by the spies, the exploration of the
Promised (See ExPLoraTion) 233

Land, the Promised Bs a3 we 600

i, Its boundaries were determined by


coy co


ii. Its extent was small _ — wn. 600


iii. Its position was secure .  .... 601
iv. Its soil was fertile — .—  . 601
v. The Israelites failed to take pos-
session of the whole of it assigned
them by God" le 601
Law of the red heifer applied, the (See
Heirer) ake. i aes ~.. 852
Law, the moral _..... ot ee. 7588
i. based its precepts upon the existence
and authority of God ; es es
fi. was a strict and stern, but far from
an unjust or cruel system; ..... 589


fii. was suited to the age and people to
whom it was promulgated;... __..... 589
fv. certain circumstances which tended
to guard, to sanction, to enforce, re-
commend, and to illustrate it, ~~ 589
deadership, the burdens cf me es 190
i. The position of leader of men is a
ingone .... ae coe we 191
ii, ‘Che true leader of men must often
be conscious of his insufficiency .... 191
fii. The ablest leaders of men sometimes
fail under the burdens of their posi-


WOW e a we ee eh OT
Lessons from an ancient warsong . 413
i. The triumphs of warriors —. .. 413
ii. The vanity ofidols... .  ... 418


iii. The discomfiture of conquerors ..... 413
iv. The insecurity of earthly possessions 414
Levites and their service, an illustration
of the Christian ministry (See Mints-
TRY) ©. aoe sess soe eS
Levites, the appointment of cities for the
residence of the mea ae wwe 607
Levites, the consecration of the, or aspects
of acceptable consecration to God
(See ConsecRATION) thes PPO
Levites, the numbering of the : comman
and obedience (See NUMBERING) .... 538


Life, death the crown of ... sume 482
Life of the good in this world, an illus-
tration of the: in the desert (See
DESERT)! is.) as iy ig ns
Life, the apparent insignificance and real
importance of human = ~ 495
i, Its apparent insignificance — . 495
fi. Its real importance any,
Every man has his own—
1. individuality of being and circum-
stances ; ie i pe gee)
2. possibilities wo ee 495


8. influence ; om ined ww 495


4, accountability ; and r=
5. is an object of deep interest to


God ..... OS tases aad ~.. 496
Life, the burdens of (See BurpzNns) .. 68
Life, the Christian: Elim nos 582


i. In the journey of human life the
Lord affords us many kind accom-
modations __...., as oss wwe 582

fi. Refreshing mercies after seasons of
distress are peculiarly sweet...  ... 682

iii, The blessings with which we are
fayoured should be enjoyed...  .... 682

iv. Amidst all our enjoyments we
should not lose sight of our pilgrim-


age state Sacee Seat. oes ww. 582
Life, the Divine guardianship of human
(See GuaRDIANsHIP) as gi, /608


Little things, the importance _ ..... ee ofl
i, The perfection of great things is im-
ssible apart from due attention to
ittle things... ee te ey |
ii, The most important issues sometimes
depend upon slight circumstances .... 71
iii. Life is composed almost entirely of


little things... ah oe, a %2
iv. Character is formed almost entirely
of littles —..... camel ee te
Lust, the graves of (See Kinrotu-Hart-
TAAVAH) on. ee wn 209


= » (See Graves) ... w= 212
Matintrenancez of the Christian ministry,
the Divine provision for the priests
and Levites, an illustration of the... 839
i. The maintenance of the Christian
ministry devolves upon the Christian
Church PS) Hien Mae sy Ms:
fi, Ministers of every grade have a right
to support from the Church...  ~... 840
iii. The ministry should be supported
liberally a me ses ae
iv. All the members of the Church
should contribute to the maintenance
of the ministry ise — ww 840
v. All should contribute prcparapnaly 841
Maintenance of the ministry, the — &
We rest this obligation on—
i. The ground of honesty
ii. The ground of interest .. ... 85
Man and the supernatural: Balak’s first
application to Baalam (See BaaLam) 428
Man, in relation to order, home, and God
(See OrDzER) ..... ee Oa ee tm 28
Man, the spirit and the Sovereign of | ..... 802
i. The grand distinction of human


DAtUTe 0. ae we me ems BD
ii. The supreme Sovereign of human
nature ..... : ae . 808


fii. The inspiring hope of human nature 803
Man, the supreme portion of (See Por-


eases


i, Its sphere 1 mms ee mem
fi. Its aspects 0. same Swiss LES
iii, Its permanence meme we 149


Manna, an illustration of the Divine pro-
vision for the spiritual needs of man 187


i INDEX,


rn


PAGB
{£, Both are of Divine origin — w 188
1 ee o» unmerited gifts i. o- 188
iii, » x» wholesome ae Sa, ists)
hh fo » Pleasant .... oes a. 188
Yo %s oe pmabundante 1) sy) was 89
vi. 5 95 free eee ca piled 189
vii. ,, | ++equire personal appropria-
HON ya ee tay ee wwe 189
Marah ; aspects of the journey of life (See
JOURNEY) on, seal be pete 579
Marah, the healing of the waters of __..... 581


i, An illustration of four bitter things 581
ia rs y the Gospel www 582

Marchson the)! <2, cs ee 174
i. The immense number on the march 174
ii, The bitter opposers of the march..... 174
iii, The victorious Leader of the march 174
iv. The abiding presence of God on the


march .... Pt hos Mee www. 175
Marchi, the he eS ees ie 177
Marriage _..... ae oo a, a 619

1. is 8 Divine institution; ..... ~.. 619


2, the obligations involved in it are


binding and sacred ..... nls a 619

i, Persons should not be coerced in
marriage can ay ww. 619

fi. There are important considerations

which should regulate the choice in
marriage acne feces me ~. 619
1, Astoproperty .. . wm a. 620
2. Astoconsanguinity ..  . 620
3. As to health ec Feet ee 620
4, Asto suitability... ww. 620
5. As to character ... ek wn 620
Marriage of Heiresses, the law for the —.. 617
i. The case stated one Se Sy
ii, The case adjudicated ee Gly,
fii, The adjudication acted upon . 618
Marshalling of the people, the .. .— 25
L Orders 2 | crt acca foes we tesallt 28
ii. Variety A eS ES ES EG
fii. Unity Soo! Pe “at OF re 26
iv. Security ..W ee oe cag HS

Master and His human servants, the
Divine ae So eae Tle 185

i, The necessity of fitness for the
Divine service = Res wwe 135

ii. lhe variety of employment in the
Divine service ns sae teem 136

iii. The care of the Great Master for
His servante Gc 186

Measure of the Divine demands upon
man, the ies : ee | De


Meeting of Balaam and Balak ..... wwe 441
i, The king receives the prophet with
great honour — as teem 441
ii. ‘he king expresses his surprise at
the delay of the prophet in coming
tovbimee ee a ae
iii, The prophet endeavours to mode-
rate the expectations of the king .... 442
iv, The king endeavours by sacrificial
offerings to induce Jehovah to tavour
Disdesign omer ase 442
vy. The king and prophet ascend a
height and cbtain a view of the camp
of Israel wn meme mess, 442


PAGE
Memorial of judgment,a... =. sm». 813
i, Things appropriated to religious uses
should be reverently regarded we 318
ii, The desions and doings of wicked
men are overruled by God for the
accomplishment of His ¢urposes ..... 818
iii, He who sins against God injures
bimeelf * Geen ae eee 813


remembered and heeded _ ..... ww 818
Memories, partial woe, LOZ
Merey of God in relation to the conse-

quences of sin, the (See ConszE-


QUENCES) ..... sii ee see 108:
Mercy-seat. the cherubim and the (See
CHERUBIM) ..... a a we 125
Midian. the vengeance of Jehovah on
(See VENGEANCE) a om —. 586
Ministry, Aaron’s rod an illustration of
the true Christian .. — ..... conse BAT


i. The characteristics of this ministry 327
ii, The origin of this ministry w. 328
iii. The influence of this ministry .. 328
Ministry, aspects of the Christian aa S
i, An arduous service . w=. = 63
ii, A holy warfare os — ear Gs
iii. A sacredcharge  ..... = wwe 64
iv. Demands the exercise of the high-
est faculties 2. cam een

Ministry, the Levites and their service,

an illustration of the Christian min-
istry .... ans a = ee) |

i. The true Christian minister should

manifest some fitness for the work
before he is designated thereto  .. 21
ii. He is called of God to his work .. 21

iii, His work demands his entire de-
votion thereto..... = as Bann =.)

iv. A faithful discharge of his duties is
essential to the well-being of society.. 22

v. Personal holiness is essential to a
faithful discharge of his duties ... 22

Ministry, the maintenance of the (See


MAINTENANCE) ois 1 ee
Miriam and Aaron, the punishment of
(See PUNISHMENT) .. — .... www 222


Miriam and Aaron, the sin of (See Sr),. 215
Miriam smitten with leprosy: transfigura-
tion through transgression 2.0 wa. 226
Miriam, the death of (See Drata) wee BOD
Miriam, the prayer of Moses for (See
PRAYER) ees — mes coon SOE.
Model ordination service, a (See ORDINA-
TION) ..... As, ~ Pe 518
Modern application of an ancient incident,
the (See APPLICATION) nn, san 217
Moral directions, man’s need of, and God’s


communications fo man... evo, 622
Morning and evening sacrifices, the  .. 517
Suggest our daily need of —
i. consecration to God; eS etl
ii. atonement with God; Pee ea (i
iii, prayer to God “ eae wer B17


Moses's diary of travels, and its teachings
(ScenDriny) 5 oe ee wwe 567

Moses for the doomed nation, the iuter-
cession of (See InreRcussion) ... 258


INDEX, x.





PAGE
Moses, the sin of — a cos =. 369
Murmuring, base .. wee 265


i, Murmuring without any catse 3 wee 265
ii. against the Best Being; wee 206
iii. of long continuance ; = 266


iv. known to God ;..... a -. 266
v. punished by God — =~ wwe 266
Names, nothing but = wwe 594


i. The tendeat of sin to deprive life
of any worthy significance .... nO
ii. The tendency of sin to retard progress 594
iii, The importance of remembering the
losses which sin causes us .... 0... 595
iv. The mutability of earthly things... 595
vy. The unsettled character of human
_ life upon earth eo = wae 595
Nazarite, the 102
i. No juice of grape or “produce of the
vine may touch his lips a ome 102
ii. No razor approaches his hair 2a 102
iii. He must avoid all contact with death 102
Nazarite, the involuntary defilement of


the, er sin in the consecrated __..... 95
The involuntary sins of good men—
i. defile and dishonour them ; wane, GOD
ii. require atonement from them ; Se 80
iii, involve loss to them ; sees 96
iv. will be followed by new efforts by
them ... 06
Nazarite, the offering of the, or the sacri-
fice of the consecrated 98
i. The lives of the best of men in the
present state are imperfect ..... 98


fi. Our services are acceptable t to God
only as we give ourselves to Him .... 98

iii. All that is good both in ourselves

and in our services is attributable to
God 99

iv. The good man will geek for oppor-

tunities of expressing his devotion to
Od ee Nasae pees 99

v. The good man through the sacrifices

by which he approaehes God has
communion with Himy we ose 99

Nazarite, the vow of the, or acceptable
consecration to God... 000 -+. 90

Such consecration is characterised by—
i. voluntariness ; as | yes wt Ue
ii. completeness 5 3 92
ag subordination of sensual enjoyment 92
separation from mora! evil... SPURS
i scaties alarm (See ALARM) wus 421
Neglect of religious ordinances, the wilful 146


i, iscommon; wW.. — w. 146
li. issinful; .... mee —_ pay k vs
iii, will be punished c= =~ enee 147
Neglect, ruinous ..... OU
i, Man is polluted by sin = . 858


fi, God has provideda cleansing element
for man’s sin . ~. 858
iii, To be efficacious this cleansing
element must be applied by man... 858
iv. Man may neglect to avail himsclf ge
this cleansing element Fi yy te
y. By such neglect man excludes ‘dae
eit trom the highest privileges. ... 859





racH

Nothing but names (See Names) we 594
Number and service, proportion between

(See ProporTIoN) ... ele Pe ath)

Numbered people, the __.... AS coy UY

Numbering of the Levites, the __..... 53

i. The interest of God in childhood —. 838
ii. The generosity of God's dealings

with man wos won O4

iii. The obedience of God’s servant . 54

Numbering of the Levites, the .... — 508


Numbering of the people, hee tern oe 2 §
i. The authority for this numbering .. 8
ii. The place of my ; ae ee
iii. The time of S ” aE |
iv. The manner of ,, on mo
v. The design of © 5


Numbering the peopls, the Divine com-


mand and directions for __..... wwe 495
i. The place in which the census was
taken ot Lane Manse man £408
ii, The time at i » 495
iii, The design with > m5 » 495
OBEDIENCE, contentment and (See Con-
TENIMENT) ... 42
Obligation of religious vows, the solemn
(See Vows) —. wwe 631


Offering and its modern lessons, anancient 111
i, They who hold the most honourable
positions should be most liberal in
contributions to worthy objects ... 111
ii. They who are not entirely engaged
in religious ministries should seek to
help those who are soengaged =... 111
iii. God is graciously pleased to accept
of man’s offerings _..... 112
iv. Gifts for religious purposes 5 should
be used in accordance with the will of
God — . 118
v. In the Divine arrangements ‘help is
granted unto mer. according to their


respective needs woe 118
ee of the first of the dough, | the ... 274
An expression of gratitude ..... wwe 275


ii An acknowledgment of dependence 275
iii. A consecration of common things 275
iv. A provision for the maintenance of
the ministry and of the worship of
God . 275
Offering of the Nazarite, the, or the sacri-
fice of the consecrated (See Naza-
RITE) .. 98
Offerings for ‘dedicating the altar, t the, and
their moral suggestions aed wee 114
i, The significance of these offerings... 118
1. They express the sense of equality
Of Obligation 7) ncn eee sees 115
2. the Divine ‘calling ‘of the nation to
be holy ; wwe 116
8. the great “truths, “taught | by the
different sacrifices... a S15
fi. The significance of “the record of
these Otlerings icc | cssse oes 116
1, The pleasure of God in the gifts
OE EIS DCO POlecy || cn weet ly enre 116
2. The permanence of good works... 116
Offerings of the feast of Passover, the .... 52]


aii,


INDEX,





PA@:
Offerings of the Sabbath and of the new
moons, the; or seasons of special re-
ligious observance (See Sanpatn)..... 518
Omission and ignorance, sins of (Sve Sins) 277
Order, home, and God, man inrelationto 28
i, The importance of order __..... Sa M4:
fi. The sacredness of family life ese rss)
fii. The right way to feel and act to-
wards God __..... Aon ers saat
Ordinance of the fringes, the: gracious
reminders of Divine commands (See
FRINGES)... ais Serum dice 287
Ordinance of the passover (See Passover) 142
Ordinance of the red heifer, the; a par-
able of the pollution of sin and the
Divine method of cleansing there-
from (See Hrrvep) ..... shass a. 849
Ordinances, God will bless His o wwe 108
Ordinances, the wilful neglect of religious


(See WILFUL) Scoopeo ae ieee AAO
Ordinances, unwilling exclusion from
religious (See ExcLusion) ..... ee
Ordination service, a model ee we OLB
4. The person ordained should be
chosen of God for his work..... wn 513
fi, The ordination is to the most im-
portant Work; 9 nn san ~. 518


fii. should be conducted by tried men; 514
fv. should be accompanied with the

imposition of handg,..... en eee, 514
v. should include a charge to the or-


ed; oe 28%, tosis wn. 514
vi. should be conducted in the presence
of the people;... .... sss =
vii. should confer honour upon the
ordained eR eee eee |
viii. A person so chosen should seek
special direction from God, and seek-
ing, shall obtain it ..... ats a. 514
Overthrow of the Amorites, the; or the
defeat of the people that delight in
Wal nme ae no ww. 411
{. A reasonable request preferred ..... 411
ii, A hostile refusal returned .... a. 411
fii, An unprovoked assault ending in
unmitigated defeat. ...., nes 55
iv. A great victory obtained by those
“who had in vain asked for a small
FAVOUT om) Gumi o aii is 412


yv. A territory which had been obtained
by conquest lost by defeat .. .... 412


Parents and children: Aaron and his sons


(S06: AARON) ccss) Ugiiaent guy aes eee’ AD
Parting of Balaam and Balak, the . 484
They parted—


i, having utterly failed in their designs; 484
‘1i, with characters considerably modi-
fied by their association with each


other ; ates cont <n ww. 484
fii. but not forever cee ww 485
Passover, ordinance of the ee wn 142


illustrates the method of salvation
through Christ with regard to—

{. the victim which was chosen ; EY;

fi, the oblation which was made; .... 142

fii, the blood which was spriukled 3 —, 143


PAGH
iv. the flesh which was eaten... .... 148

Passover, the feast of, a memorial and a
Atle Ex = ae cate » 189
i. A memorial of a great deliverance... 139
ii. A type of a greater deliverance _..... 140

Pentecost, the feast of ; or man’s celebra-

tion of the goodness of God in harvest

(See CeLEBRATION)..... aoe ane
Perfection, aims at za ion woe 274
Peril and a gracious precaution, a grave... 336
Persistence in the pursuit of a sinful pur- ie
purpose ae ees ae —. 456
il. Error as to man’s power to curse his
fellowman _.... eek pes wwe 456

iii. Error as to the nature of the Divine
Being ...... ess Eee ones vue 456

iv. The communication of the message
ef God to an ungodly man ..... wa 456

v. The attention with which Divine
communications should be received... 456
Phinehas, the circumstances which moved
the zeal of _..... ap ates ae
Phinehas, the flagrant wickedness of
Zimri and the fervent zeal of wm 489

Pi-hahiroth; or, a long separation (See
SEPARATION)... eel MRS Bay

Pi-hahiroth ; or, going forward in th

face of difficulties (See Forwarp).... 575

Pi-hahiroth ; or, standing still in the
midst of danger (See StaNDIN@) ..... 571
Pilgrimage, aspects of human _..... wwe 164

i, Human pilgrimage should be prose-
cuted according to Divine directions... 164

ii, In human pilgrimage the arrange-

ments and provisions for Divine

worship should be matters of primary

concern ; sseca)  jsasen) is oon

iii. the most reverent care should be

exercised in relation to sacred
things; ss cee.) feaine eee

iv. the weak and the wandering should
be tenderly cared for... ae — 165
Pilgrimage, a song of the... <<, ee
i. The needs of human pilgrimage ... 407

iii The Divine provision for these
NOBUS 5 cael cess aan ie we 408

iii, The continuousness of human pil-


492


grimage __—i.... ben. beeen

Pilgrimage of life, uneventful stages in
the (See UNEVENTFUL) . a» 494

Pilgrimage of the good, the an oe


i, the infallible Guide in ~~ ae
ji. the perfect Protectorin ow. ww. 158
iii. the true spiritin .. we w. 153
Pilgrims nearing home .. — .... . 419


i. are cheered by delightful prospects;..... 419
ii, need preparation for the state into
which they are about to enter; _.... 419
ili. are still subjected to trials and diffi-
culties... ee
Pillar of cloud and fire, the Rak — 150
i, The advantages of its possession —. 150
ii, The perpetuity of its enjoyment ... 161
Pillar, the cloudy ..... aa pe IE
Plague, Aaron staying the (See Aarow) 323


INDEX.





Plague and a Divine antidote, a deadly... "304
i, The sin of the people is =a BOE
ii. The punishment of their sin ww. 395
tii. The penitence of the people a. 895
iv. The Divine antidote for the plague 395

Plague ond asurprising remedy, an awiul 819
i, An awful spectacle exhibited ~- 820
ii, The surprising remedy found 320
iii, A practical application demanded 821


Plague stayed, the. .. w= w. 823
i, The evil eh pay yee ET:
fi, The punishment w. ww. 824
fii. The remedy... mm mens SDE

Portion of man, the srgreme .. —. 344
i is all- sufficient; aa = aw 345
ii, is joy-inspiring; — — — 345
iii. is inalienable = ey

Prayer of Moses for Miriam, the.  . 227
i, The prayer ead at moaned.
ii. The answer — woe 227


Precaution, a grave peril ‘and a gracious 836
Preparation for judgment, the .... 305
i. The separation of the people from
RIEQIPE SIG We gece ath ie tisee 805
ii. The final statement c concerning the
decision of the question which the
rebels had raised __..... a. 805
fii, The final opportunity afforded to
the rebels of turning from their evil
course ..... esas = siosi wee BOG
iv, The persistent audacity of the rebels 306
Presence of God, rebellion maintained in
the very (See REBELLION) ..... wee 300
Presence, the manifestation of the Divine
(See ManrrestaTIon)


Presumption se eer ea oOo
i. What it includes Be foe aw 283
ii. Its chief causes pe == w. 283
iii. Its terrible results —. uh eeoo

Presumptuous enterprise and its disas-

trous termination, Binns Or


Presumptuous sins, the nature and pun-
ishment of _..... SK

Priesthood, the sin of usurping the office
of the ..... wn 296
Priestly blessing, the (See Biessine) ... 106

Privations of man and the resources of
God, the soa spi anges CO
i. There are privations i in human life... 366

ii, These sometimes develop the evil
tendencies of human nature... .. 366

iii, These privations and the evils which

are occasioned by them, impel the
good to seek help of God... a B67

iv. These privations are sometimes re-

moved in auswer to the prayer of the


Privileges of man, ; the condescension of
God and the (See Conpescension) 120

Promised land, the (See Lanp) .. ~~ 600

Proportion between number and service 3


i. The wisdom of God... aed
ii, The reasonableness of His require-
ments .... oh ths


fii. The obedience of His servants Nasa 0


Proposal, a generous . 169
i The characteristics of » true e church 169


SPO A A


Pag
fi, The duty of the church to invite
suitable persons to join with it .....
The argument we can use is that
association with the Church will do
those who enter ‘nto it good _....
iv. Let all who belong ‘o the Church
take care to moke this argument true 171
Proposal of the Renbsnites and Gadites,


the amended ..... ce pore ae ets 552

i. made ;..... ns ane Pie aca 552
AU ACCOMUCU en ten aren cg ~. 558
iii. contirmed poh ica Sel Sap egie 553
Propriety in worship (Seu “Worskt+) Deere 271


sg as for the Hansel and Levites, t'e
Divine, an illustration of the maine
tenance of the Christian ministry

(See MaINTENANCE) i... . 839
Provision for the spiritual seeds of man,
the manua, an iilustration of the

Divine (See Manws) oo ...., 187

Punishment of Miriam and Aaron, the 222
i, The Divine judgment because of their


I ag ae es PE ee wats Se PO Ne a 222
ii. This judgment leading ‘to. their
Humiliation: 25. | acs, ch suet ee 223
iii. Aaron’s acknowledgment of the
eminence of Moses ..... oe cerot 28
iv. The magnanimity of Moses vue 224
v. The power of his intercession . 224
vi. The justice and mercy of God in
His treatment of Miriam  .... vue 224
vii. The sin of one person checking the
progress of an entire nation... __..... 224
Punishment of presumptuous Hoe the
MIGGORE ANG irc. osc: seein o ecce 279
Punishment of the tempters, tha 493
i, Sin, whether in the people of God or
in His enemies, cannot gounpunished 498


ii, Whatever tends to lead into sin
should be viewed by the godly as an
enemy tu be contended against — 493

iii, Under certain circumstances war is


justifiabie .., . 493
Punishment, the sins of “holy men and
their ‘See Sins) __... , 872


Purity, where God dwells there must be 78
i, God Himself is pure, and cannot asso-
ciate with the impure 79
ii. ig cannot do any Lies to the im-
pur 7
Pursuit roe a sinful purpose, persistence
in the (See PreRSISTENOL) ... 456
ba ai concerning the Lord’s hand,
pagel Reap nee COR
ppl this question to—
e subjcct of creative manifesta-
eae Saisie oo


ii. Divine providences for His Chureh ;
Me jee. Rois of the most guilty


208
203


208
iv. sihe faliiosént ¢ of Divine prophecies
and promises .. Des ee wwe 208


Rank and service ..... ws ea |
i, Co-operation in Divine service .. 12
ii. Bociety’a need of leaders —. » 12


xh.


INDEX.





paen
ili, The grand characteristic of true
leaders 12
Rebellion, 6 noble effort to arrest fa
nation’s: Joshua and Caleb (See


SORHUL) sa ec, es are 247
Rebellion maintained i in the very ; presence
of God asd .. 800


i, The test mreseiad to the rebels 3
ii, The test accepted by the rebels _.... 300
iii, The interposition of the Lord God 800
iv. The intercession of Moses and
Aaron for the congregation ..... wee BOL
tebellion of Israel, the Divine declara-
tion of judgment because of the
See DucLaRATION) ..... ~~ 250
Rebellion of Israel upon receiving the
report of the spies, the a oe ee
i. Grievous mental distress ..... wwe 244
ii, Unreasonable and unjust murmuring 244


iii. Shocking blasphemy Se wnvee 245
iv. Foolish and wicked rebellion __..... 245
v. The noble conduct of Moses and
Aaron in these circumstances . 245
Rebellion of Korah and his company ~ 291
i. The rebellion... a sauce mn 29
1. Its leaders ... ae = e291
2. Its nature ... aes wath 29)
8. Its cause... me 291
ii. The noble conduct of Moses in the
rebellion Mos Bey . 292


1, His resource in trouble _- ey LY:
2. His confidence in God _ ..... ~. 292
8. His rebuke of the rebels ..... soe 29D
Rebellion of the people, the ageravated,
the effectual intercession of the good,
and the justice and mercy of God .... 316
i. The aggravated rebellion of the
People Peas 816
ii. ie speedy ‘interposition ‘of Jeho-
ie ww 316
iii. "The effectual intercession of Moses
and Aaron _..... ~. 316
iv, The exercise of the justice and
mercy of God..... 317
iebels, the cry of the subdued (See Cry) 331
Rebuke of Moses to the Reubenites and


Gadites, the faithful... _..... ww. 551
i. The injustice of their proposal _.... 551
ii. Its tendency to dishearten their

brethren ws ame cae vee 651


atti: eek ie Teed Nil tes 661

v. The solemn example by which Moses
enforced his rebuke ...... Ee we 552
ROU SO MMAR a sss) dence er Steen eee 607


Befnee, the cities "of, an illustration of
the salvation of Jesus Christ (See
CUTIBB Pao wcos, |) aed) tos
Refuge, the cities of, as legislative enact-
ments and as religions institutions... 614
Refnge, the security of those who have
fled to the city of (See Crry) - 616
Relation of the Gospel ministry to the
seasons and services of the Christian
life, the silver trumpets, or the (See
TRUMPETS) ates come owen


PAGE
Removal of a devoted servant of God, the 384
Rephidim ; or, water from the rock in
Horeb (See Water)...
Rephidim ; or, the Battle between Ama-
lek and Israel (See Bartuss) wwe 585
Report of the spies, the rebellion of Israel
upon receiving the (See REBELLION) 244
Reports of the spies, the, and their lessons


forus ne Mo Paes 7 wee 286
i. Examine the reports of the. spies . wm 238
1. The report of the majority 236
2. The report of the minority _ ..... _ 231
ii. Deduce the lessons arising from
these reports ... — +e 238
Request and an ungenerous refusal, a
reasonable _ ..... = ww. B76
i, A reasonable request ce == 376
1. Reasonable in itself Bes ~. 376
2. Urged by forcible reasons ~-. 376


ii. An ungenerous refusal ~~. 876
This probably arose from—
1, fear of injury from Israel; wwe B76
2. envy at the growing power of
Israel;.. Pe 77
3. remembrance of an “ancient injury 377

Request of the daughters of Zelopheliad, |
the: the rights of women ... __.....

. The request of the daughters of
Zelophehad ..... 50
1. was presented in an orderly t manner; 3 509
2. was reasonable; ..... 09
8. indicated respect for their “father ; 509
4. implied faith in the promise of God, 509
5. and an earnegs’ desire for a portion
in the Promised “end ...__ .... 5

ii, The Divine answer to their request 509

Request of the Reubenites and Gadites,

the selfish _..... Ss won 6
This request exhibits—_ ,
i. mean selfishness; — ~— 548
ii, predominant worldliness; ..  .... 549
iii. disregard of the interests and rights

of their brethren; 0. sae tsem
iv. disparagement of their Divine call-

Top eee ween BA
y. want of faith in the Divine | promise. 549

Resources of God, the privations of man

and the (Sce PRIVATIONS) i. 36€

Responsibility of each and the co-opera-

tion of all in the servize of God, the
(See Co-oPERATION) 58
Resting and the rising of the good, the .. 162
i. The people of are sometimes
called to remain, as it were, station-
ary for a time in this life; .. =...
ii. yet there is no permanent settlement
in this world;..... Siase ge eee ww 16
iii, both their restings and risings are
ordered by God; ee owe
iv. whether resting or marching they
are protected by H. im ps poe |
Return of the victorious army, the _.... 541
i. The reception of the returning war-
riors on ww 541
ii. The remonstrance with them... 541
iii, The retribution to the Midianitish
WOME... aus es ce


i


INDEX, Ev.


A AT RE NE


PAGE
iv. The Perecation of the Miagorris.
captives, and spoils .... wane ¥ 2
Reubenites and Gadites, the amended pro-
posal of the (See Prorosax) — 552
Reubenites and Gadites, the arrangements
for carzying out the proposal of the
(See ARRAraEMENT) wm 569
Reuhenites and Gadites, the faithful re-
tuke of Mose. to the (See Resuxs) 6551
Reubenites and Gadites, the selfish request


of thy (See Request) = wwe 548
Reverses, the benefit of _..... ae ve 392
' i, Reverses are sometimes enconntered

in the path of daty; ..... ww. 892

ii. arouse the true-hearted to more vigor-
SMES CHLOYG ae te cecry Wee 892


iii. and cho contribute to their t triumph 893
Revolutions, national: Balaam’s final
parables sah et SSO
National revolutions—
i, exhibit the instability of earthly
tness and temporal power; ..... 480
fi, manifest the am of Divire
retribution; .... —e —
iii. are ordered by God _. SE OR 27 481
Rock at Kadesh, the,an emblem of Christ 370
i, in its characteristics ; ; 370
ii. in the water which flowed from it_.. 370
Ruin and the remedy, the... ace a. 333
i, The devastations of death —. . 333
ii. The cause of these widespread deso-


lations ..... = cut SoS

iii. The remedy for them eae .. 834

Ruinous neglect (See Nseiecr)..... 858
Rules for the distribution of the Promised

Land (See DisTRIBUTION) .. _..... 502


SaspatH and of the new moons, the
offerings of the, or seasons of special
religious observance ..... -- 518

i, The tendency of material and tem-
poral things to engross our attention


MUA OSATONE Vane Ph lore Oe) Pee) Pa. 519
ii, The supreme importance of aod
things =
iii, Man’s need of spiritual plik
ments and exercises... an sanee 5
Sabbath-breaker and his doom, the  _.. 286
i, The sin — — awe — 286


ii. The arrest __..... oes ome
iii. The consultation = we 286
iv. The sentence = —
y. The execution
Sabbath-breaker, the sin and punishment
of the .... = = ne =. 283


i, The sin committed om am 288
ii. The punishment inflicted ..... ete. |
Secsiment of the year, the first .. an 020


i. Approach to God through ‘sacrifice
the privilege of His people ... wee 520

In some seasons the mind is aroused

to a special ee of the great

atonement ..... ene

fii. In all our reli gious engagements

we must have respect to the presence
and gloryof God .. ow. «621
Sacred things and duties .. us» = 55


PAGH
i, Divine directions for insuring order 56


ii, Divine distribution of duty... .... 66
iii. Divine recognition of the sacred-
ness of things associated with reli-
gious worship .. eee ee 56
Sacritice of Balak and Balaam, the ©... 446
i. objectively was as perfect as they
could make it; _..... 446
ii. subjectively was very imperfect and
even sinful _..... SM Sch, cold tact 446
Sacrifices, the morning and evening (See
WLORNING) Bij t Were COKIN. ee 617
Sea, the dividing of the Bed (See Drvip-
ING) oF chisy) — voccas en ss ne 577
Secrets and human curiosity, Divine _ .... 66
i. Certain things in the universe are
hidden from mano, seen 66


ii. Men are prone to curiously pry into
hidden things.....
iii. Irreverent prying into hidden things
may leau to terrible results ..
petite y, Balaam’s declaration of Israel’s 465


The important truth affirmed __.... 465
ii The triumphant exclamation uttered 455
Self-retributive nature of sin, the . 567


Confirmed by—
i. the germinal character of human ac-


Lioness one ee sone wwe 557
ii, the exercise of memory $ a — 557
iii. the operations of ania ww 557
iv. the power of habit .. sou wee DDT.
Sending forth of the apies, "the a nce PAL)
i. The origin of this expedition’ aw 230
ii. The agents in this expedition ..... 230
iii. The aims of this expedition wwe 231
iv. The «pirit appropriate to this expe-
dition ..... . 231
Senses over the soal, the supremacy of
the (See SupREMACY) - 183°
Sentence of God upon the sinfcl people,
the) anc pa eas we 263
i, was couxpicuously just ; fe een 263


ii, was uiterly irreversible 5 at een Ok
iii. caused great sorrow... wn 264
Separation, & long: Pi- hahiroth..  ... B74
i. The triumphant faith of Moses... 674
ii, The suicidal hardihood of the wicked 574
iii. The working of God in history .... 574
iv. Separations which take place
amougst men in the present..... . 674
vy. The “great separation which will
take place amongst men in the future 575
Separation from the wicked, the duty of 307
By friendly association with them—
i, we countenance them in their sina; 807
ii. we are in peril of being drawn into
ChHeinBins + eter ey ale 808
iii we are in peril of the judg rment
en will fall upon them for their


Be VEPs belle 808

deren a type of Jesus Christ, the brazen 401
i, The malady .. a= oe .. 401
ii. The remedy ..... ee w.. 401
iii, The appropriation ce =< .. 401
iy. The result ..... wwe, 402


Serpent, the brazen; or, . the nor of
existence faced i past fuith ooo oo 408


xvi.


Servant of God summoned Sais oo


(See SUMMONED) . : B11
Servant, the good and faithful .. . 883
i, The common destiny of man --. 883


fi, The rigorousness of moral law ... 388
fii, The termination of life in the

midst of labour 883
iv, God’s agency in man’s dissolution 883
vy. The promptitude with which Provi-


dence supplies the places of the
dead


vi. The trial of human ‘friendships oe 884
vii. The painful recognition by society
of its greatest losses .....
Servants, helpfal thoughts for the Lord's 203
i, The obedience of Moses, an seve
for them
4, The bestowment of the Spirit upon
the elders, encouragement for them 203
iii. The error of Joshua, admonition
to them x =
iv. The magnanimity of “Moses, an ex-
‘ample LOT ACU GH eee een eee 204
Servants, the Div..e Master ‘and His
huma:. (See MasTuR) ae we. 135


Service 188

i. The service Ga) demands of all
Levites -.. 188

fi, Gud dernand. the service “in our
prime ; cone -. 188

iii. «nd when it can be most easily
render.d ae oe wwe 188
Bervice, aspects of Divine Foe ww. +40


‘i. Persons of every kind and degree of
faulty may find sanloypinks in the
Divine service _..... 40

ii. Even the lowest position in thie eer-
vice should be faithfully filled W. 40

iii. Even the lowest position in this
service is yne of privilege and honour 40

iv. Seemi.gly obscure positions in this
service are, in many instances, of


great importance =... 4l
Service, God's claims pon man’s (See

CLAIMS) asm uO
Service, Rank and (Ses Rank) —. pen Pe ll
Shittim, the sin of Israel at, and the

judgment of God (See Sty) ww. 487


Sinai, in the desert of ; Lessons from the
worship of the calf. sn . 591
Sinai, in the desert of ; Moses’s comimu-
nion with God in the mount (See
COMMENTION) 8.500 (finn, b wioer ear 592
Sinai, in the desert of : the golden calf
Sinai, in the desert of: the moral law
(Re A AW ies races 588
Sin and punishment nf the Sabbath-
breaker, the (See SABBATH-BREAK«R) 283


Siz in the child of Gow! ..... oc es 875
i. is very painful to God; —.... SOLO
ii, most inexcusable; .... = we. 875
iii. most disastrous in its resuite ; .. 875
iv. very certain of punishmezt __.... 375


Sin of Israel at Shittim and the judg-
ment of God, the na wa. 487
i. The sin Se enh ea ee SOT
ii. The judgment cess AG


INDEX


iti, The lessons ..... = =. 487
Bin of man and the salvation of “God, the 818
i. There is an awful controversy be-
tween & holy God and a rebellious


world ..... SoG betes OF grees
ii. There is at hand a ‘prescribed and
Divinely approved remedy . - 319
Sin of Miriam and Aaron, the ..... . 215
i. Theirsin ..... 5 215
ii. The Divine cognizance of their
sin wa. 215


iii. The commendable conduct of Moses
under the provocation of their sin... 216
Sin of Miriam and Aaron, the inquest of
the Lord into the (See Inquist).... 219
Sin of Moses, the ..... ~s esses wna SOG
i. Its nature ..... fe co a. 369
li. Its lessons __..... — ~~. 370
Sin, the self-retributive Tature of (See
SELF-RETRIBUTIV£).... = cov DOM
Sin will come tolight ..... see woe 559
It finds men out—
i. in the woe which comes on some sin-
ners here; __ ... =
ii. in the judgments which God some-
times sends: 20.00 wan ww. 559
iii. in the fears, clamours, and remorse
of conscience ; .. 560
iv. and in the next world, if the sinner
die unpardoned ne eeee
Sin will find us out, the. certainty that
(See Cr RTAINTY) tie ae =n DDG
Sins dangerous and sins deadly —. ... 281
There are degrees* isin 4. wow, DBL
ii. While all sins are dangerous, some


559


are deadly  ..... ww 282
Sins is holy men and their punishment
the a


i. The liability of the good tosin .... 872

ii, The dinger of their failing in those
excellences which most sem
them ....

iii. The impartiality of the Divine go-
vernment ....

iv. The great guilt of those who oeca-
sion sin in the good ..... wa 873

v. The means which God uses to detar
men from sin ... Sree .. 373

Sins of omission and ignorance ..... ee iis

i, Omissions of duty are accounied sin-
ful by God; ..... a4 efi!

ii, even when arising from i ignorans 20. 277


iii. A whole nation may be guilty bie
such sins es
iv. Such sins may ; be forgiven... e ~ ine


Sins, the nature and a of pre-e «
2


sumptucns coe an TY
Song at the well head,a a om 410
i, A promise of supply... 5 =. 410
i, The song .... a a Cael
iii, The song wasa prayer .. . 410


iv. Then they went to work .... «. 411
Song of the Pilgrimage, a (See Pu-
GRIMAGE) we — we
Sorrows of bereavement, “the (See Bz-

RFAVEMENT) 0 me we BE

Spies the 16 em. tem ee ee





INDEX,


xvii


Sessa: nausea


PA
1, The ungodly world are not to be ex-
cused for that instead of investigat-
ing religion for themselves, they
usually trust to the i aug of


others .... tas =~ 241
ii, Bring forth the bad spies ete wun, 242
iii. Now we have some good spies . 242
iv. The necessity of bringing outa uni-

formly good testimony coucerning re-

HGiOn ALP Piatt) 255, AP sen wa. 243


Spies, the reports of the, ‘and the lessons

these reporte teach us (See Ru-
PORTS) eee baw ERO ioe tle...

Spies, the sending forth of the (See
SENDING)...

Spirit and the Sovereign of man, the
(See Man? ... 802

Spoils of the War, the distribution of
the (See DisrrreuTioy) .....

Stability of the Church, the, and the


security of believers ..... ae wwe 463
Standard, every man tire his own... — 24
i. The one Israel aes =a of
ii. The various tribes .. 24

iii. The special directions to the different
tribes .... 24

iv. The spiritual leasons the | subject
presents to us..... 24


Standixg still in the midst of danger _ 571
i, The deplorable effect of slavery ... 571
ii. The distinguished heroism of Moses 572
iii, The remarkable exhortation of


Moses— an snk — 572
ae inl

- Our personal salvation —. — 572

2 The exigencies of life — = 572

Star and the Sceptre of Israel, the . 476


i. The glory of the Messiah as a King. 476
ii, The extent of His conquests . 476
iii, The prosperity of His subjects .. 477
Star spoken of by Balaam, Christ the (See
CHRIST
Succoth and Etham: the determination
of the route (See DzreRMInation).... 569
Suffering the consequence of sin, conflict
the condition of attainment, and (See


soapy ge wee 554
paaees of the good i in the path of duty, Ler
£ ie Gia eE es a. 194
ii, Asa problem 194
iii. Hints toward the solution of the
DODGE em eess hee ica mets Seas
Sammoned home, the servant of God .... 511


i, Sin is an evil of the greatest gravity 511
ii. God is the absolute Sovereign of
human life __.... 611
fii, Inspiring visions are often granted
to the good as they approach the
close of their earthly career... aa OLE
iy. Through the gates of death the good
enter upon scenes of social life . 611
Support of religious institutions, the 118
: Some of the responsibilities of the
wealthy 118
ii. An illustration of the voluntary
principle — = me 19
be


&-


eget |
Supremacy of the senses over the soul, the 183
characterized by—


i. unsatisfied cravings}... noua ww. 184
ii, humiliating effeminacy; .. .. 184
iii, daring unbelief; same one 185
iv. deplorable degradation ; rks 185


vy. decided contempt of Divine blessings 185


Tapgrau and its teachings aa «. 181
i. Man sinning against the goodness ‘of
od p eer is oes iit 2, iste == LS
ii, God recognising the sin of man .... 181
iii. Suffering men seeking the interces-
sion of the BOOd ne ae sees 182
iv. The intercession of the good result-
ing in blessing to men S55 Nearest 182
v. The employment of a transient judg-
Ment asa permanent warning _..... 182
Tabernacle in the midst of the host, the... 86
i. The reasons for ites the Taber-
_hacle thus... ites ate 6TH
. The uses of so doing ee tas) 86
eee the feast of; its meaning


and lessons (See Feast) ae . 528
Tempters, the punishment of the (See

PUNISHMENT) _..... 493
Terrors of existence faced in faith, the

brazen serpent,orthe au aaa, 403
Testimony of the irreligious to the value

Of religion, the ll Men eases at 453

i. The exclamation of Balaam..... wwe 453


ii. The instruction to the people of God 454
Testimony of the ungodly to the precious-
ness and power of piety, the unde=
signed ....
i. By showing that the want of it is
weakness See Games ties ies 898
ii. By seeking help from him whom
they knew to be aman of God __... 899
iii, By confessing that Moses had no-
thing to fear from God, while they
had everything tofear __..... . 899
iy. By acknowledging that Moses could
get from God what they could not... 899
Thoughts for the Lord's servants, ies


(See SHRVANTB) ue oe tase 203

Transfiguration through trans, gression;
Miriam smitten with leprosy sonst 226
Trial of the suspected wife, the ..... wn. 86

i. Confidence in conjugal relations is of
_, Breat importance — sa. 87

ii. Adultery is a sin of the ‘preatest
cganawaiity sche 88

iii, The punishment of sin is closely re-
lated to the sin itself... .... 88

iv. God will bring to light the secret
BLS OL ene te er ees fos 88


y. God will vindicate the innocent who
have suffered from suspicion or


MIATIGOL MRM creEel Mc WN ac, dos 89
Trumpets, the feast of : how to begin a

new year (See Yar) Recs ser 523

Trumpets, the silver seoss TU isda tacit asad 161
i. They call the people to God's sane-

fuary eee eee ie so Fee HG

ii. They give command to march ..... 161

iii. They sound for war — at Os


xvi,


INDEX. ~





PAGH
iv. In the grand feast they cheer the
worshippers s+. on ove wo. 162
Lrumpets, the silver, or the relation of the
Gospel ministry to the seasons and
services of the Christian life... eo» 158
They were used—
i, for the calling of assemblies; «. 158
ii. for summoning the people to ad-
VANCE? eee) ses “0 oni ee. 159
lii, for encouraging them in battle; ... 159
iv. for suitably observing seasons of
special interest a see eo. 159


Unsrirer of good men, the, and its
Divine antidote cee ies ewe 199

i. The proneness of good men to un-
belief ... aa zap eee so. 199

ii. The Divine antidote for unbelief in
the good see sene ee eee 199
Unchangeableness of Jehovah, the coe 460
i, Some men think that God will lie ... 460
ii, Others fear He may lie... ee 461
fii. But He neither will nor can lie ... 461

Unclean, the exclusion of the (See Exonu-
BION) .. a on 41h)


Uneventful stages in the pilgrimage of
life a oe vee 404

{. Many scenes in the pilgrimage of life
are quiet and uneventiul ... eee 404

fi, In such scenes we should follow the


Divine directions ... ... ss. 405
fii. Many of the records ef the pil-
grimage of life are transient coe


iv. Present progress is promoted by the
recollection of God’s past doings ... 405

Usurping the office of the priesthood, the
sin of ... ees eee owe oo. 296


Vauve of religion, the testimony of the
irreligious to the (See Testimony)... 458
Vengeance of Jehovah on Midian, the ... 536
i. The punishment of ain is certain ... 536
fi. God can work by many or by few in
the execution of His purposes vee 537
iii, God honours the holy zeal of His
servants by employing them as leaders
in the execution of His purposes ... 537
iv. God enriches His people with the
spoils of their enemies eee
Veracity of God, the aa soe
Victorious army, the return of the (See
Rerurn) At an “oF cee
Vindicating the high-priesthood of Aaron,
the Divine plan for, and its moral
teaching ia eos) A coe oe 825
{. True ministers are elected by God 325
ii. It is of great importance that men
should know that their ministers are
called by God oes wee eee 825
fii, The vitality of sin is of dreadful


tenacity vee on eae e+e 826
iv. God is engaged in eradicating sin
from human hearts ... ses --- 826
Vision from the rocks, the ns we, 452
i. The ruggedness of the land of our
present sojourn oe eee eee 452
ii. The glorious land .., ae vee 452


Paeg
iii. A people delivered from a present


evil world... tee ae oe 452
iv. A people sustained by Jehovah ... 452
v. Apilgrim band... ae sas 458
vi. A people bought with aprice ... 453


vii. A people loved with an iufinite
love... cas x ase we 453
viii. A people preparing to over to
the goodly land 2. yee eee 453
Vow of the Nazarite, the(See NazariTrE) 99
Vows of women, the—their ratification
and abrogation on ou ewe 533
i. Religious vows are sometimes rashly
made ... see eos see “se
ii. Religious vows made by females
under the authority of a father, or a
husband, and disallowed by him, cease
to be binding ... aoe oon saa
fii. Vows made by females under such
authority and not disallowed, and
vows made by females not under such
authority, are binding soe eee 533
fv. If a husband improperly annul a
vow made by his wife, the guilt of
its non-fulfilment will rest upon
iM se ees aaa ove see 533
Vows, the solemn obligation of religious 531
i, The case supposed ... son ass) Gal
ii. The danger implied ... coo ee 531
iii. The command given ons eee 532


Wak Song, lessons from an ancient (See
LEssons) ... fon nen we 413
Water from the rock in Horeb ... eee 583
i, The place of the miracle... eee 684
fi. The temptation connected with th
miracle ace eco es vee 584
ili, The nature of the miracle ce 584
Wicked ambition faithfully rebuked (See
AMBITION) ... Nae aes oe
Wicked, the duty of separation from the
(See SEPARATION) ... eee «. 807
Wickedness, audacity in(See AuDaciTr) 297
Wife, the trial of the suspected (See


Tartar) ore Re “cS ee 86
Women, the vows of—their ratification
and abrogation (See Vows) ee 533


Worship, propriety in... eee ae 20k
i. The gracious intimation ... we. 271
ii. The directions concerning the wor-
ship of God ... cea soe wo. 272
iii. The pleasure of God in the worship


of His people... ec so  s. 299


Year, how to begin a new aoe oo. 528
i. With special attention to religious


duties and privileges ... nee . 524
ii. With humble confession of gin and

prayer for pardon... x vee B24
iii, With grateful acknowledgment of

Divine mercies eee aus ow. G24
iv. With complete consecration of o}

selves to God... f woe B24


Year, the preacher’s blessing ; ‘or, the
happy DOW we see = cena. 108


eee 49]


Zeal, ove 208 ot oo


INDEX, i
Sr a ae ee Are SSSRSaSe ese ps escssusszasuinesicsovesusrosiouspmentsuhasnttsacsbne nce


Page
{. The source of godly zeal .. = as. 491
ii, The seat of godly zeal eee eo. 492
iii, The object of godly zeal ... eee 492
iv. True zeal is blended with know-
ledge a eee eee ooo ooo 492
v. Zeal ia self-forgetful ooo owe 492





PAGE
Zeal of Phinehas, the circumstances which
moved the... 492


Zelophehad, the request of the daughters
of (See ZELOPHEHAD) as oes
Zimri, the flagrant wickedness of, and
the fervent zeal of Phinehas woe 489





INDEX TO ILLUSTRATIONS.


Aanzon, the death of, 881
Affection, filial, 535
Alarming appearances, boldly confronting, 423
Alarms of the good, the groundless, 422
» wicked, 423
Alienation between friends, the bitterness of,
877
Altar, the good man’s tent and, 166
Ambition defined, 216, 293
» the benefits of rightly directed, 295
» the curse of ungoverned, 295, 602
» What it is, 293
Angel of Jehovah, the, 438, 439
» the destroying, 141
Anger and hatred distinguished, 299
» TYighteous and sinful, distinguished, 299
», the suppression of, 374
Appropriate the benefiis of Christ’s death,
how to, 142
Ass, the speech of Balaam’s, 438
sae eer the peril of evil, 806, 808, 851,
28


Assumptions of Romanism, blasphemous, 457
Atonement, what it consists in, 279


Backs ibe, a spiritual loser, the, 97
Balaam, prophetical powers possessed by, 426
specially favoured by God, 427
the anger of God against, 438
» the counsel of, 488
y the egotism of, 471
nthe petulance of, 439
the veracity and truthlessness of, 475
», tries to change God’s will, 433, 447
Balaam’s ass, the speech of, 438
Beauty of a true Christian, the, 829 ,

» of religion, the, 329
Beulah, in the land of, 420
Bible a clear lighi, the, 130

» how to study the, 234
Blesseduess, true, 451

TT?


Blessing of God in the heart, the, 108
Blood of Christ, conviction of sin necessary te
appreciation of the, 359
Blood of Chr.st, our need of the, 356
ie the cleansing efficacy of the,
Brotherhood of all men, the, 338
Burden, what the term includes, 70
Burdens, profitable, 71
» should be blessings, 79


Canaanirns, the reason for the expulsion of
the, 598

Care of men, God's constant, 301

Catholicity of Christianity, the, 205

Character, the continuousness of the cone
struction of, 406

Children of godly parents, wicked, 47

Christ essential to man’s spiritual life, 372

» every eye shall see, 478

present with His Church, 149

the everlasting fulness of, 356

the holiness of, 355

the Saviour of all men, 618

the self-existence of, 371

the Star and Sceptre of Israel, 477

the vicarious sufferings and death of, 358

to be supremely trusted, the ever-living,


”


ssys3s


Christ's sacrifice, the perfection of, 141
a ? how to appropriate the bene
fit of, 142

Christian needs the help of God, the, 269

» will confess Christ, the true, 134
Christians have to fight real battles, 234

» lights in the world, 130
» should be separaie from sin, 94
Church. Christ p:esent with His, 149

» Christ's garden, the, 471

» marked by order, the, 471

« of Gud, the comprehensiveness of the, 45)


xx. INDEX.
Z


Church secured by God, the, 443
»» strengthened through her enemies, 472
» the perpetuity of the, 472
Claim upon all we possess, God has a just, 343
Cleanliness recommended, 78
Cleanse from sin, man’s inability to, 352
Cleansing needed even by good men, constant
spiritual, 338
Common things consecrated by religion, 276
Companions, their influence on our character,
428
Complaint, man’s proneness to, 183
» contrasted with thanksgiving, 266
Compulsion of sinful habits and circumstances,
the, 299


Confession of sin, a condition of forgiveness,


83
Condescension of God, the, 122
Conquerors, the fall of great, 415
Conscience, the fallibility of, 628
yy the misery of a guilty, 439
yy the terrors of a guilty, 558
Consecration claimed by our Lord, the exrant
of the, 101
Consecration.to God, entire, 98, 184, 344
5 5 » voluntary, 93
Contentment, 43, 44
y»» & medicine for all miseries, 70
» in our position, 166, 503
Contribute to the cause of God, every one
should, 341
Contributions to the cause of God should be
in proportion to our means, 342
Co-operation, Divine and human, 605
Courage, true and false, 232
Covenant, the new, 459
age on 8 deceitful and dangerous sin,
26
» the sin of, 602
Cowardice, moral, 238
Creator, the faithful, 801
Crowd, the uureasonableness of a, 246
Curiosity should be controlled, 68


DzatH, a going home, 882
»» glimpses of glory in, 512
» hope in, 865
» in itself the same to the righteous as to
the wicked, 420
» neglect of conversation on, 97
» Of faithful ministers a loss to society, 882
yy of the good is ordered by God, 381
» sudden, 97
» the gate of life, 865
» the great leveller, 865
» _the importance of preparedness for, 865,
866, 382, 561, 562
» the lot of all men, 865, 882, 618
» the penalty of sin, 618
9 Without God, terriple, 812
Degradation of manhood, 868
Degrees of guilt and punishment, 265
Degrees of guilt in the same crime, 280
Democracy a self-cancelling business, 292
Departure of God from man, 221
Dependence upon God, man’s, 154, 276, 580
Desires an injury, the granting of our selfish,
198


Destroying angel, the, 141
Die the death of the righteous, how to, 452

», this year thou shalt, 526
Difficulties, believing effort will overcome the

greatest, 394

» in Christian life and work, 234

» removed by God, great, 577

» Should not dishearten the Christian, 8948
Difficulty, the discipline of. 893
Discountenaneing sin, the duty of, 308
Disobedience hardens the heart, wilful, 299
Duty are best, first thoughts of, 484


Farra.y things, transient, 481
Effi rt and its reward, Christian, 6
Efforts to obtain salvation, earnest, 306
Knemies of the godly, invisible, 176
Enjoyment in quiet scenes and duties, 406
Envy, the commonness of, 207

» the folly of, 208

» the proneness of man to, 205
Evil-speaking, 216
Examination, self-, 537


FairH appropriates Gospel blessings, 190
» 1s possible to all, the exercise of, 846
» the achievements of, 239
» the eye of the soul, 396
», the inspiration and strength of, 289
» the wisdom of walking by, 239
Faithful unto death, 249, 839
Faithfulness in little things, 41
yy of God, 460, 508
y valued by God, 259
Fame, how it is gained, 498
» how to achieve enduring, 501
y», uncertainty of earthly, 562
Family, sacredness of the, 39
Fasting, the efficacy of, 527, 528
Feeblest power should be used, the, 41
Felicity is transient, earthly, 583
Festivals, the times of the Jewish, 525
Fidelity in fulfilling promises, 554
» Of each benefits all, the, 388
Forgetfulness of mercies, trials leading te
368
Forgiving spirit, the nobility of a, 317, 396
Fraud of every kind forbidden by God, 83
Freeness of the gifts of God, 190, 369, 871
Future a blessing, ignorance of the, 67


GENTLENESS of God, 39
Gift to man, God's supreme, 848
Giving religiously, 545
» the benefit of, 546
Glory of God, the, in what it consists, 255
+» unconscious, 593
God all-mighty to fulfil His promises, 200
» Approves the good, hates the evil, 327
» cannot change, 448
» dishonoured by man’s unbelief, 252
»» gives Uimself to His people, 459
» 18 @ jealous God, 438
» the guide of His people, 154, 164
God’s control of nations, 481
» interest in infant life, 65
» omniscieuce, 15
»» withdrawal from man, 221


INDEX,





Good men to sin, liability of, 874
Goodness of God contemned by man’s unbe-
lief, the, 252
Gospel blessings, freeness of, 190, 869, 871
» » refreshment of. 371
an sufficiency of, 371
.. Water an emblem of the, 371
Grapes, remarkable clusters of, 235
Gratitude for small mercies, great, 646
» to God, 276
Greatness cannot be manufactured, trne, 18
» moral excellence essential to true, 500,


1
», independent of class or station, true, 501
» the obligations of, 118
Gregarious, men are, 231
Guidance implored, Divine, 154


Hasirts, the miserable bondage of evil, 559
Hands, the laying-on of, 515
Hatred of sin, God’s, 552
Hearing the Gospel without serious atten-
tion, 827
» the Word with attention, 457
”» ” », self-application, 123
Heaven, holiness necessary to enter, 359, 860
» Yehearsing for, 420
Help, mutual dependence and, 554
», of God essential to the Christian, 269
History is unwritten, the best part of human,
498 °


Holiness in little things, 289
» of God the chief reason for the holiness
of man, the, 288
Home without enquiry as to religious privi-
leges, choosing a, 166
Hononr, rit the way to, 83


e,
Honours, undeserved, 88
Humility before God, 276
» in religious teachers, becoming, 145


Iptenzss leading to sin, 488
Idolatry, the heinousness of, 597
Ignorance of the revealed will of God, « sin,
279
Immortality a consolation to the bereaved, the
revelation of a blessed, 387
» brought to light in the Gospel, 887
» of good deeds, the, 118
Imperfect, the best of men in this world are,
100,374 —
Imperfections should not dishearten the Chris-
tian, 894
Indignation against evil, 491
Individuality of man, the, 496
Influence, every one exerts a never-ending,
485


» unremitting personal, 485
Ingratitude, base, 368
», the bitterness of, 247
Insignificant people, 496
Instruments, Bod can work by weak, 588
;, God usually employs suitable, 539
Instruments of the Divine judgments, the, 252,
312


Intercession, the power of, 183, 225
Intercessor, Moses an, 587


Invitation to come to Christ, 190
Irreversibleness of human conduct, the, 489


JEALOuSsY defined, 89
» personified, 89
Journey of life, the, 155
Justice of God, the, 220, 806
“5 » inthe punishment of ain, the


» the temple of, 544


Kept by God, Christians are, 105
Kindness, brotherly, 877


Laxsovurers wanted in the cause of God, 118
Leaders of men, the trials of the, 192, 193
Liberty in the service of God, 75
Life a condition of successful Christian work,
intense spiritual, 329
Life a reason for earnestness in Christian
work, the brevity of, 525
» Of souls, goodness the only true, 829
»» the sacredness of human, 609, 610
Little things, faithfulness in, 78
» » make human characters, 78
» seeds of great ones, 73
in » the importance of, 73
Lives, how to ennoble commonplace, 499
Living for the invisible, 482
Looking to Christ, healing and life through,
896


” ” ” life by, 402
Love of God purifying, the, 352
” » the fountain of blessing, the, 189


a » unmerited, the, 190
Loving-kindness of God, the preventing, 5838
Lusts of the Israelites, the carnal, 186


ee to curse enemies, employment of,
25


Man a great boon to the world, a great, 886
Man does not die until his work on earth is
done, the good, 886

» God manifest in, 497

» God’s interest in, 497

» something good in the worst, 497
Manna a miraculous product, the, 189
Marah, the bitter disappointment at, 581
Marriage, a model, 535

» and celibacy contrasted, 618

», different conditions of, 618
» of Christians, a principle to be observed

in the, 621
Marriages, early, 621

» prohibited, 621

» thoughtless, 621

y» unprincipled, 620

» unsuitable, 621
Materialism degrades manhood, 868
Meekness defined, 217
Memory an inspiration in conflict, 416, 417
Memory a source of misery, 558

» imperishable, 558
Memory, life enriched and inspired by, 407

nothing lost to, 558
Mercies, grateful acknowledgment of God’s
525


» the multitude of God's, 525


xxii.


INDEX.


SNCS


Mercy cried for too late, 312

» God's delight in, 225

» Of God infinite, the, 258, 369

» of God, salvation through the, 85

» of God,various manifestations of the, 318
Messiah, the conquests of the, 478
Miniter is called of God, the true Christian,

» learning is requisite for the Ohristian, 130

y»» prayer indispensable to the, 146, 515
Ministers a loss to society, the death of faith-

ful, 382

» cannot do everything, 615

2 eXperienced, 65

» like trumpets, 160

w» Teverent, 65

»» Should be adequately supported, 86, 841

y» Should be holy, 23

» Should be honoured, 62

» Should feed their flocks, 86
Ministers, the greatness of the work of, 62, 515
cg a Divine institution, the Christian,
82


5) » 9 Vocation, the Christian, 28,
5G, 826
» great gifts not indispensable to usefulness
in the, 841
» is life-giving, the true, 829
» is perennial, 23
Minorities, honour to small and genuine, 248
Money, a ruinous passion for saving, 442
» cannot buy, the things which, 443
Monotony a source of enjoyment, 406
Murder, the criminality of, 609, 610
Murmurers, habitual, 267
Murmuring embitters life’s mercies, 247
Mystery, omnipresence of, 67


Nationa revolutions controlled by God, 481
Needs of man, the abundant provision of God
for the, 409
#% 1» 4» the continuousness of the, 409
» » g the immense number of the
409
Neglect of religious worship, 147
N lg of the redeemed, the countless, 175,
1


OsepiEncr, blessedness of, 44, 55
» complete, 55
» filial, 584
Obligation and liberty, 75
» and power, 74
Offering our best to God, 101, 117
» praise to God, 118
Offerings accepted by God, humble, 187, 546,
547
Omissions of duty, sinful, 278
Omniscience of God, 1
Onwardness of life, 168
“ Order is Heaven’s first law,” 27


Paxxstin®, the natural fertility of, 608
» the secure boundaries of, 603
» the small extent of, 608

Parental authority, 33
» encorragement of pious children, 47
» exan ple, 47


Parental influence, 38
sy prayers, 47
» responsibility, 584
s teaching, 47
» training, 46
Parents, honour due to, 83
Passage of the Red Sea, the, 578
Passive virtues, the heroism of the, 878
Past favours an encouragement to seek Him,
God’s, 255
Penitence and pardon cannot abolish all the
consequences of sin, 258
» begotten of pain is short-lived, 186, 269
»» leads to joy, 527
Perfection of Christ’s character, the, 351, 855
Persistence in sin, the great guilt of, 457
Pilgrimage, continuousness of human, 409
Pillar of cloud and fire adapted to the needs
of Israel, 149


” ” »
Places, sacred, 57
Please ourselves without displeasing God,

striving to, 434
Pleasures of sense, the perils of the, 489
Portion, God the only abiding and unchang-
ing, 347
» of the Christian, the all-sufficiency of
the, 346

» of the Christian, the joyfulness of, 347

Power proportioned to human needs, Divine,
114


» Should be used, the feeblest, 41
Prayer and effort combined, 587

»» and praise, daily, 518

» efiicacy of, 183, 225, 817

9 elements of, 128

» indispensable to ministers, 146, 515

» What is, 123
Prayers, the punishment of unsubmissive, 198
Preacher, a lifeless, 328

» Solemnity of the work of the, 821
Preaching, not easy work, 137
Preciousness of small services, 42
prepares for religious work, necessary,

13


& protection, 164


» of heart for public worship, 145
Presence of Christ the secret of His people's
success, the, 150
» of God in human life, 123
A ot Sos. the blessedness of realizing the,
7


Preserved by the Lord, Christians, 105
Presumption, a growing sin, 801

», the peril of, 269
Presumptuous sins, an example of, 280

= » harden the heart, 281
Priestcraft, a great evil, 457
Privileges estimated in hell, religious, 295
Progress a great law of the universe, 577

» is from one difficulty to another, Chris

tian, 577

» should be continuons, Christian, 160
Promises are reliable, God’s, 508

» Should be pleaded in prayer, God's, 255
Prospects of the godly, the glorious, 169
Providential care, Gou’s, 301
Punishment correspouding to sin, 225
Panishincnt, God bas many methods of, $319


IN DEX.


xxiii,


A NT A


Punishment growing out of the sin, 89, 265, 481
a Se sin, certain, 89, 258, 265, 812, 818,


» Of sin, impartial, 225, $74
Purposes of God, eternal and unchangeable,
the, 508


Reason and faith, 200
» the insufficiency of human, 624
Rebellion against God, the futility of, 832. 888
» at Rephidim, the, 584
Receiving and giving, universal, 117
Reconciliation of brethren at the Cross, 878
Redemption, an illustration of, 51
Reflection, a time for, 525
Refuge for the manslayer, a, 618
Religious efforts should begin at home, 169
Reputation, posthumous, 282
Celery reveals the strength of opposition,


pce. great honours involve great,
8


Rest in heaven, 420
» true, 530
x uses of, 163
Restitution a condition of forgiveness, 84
Restraints, the need of Divine, 443
Revelation, unacknowledged obligations to
Divine, 628
» Man's need of Divine, 624
Reverence, filial, 534
Reverence for sacred places and things, 314
Kevival of psalmody a token of revival of ree
ligion, 499
Revolutions, noiseless, 499
Rod of Moses an incentive to valour, the, 587


SaBBatTuH, importance of preserving the re-
ligious spirit of the, 285
w» man’s need of the, 285
» Obligation, the true basis of, 285
» observance, the effect of, 520
Sacred places, 57
Sacrifiee in the path of duty, self-, 544
» salvation through, 133, 279
» the perfection of Christ's, 141
» the true value of, 448
y without mercy, worthless, 448
Saddling of asses, 434
Safety in battle to be ascribed to God, 546
Salvation attainable only by faith, 402
Satisfaction cannot be found in worldly
things, 9
Saviour of all men, Christ the, 618
Security of the Christian, 154, 451, 485
Self-accusation follows sin, 613
Selfishnees of men, 475
» the failure and folly of, 550
» the injustice of, 550
» the prevalence of, 550
»» Warning against, 550
Separate from the world, Christians should
be, 94, 451
Service, the dignity of, 18
Services recognized by God, the smallest, 187
value of slight, 42
Serving God with our worst 605
Sin brought to light, secret, 90, 558


Sin cannot enter heaven, 78, 359, 860
discouraged by Christianity, 288
forgiven yet punished, 258
immortality of, 35
in a child of God is punished, 97, 512
infectious, 187, 851, 428
injures the sinner, 314
is against God, all, 83
leads to death, 281, 314, 475
must be slain, 599
of one an injury to many, the, 553
the folly of, 475
» Universal, 613
Sins of ignorance, 279
» 9) Omission, 278
9» » presumption, 281
Slander best answered by silence, 218, 219
», the best men are exposed to, 218
Socialism of grace, the, 168
Soldier, exhortation to the Christian, 417
» is assured of victory, the Christian, 416
» the Christian a, 416
Soul i man, everlasting individuality of the,
8


ssssvys33s3%3


7
-


Beenatn unspeakable importance of the,

80
Sovereignty of God, the basis of the, 88
Pe » vw the manifestation of the,
502
oo OO” the righteousness of the,
Spirit, a peavextal, 518

» of man, evidence of the existence of

the, 304
Standing still, progress in, 578
Star, Christ the bright and morning, 477
Stillness beneath the hand of God, 573
Stimulants contrasted with the Holy Spirit, 94
Strangers and pilgrims, 163
Suffering, character tested by, 195

w~ knowledge through, 71

ws progress through, 195

» promotes future joy, present, 195

ns vicarious, 196
Suicide, the criminality of, 610
Sundays, the happiest, 286


Tweaks should be controlled, 246
o a yy Bacred, 246
Temperance, the obligation, 187
Temptation, likely instruments used in, 494
not to be parleyed with, 428, 429


oy should be avoided, occasions of,
548

, the all-triumphant answer to, 493
. veiled with the mask of virtue, 494


Tempting to sin, the extreme guilt of, 265,
493

Tent and altar, the good man’s, 166

Thirst, the intense misery of, 581

Trials, how they should be borne, 869


Unpewier dishonours God, 252
» of good men, 200
Unchangeableness of God, 460
Unsatisfactoriness of worldly pleasures and
pos-essions, 9, 209
Use of the gifts of God, obligatory, 51, 52


£xiy.


INDEX.





Vaniery, the beauty of, 27
Various ways of serving God, 187
»» manifestations of God to the soul, 150
Veracity with truthlessness, 475
Victories of faith, the, 20
Victory of the Christian, through Ohrist, 176
» Tight is certain, 161
Vitality of sin, the terrible, 327
Vocation, the Christian ministry a Divine, 28,


Voice of God in nature, the, 10
Voluntaryism, efficiency of, 119

Vows, forgotten, 532

should be fulfilled, baptismal, 582
should be fully performed, 532
the voluntariness of religious, 532


”
”
”


Warrtine for the home-call, 420
»» judicious, 6
Walking by faith, not by sight, 239
War, sometimes justifiable, 19, 588
» the cruelty, 542
» the injustice of, 19, 414
» the ravages of, 414
Warnings precede Divine judgments, solemn,
807


Watchfulness, the importance of, 875
Water an emblem of the Gospel, 371
Way, the evil of having our own, 231
Wealth and spiritual poverty, material, 309
» does not satisfy men, 209
» Should be properly used, 117
Wells a valuable property in ‘the Hast, 377


Wicked poets be excluded from the Churck
the, 78
Wisdom of God seen in the variety of Hia
gifts, the, 74
Women, the disabilities of, 510
» the power of, 510
Word aright, hearing the, 128
Work, diversity of Christian, 49, 57, 187
» Sacredness of, 49, 57
» under Jesus Christ, Christian’s, 888
Workers in the Church to look to their own
salvation, 218
World is too much with us, the, 520
Worldly things, transitory, 595
Worship a necessity of the human soul, 148
* — be offered in any place, acceptable,
6
» culture and beauty in, 273
y»» ennobles the worshipper, 274
», imperfection and sin in public, 888
» morning and evening, 518
a6 Beret and extraordinary seasons of,
52


», praise the supreme act of, 274


» propriety in, 273
Wrath of the, 220, 221


Zeau, defined, 491

Zeal for the gory of God, constant, 254
» inthe service of Christ, 491
so like tire, 491
» Works wonders, 491


INDEX TO AUTHORS QUOTED.


Apams, Thomas, 129, 180

Addison, Joseph, 78, ‘295

Ainsworth, 437

Alford, Dean, 180, 188, 849, 862, 515, 536,
563, 569, 577

Allon, Dr. Henry, 20, 148, 273, 274

Anon., 338, 422, 460, 462, 554

Arnold, Dr. Thomas, 285

Arvine, R., 198, 318

Attersoll, W., 37, 65, 70, 78, 86, 88, 89, 206,
216, 265, 279, 812, 341. 368, 378, 427, 451,
452, 481. 488, 489, 518, 602

Augustine, 299


Bazinetor, Bishop, 65, 68, 116, 184, 217, 373,
436, 476, 489, 618

Baillie, Joanna, 18

Barnes, Dr. Albert, 833

Barrett, W. G., 430, 432, 444

Barrow, Dr. Isaac, 613 ;

Bates, Dr., 583

Baxter, Richard, 821, 538, 598, 599

Bayne, Paul, 396

Beaumont, Sir J., 118

Beecher, H. W., 15, 19, 28, 83, 89, 57, 70, 72,
73, 128, 180, 150, 176, 190, 195, 196, 200,
209, 255, 258, 265, 269, 299, 307, 308,
827, 329, 338, 352, 365, 382, 394. 409,
416, 422, 448, 451, 475, 482, 491, 497, 534,
548, 547, 550), 658, 605, 621

Bevan, W. L.,621

“Biblical Museum,” 57, 90, 152, 187, 240,
274, 839, 385, 543, 554

Bonar, Dr. H., 213, 246, 453, 541, 667

Boston, T., 870

Brooks, Thomas, 218, 247, 847

Brown, J. B., 174, 187, ail

Browning, Mrs. E. B. , 12, 120, 183, 184

Brougham, Lord, 304

Bubier, G. B., 100, 546

Buddicom, 570

Burder, G , 263

Barke, E., 293

Burkitt, W., 64

Burns, Dr. Jaber, ai 208, 238, 250, 288, 824,
455, 463, 466

Burritt, Elihu, 485

Barton, R., 293

Busfield, W., 528

Bnshnell, Dr. H., 14, 42, 47. 65, 75, 94, 114,
184, 142, 221, 495

Byron, Lord, 557


Cartriu, Thomas, 28, 50, 232, 288, 249, 278,
293, 413, 552

Carpenter, Dr. d. S., 488

Caryl, Joseph, 338

Chalmers, Dr, aw hy 122, 302

Channing, Dr. W. E., 415

Chaplain, A Military, 438°

Charnocke, Stephen, 16, 39, 74, 252, 258, 807
897, 459, 460, 508, 606

Cheever, Dr. G. B, 169, “220, 421, 423, 6538

“ Christian Treasury,” 97, 535

“Christian World,” 147, 384

“ Christian World Pulpit,” 488

Cicero, M. T., 439

eaten Lord, 207

rke, Dr. Adam, 89, 229, 881, 836,

862, 437, 444, 467, 597 i eh

Clarke, Samuel, 91, 525

Clayton, George, 179

“ Clerical Year Book,” 800

Close, Dean, 334

Coleridge, Bishop, 806

Coleridge, S. T., 415

Collier, Jeremy, 206

Cook, Eliza, 10

Cowper, William, 65, 855, 856, 419

Cox, Samuel, 142

Crabbe, G., 182

Culross, Dr. J. 177

Cumming, Dr. s BO, 105, 125,150, 222, 247, 255


Datz, Dr. R. W.., 62, 93, 101, 185

Davenant, Sir W., 208

Dibdin, R. W., 297

Dickens, Charles, 118

“ Dictionary of the Bible,” Dr. Smith’s, 76,
84, 91, 157, 181, 229, 362, 363 877, 388,
889, 390, 891, 392, 407. 469, 524, 525, 547,
548, 562, 568, 601, 621

“Dictionary of Illustrations,” 51,73, 219, 255,
265, 267, 269, 377, 457, 534

Doddridge, Dr. ¥: 22, 513, 515, 625

Donne, Dr. J., 365

Dryden, J., 557

Dwight, Dr. T., 460, 550

Dykes, Dr. J. O., 131, 217, 859, 860, 453


“ Ecieorio Review,” 148
Emerson, R. W,, 329
‘+ Evangelical Synopsis,” 836


Farrar, Canon, 90, 225, 875


ow





xxvi. INDEX.

Feltham, Owen, 207 Kitto, Dr. John, 285, 895, 423, 425, 426, 482,

Ferguson, Dr. R., 57, 198, 195, 874, 501, 512, 8, 538, 548, 581, 585, 587, 598
544 Knobel, 606

Flavel, J., 457, 498, 582 Krommacher, G. D., 186

Fletcher, Dr. Joseph, 280

Fuerst, Dr. Julius, 562 Lang, J. D., 828

Faller, Thomas. 28 ae — 11, 80, 108, 162, 236. 831, 403,

Ganven, Francis, 284 Leask, Dr, W., 508

Gerhard, P., 38 Leighton, Abp., 481


Gilfillan, G., 98, 141, 881, 888, 512, 877, 590,
594


Gill, Dr. John, 271, 489

“ Gleanings,” Es 117, 118, 188, 219, 429, 518

Goldsmith, O.,

“ Good Words, ie 404

Griffin, R. A., 138, 156, 228

Grindon, L. H., 865

Grosart, 6

Grove, George, 888, 889, 890, 600, 601

Gurnall, W., 428, 491, 493, 494

Guthrie, Dr. ,, Thomas, 50, 281, 888, 856, 525,
646, 62


Hate, Sir M., 129, 428
Sey, Robert, 68, 128, 145, 154, 898, 414, 457,
58


Hamilton, Dr. James, 10, 137, 888

Hamilton, Dr. R. W., 78

Hare, A. W., 108

Harmer, 158

Harris, Dr. John, 342, 848, 844,

Harris, W., 578

Havard, W., 423

Hayman, Dr. H., 157, 229, 888, 889

Hemans, Mra., 580

Hengstenberg, Dr. E. W., 449, 450, 4

Henry, Matthew, 47, 55, 74, 181, 24s, 264, 294,
838, 395, 617, 61 8

Heraud, J. A, 558

Herberc, George, 43, 44, 57

Hervey, Bishop, 290

Holmes, O. W., 47

“ Homiletic Quarterly,” 179, 435

Hood. E. P.,

Horns, cece 97 9, 563

Horton, T, G., 440

Howe, John, 396

Hunter, Dr. H., 489

Huntington, Dr. F. D., 21, 47, 68, 101, 187,
194, 329, 369, 494, 510, 578, 574


Jann, Dr. John, 349, 612
James, J. A., 207, 382, 428
Jones, Harry, 163

Jones, homas, 190
Josephus, Flavius, 418
Judkin, T. J., 52


Keszg, John, 52, 188

Keil and Delitzch, Drs., 25, 44. 88, 99, 108,
110. 127. 128, 179, 180, 192, 214. 243,
244, 269, 270, 271, 278, 290. 316, 324,
835, 339. 340 345, 348 349, 362, 887,
417, 418, 438, 444, 445, 446, 450, 467,
468, 469, 44, 486, 509, bal, 536, 545,
548, 663

Kennicott, Dr., 58


Lester, Dr. J. W., 198

Liddon, Coiba 871

¢ Literary World,” 457

Lloyd, David, 17. 29, 53, 59, 80, 90, 119, 213,
257, 282, 816, 376, 399, 568

Locke, J ohn, 624

Longfellow, H. W., 885

Lynch, T. T., 41, 200

Lyte, 69

Lyttelton, Canon, 404

Lytton, Lord, 246, 277, 406


Macautar, Lord, 499
Macdonald, Dr. G., 18
Mackay, Dr. C., 258
Macmillan, D., 588
Mant, Bishop, 62, 295
Martin, Samuel, 183, 288


Mathew, 423
MeCormac, H., 239
Melville, H. 24, 176, 206, 310, 451, 477, 478,


479, 5
Miller, Hogh, 21
Miller, M., 120
Miller, S., 260
Milman, Dean, a8, 569, 571, 579, 608
Milton, John, 2 7, 129
Moore, Daniel, 281
Monsell, J. S. B., 368
More, Hannah, 87
Morris, A. J., 102, 589
Mullens, Dr. Joseph, 147
Murray, W. H. H., 35


Newman, ert 154, 804, 805, 360, 437,
434, 438, 4
“New York iadepestyene® 83


“ Onn hundred Sketches of Sermons,” 598

“Outlines of Sermons on the Miracles and
Parables of the Old Testament,” 227, 818,
830, 441, 584

Outram, Dr. W., 517

Owen, Dr. John, 428


Pagkrr, Dr. Joseph, 41, 49, 55, 66, 67, 88, 99,
106 114, 155, 161, 163, 164, 166, 168,
195, 200, 205, 221, 231, 232, 239, 241,
259, 274, 276, 306, 312, 327, $41, 356, 359,
866, 369, 374, 878, 407 409, 417. 442, 443,
448, 482, 485, 494, 496, 498 499, 501,
5038, 508, 515, 530, 552, 538, 545, 550, 622

Parsons, James, 885, 618

Patrick, Bishop, 37, 270, 444

Payson, Dr. E., 83, 84, 299, 308

Perowne, Dean, 3. 89, 390, 391, 407

Phillott, H. W., 877

Pigg, J. G., 42°


INDEX.


xxvil.


a ee :


Pilkington, J. G., 220

Playfere Thomas, 23

Plumer, Dr. W. S., 560

Plumptre, Prof. E H., 84

Pope, Alexander, 433°

Porter, Dr. J. L., 599

Pulsford, John, 89, 234, 801

Punshon, Dr. W. MM. 73, 146, 155, 161, 276,
314, 826, 347, 491

Pusey, Dr., 176


Rarries, Dr. Thomas, 562

Raleigh, Dr. ae 190, 882, 407, 410, 588

Reid, J. M., 839

Reynolds, Dr. H. R., 62, 84, 286, 289

Richard, Henry, 415

Riddel, John, 386, 887

Roberts, Arthur, 582

Rohertson, F. W., 70.71, 72,78, 94.96, 221, 285,
286, 434, 439, 448, 471, 475, 481,520, 596

Rochester, aa? 619

Rowe, N.,

Ruskin, jou, 18,19, 27, 44, 550, 554


Satter, H. G., 252, 508

Saurin, James, 361

Scott, Thomas, 82, 524, 541,597

Secker, William, 851

Shakespeare, W. 88, 51. 67, 87, 197, 208, 217,
247. 295, 298, 380, 422, 558, 619

Bibbs, Richard, 396

Simeon, Charles, 109, 462, 480, 557

Sleigh, William, 143, 268, 617

lene Dr. S., 393, 394

mith Lienry, 63 62

Smith, J. H., 855

Socrates, 307

South, Dr. R., 801.546

“ Speaker’s Commentary,” 2, 68, 69, 75, 90,
110, 128, 156, 157, 180, 181, 214, 244,
289, 290, 291, 325, 336, 348, 361, 363,
888, 390, 391, 892, 418, 445, 468, 469,
486, 529, 531, 536, 548, 564, 565, 599,

606


Spencer, Thomas, 583

penser, Edmund, 89

‘Spiritual Bee,” 187

Spitta, 136

Sprague, Dr. W. B., 591

Spring, Dr. ee 317, 318

Spurgeon, C. H , 123, 134, 187, 149, 150, 163,
164, 166, 171, 176, 178, 183, 187, 190,
195, 202, 209, 218, 225, 226, 235, 239,
243, 255, 259, 262, 269, 279, 289, 295,
812, 314, 322, 327, 329, 332, 347, 352,
858, 365, 366, 368, 369, 371, 375, 394,
409, 411, 416, 417, 420, 423, 448, 451,
471, 472, 475, 491, 497, 520, 525, 527,
528, 535, 539, 546, 547, 552, 677


Stanford, Dr. C., 580

coriace Dean, 181, 861, 868, 888, 424, 568,
604

Steele, Sir yd 619

Sterne, Laurence, 396

Steward, George, 401

Storr, Dr., 486

Stowe, Dr. C. E., 189

“Study,” 71, 492

“ Sunday School Teacher,” 94, 249, 801, 554

4 air School Teacher's Treasury,” 276,

85


Tacszor, 97
caures Dr., 308, 871, 872, 525, 526, 559,


Taylor, Bishop, Jeremy, 36, 374, 618

Temple, Ebenezer, 152

Tennyson, Alfred, 32, 33, 182, 501, 576

Thodey, Samuel. 819, 321 400, 454, 464, 468,
473, 516, 521, 555, 616

Thomas, Dr. David, 75, 86, 117, 146, 884

Thompson, H. + 838

Thomson, J. R., 472

Tillotson, Abp.. 818

Todd, Dr., 267

Tourneive, 111

hy ig ohn, 78, 184, 191, 220, 229, 291, 887,


Trench. Abp., 75, 96, 100, 129, 222, 228, 246,
468, 582

Trench, F. F., 554

Tulloch, Dr., 387

Tupper, Martin F., 225

Turner, Dr. G., 618


“ Umiow Magazine,” 428


Vaueuan, Dr. R., 123, 279
Vinet, Dr. Alex., 23, 118, 402


Wagptaw, Dr. R., 527, 610, 621
Waring, A. L., 75

Watson, Richard, 104, 127, 508, 610, 624
Watt, C. K., 277

Watt, D. G., 354

Watts, Dr. Isaac, 522

Webster, 544

Wesley, Charles, 18, 21, 159
Whale, W., 592

White, H. K., 595

Whiitier, J. G., 199

Williams, W., 149

Willis, N. P., 295

Wordsworth, William, 40, 520
Wythe, W. W., 456


Youuxe, Dr. Edward, 87, 296, 880, 5¢9


ERRATA


Page 36a, line 50, for “ xxvii.” read “ xxxvii.?


2
”
”
Led
9


”


39a,

84a,
1008,
115d,
191a,
224a,
415a,
448a,
466,
494b,
522a,


oo
”

”

LED
”
”»
”
”»
”
”


”


Zyieay A OG a | eee from.!2
53, ,, “ Plumtre” read “ Plumptree.”
LZ espn God "2 a > Christ?
45, ,, “taonement” read ‘“ atonement.”
43, ,, “‘negotiis” » “* negotiis.””
44, supply “the” before “* good.”
50, for “2 Cor. ix,” read “2 Cor. x.”
26, # “ word ” . 6 way.”
24, ,, “blessings” ,, “blessing.”
27, ,, “ Huntingdon” read “ Huntington.”
18, Kd 6é thou ” m ta him.”’





HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY


ON THE BOOK OF


DEUTERONOMY.


WITH CRITICAL AND EXPLANATORY NOTES, INDICES, Hic., Hite.
BY


REV. JAMES WOLFENDALE.


Printed in the United States


FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK anp LONDON





DEUTERONOMY.


a


INTRODUCTORY NOTES ON THE BOOK,


EL The Name. The Books of the Pentateuch are called by their firat word, eg.,
Genesis mw B’réshith = “In beginning:” Exodus Mow TDN) V’él’leh Sh’mdth
=‘ And these the names.” So Deuteronomy has been called O77 TN Ell&h
Hiidd’bharim = “ These the words.” The Rabbins, however, sometimes named the
Book HIND IDO Sephér Thochakhdth = “Book of Rebukea,” But by the Jewish
people it was frequently called THAT TIVO Mishnth H&ttdrah = recapitulation
or repetition of the law, from Deut. xvii. 18, which name was adopted by the
LXX. who christened the Book Asurspévosev, and the Vulgate, following, Deutero-
nomium ; English, Deuteronomy.


Ii, Author. “One of the first questions connected with the Pentateuch” (and
of course Deuteronomy) “is that of authorship” (Davidson). ‘Moses was the
originally received author of the Book of Deuteronomy. In early times no one,
Jew, Christian, or heathen, denied the Mosaic authorship till Aben Ezra, in the
twelfth century, raised some doubts” (Patrick). “In the seventeenth century
Richard Simon, in his ‘ Critical History of the Old Testament,’ denied that Moses
was the author of the Pentateuch” (Kitto’s Dict., 8. v. Simon). “Since the middle
of the eighteenth century, the authorship of the Pentateuch has given rise to much
discussion ” (Horne’s Introduction). But the whole controversy may be summarised
under two heads: (a.) The Supplementary (Horne) or Fragmentary Hypothesis
(Havernick) ; and (6.) The Mosaic authorship. In our limited space we refrain
from adding ‘ae word to the controversy, but would rather refer the reader to tw
or three works where the question is stated and literature on the subject is given,
eg., Articles ‘‘ Pentateuch,” “ Deuteronomy,” in Kitto’s Cyc. Bib. Lit. and Smith’s
Dictionary, Worne’s Introduction, vol. ii. 593; Davidson’s Introduction to Old
Testament, vol. i. ; Keil and Delitzsch on Pentateuch, vol. i. 17-28 ; Hengsteuberg’s
Egypt and Books of Moses; Hiivernick’s Introduction to Old Testament ; Colenso’s
Pentateuch; Speaker's Commentary. We would, however, quote a word from
two writers on this matter before leaving it: “If the Pentateuch is not the work
of him who names himself in it as its author, it is the work of deception. The
history is then an untrue history: the laws are falsely ascribed to Moses: the pre-
dictions have been invented post eventum ”’ (Hivernick). ** The genius and dispo-

A 1


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





sition, in other words, the character of the author ; the contents of the Books
themselves, or what they treat of in relation to historical, political, and geographical
topics ; the nature of the styie and language, and the arrangement and form of these
Books, all show Moses to be the author” (Jahn).


IIL Contents. The Book is divided into two parts: the first, from chap. 1, to
xxx, ; the second, from chap, xxxi to xxxiv.


L Consists of three addresses which Moses delivered to all the people according
te the head of chap. % vers. 1-4.
(a.) i. 6-iv, 40. First address, to prepare the way for exposition and enforce
ment of the law.
(3) v.-xxvi. Second address, is the law itself, which Moses set before the
people, and consists of two parta—
1.) v.—xi. General.
2.) xii—xxvi. Special.
(c.) xxvii-xxx. Third address, has reference to the renewal of the covenant,
II. The second part of the Book contains the close of Moses’ life and labours.
a.) Appointment of Joshua to be the leader of Israel into Canaan (xxxi.)
‘ Song of Moses (xxxii, 1-47).
(c.) Announcement of Moses’ death (xxxii. 40-52),
d.) Blessing of Moses (xxxiii.)
(" Account of Moses’ death (xxxiv.)


Vide Keil and Delitzsch, Angus’ Handbook to Bible, Davidson’s Introduction,
Smith’s Dictionary, Speaker’s Commentary, and Kitto’s Cyc. Bib. Lit.


IV. Date. If the Mosaic authorship be accepted, then the date of the Book is
easily fixed, and may be determined by chap. i. 3, which implies that the Book
was composed during the last two months of the life of Moses. (Cf. Keil and
Delitzsch, Horne, Havernick, Speaker’s Commentary.) On the other hand, if the
Mosaic authorship be rejected, then the date is fixed variously by different critics,
¢.g., De Wette, time of Solomon ; Ewald, of Manasseh ; and so on, and so on, quot
homines tot sententie. But see the authorities already named, with the addition
of Jahn, from whom a word: “The language of the Pentateuch is very ancient
Hebrew, and differs considerably from the Psalms and other more modern books,
There are no foreign words to be found in the Pentateuch, except some of old
Egyptian origin. ‘Archaisms occur, and forms less frequent in the modern
books.”


V. Purpose of the Book. Exodus depicts the inauguration of the kingdom of
God on Sinai. Leviticus and Numbers, the former narrates the spiritual, the
latter the poldtical organisation of the kingdom, by facts and legal precepts.
Deuteronomy recapitulates the whole in a hortatory strain, embracing ‘both history
and legislation, and impresses it upon the hearts of the people, for the purpose of
arousing true fidelity to the covenant, and securing its lasting duration, The
economy of the old covenant having been thus established, the revelation of the
law closes with the death of its Mediator (Ketl and Delitzsch).


VL. Relation of Deuteronomy to the other Books of the Pentateuch. It is
not quite accurate to speak of Deuteronomy as merely a recapitulation of things
commanded and done in the preceding books, nor yet as a compendium and sum-
mary of the law. Large portions of the Mosaic code are omitted. Still less is it
a manual for the ignorant, . . . . Deuteronomy is an authoritative and inspired
commentary on the law, serving in some respects also as a supplement and codicil
to it. The preceding books displayed Moses principally in the capacity of the
legislator or annalist. Deuteronomy sets him before us in the light of the prophet
tof. ae Commentary, Keil and Delitzsch).


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





VIL Genuineness. “A very strong proof of the genuineness of the Book Hes
{n its relation to the later writings of the prophets. Of all the books of the Pen
tateuch, Deuteronomy has been made most use of by the prophets, simply because
it is best calculated to serve as a model for prophetic declarations, as also because
of the inward harmony that exists between the prophecies and the law upon which
they are built” (H/dvernick),


VIIL. Style. “The speeches exhibit a unity of style and character which is
strikingly consistent with such circumstances, They are pervaded by the same
vein of thought, the same tone and tenor of feeling, the same peculiarities of con-
ception and expression, They exhibit matter which is neither documentary nor
traditional, but conveyed in the speaker's own words. Their aim is strictly
hortatory ; their style earnest, heart-stirring, impressive, in passages sublime, but
throughout rhetorical” (Speaker's Commentary). “The style throughout is
changed” (from that of the other books of the Pentateuch), ‘ “The manner of
representation is somewhat rhetorical, verbose, and not unlike the prophetic. The
tone is no longer that of the narrator or a lawgiver, but that of a moral preacher
who expatiates in long exhortations. Moreover, the style has some peculiar turns,
which appear not in the other books, but in the prophets, especially Jeremiah”
(Schumann). ‘In Deuteronomy the speaker is evidently an old man, whose age
has rendered him somewhat verbose, captious, and querulous, and disposed to
censure the errors of his juniors” (Jahn).


IX. Deuteronomy in the Synagogue. The Jews divided the Pentateuch into
fifty-four parts, The division into fifty-four sections was to provide a lesson for
each Sabbath, from the Pentateuch, of those years which, according to Jewish
chronology, have fifty-four Sabbaths, In those years which have only fifty-two
Sabbaths, four shorter sections are read on two Sabbaths, ‘The first section,
Genesis i.—vi. 8, is read on the first Sabbath after the Feast of Tabernacles. Deu-
teronomy embraces sections 44 to 54. For a full account see Dr. Ginsburg’s
article “ Haphtara,” in Kitto’s ‘‘ Cyclopedia of Biblical Literature.”


X. Estimates of Deuteronomy. ‘The Book is superior to all the other books
of the Pentateuch, for it is the summing up..... Its contents are a Divine
revelation in words and deed, or, rather, the fundamental revelation through which
Jehovah selected Israel to be His people, and gave to them their rule of life (vowo¢)
or theocratical constitution as a people and kingdom” (Kel and Delitzsch).
“ Moses delivered this address to Israel a short time before his death... . . The
address of Moses is in perfect harmony with his situation, He speaks like a dying
father to his children. The words are earnest, inspired, impressive He looks
back over the whole forty years of their wanderings, reminds of blessings received,
ingratitude returned, God’s judgments and His love, explains laws, adds what is
necessary, &c.” (Hengstenberg). ‘ The Book of Deuteronomy contains, not so much
a recapitulation of the things commanded and done, as related in Exodus, Levi-
vicus, and Numbers, as a compendium and summary of the whole law and wisdom
of the people of Israel, wherein those things which related to the priests are
omitted, and only such things included as the people generally required to know”
(Luther), ‘With respect to the prophetic parts of Deuteronomy, it should be
remarked that Messiah is here more explicitly foretold than in the preceding
books, and described as the completion of the Jewish economy. The prophecies
of Moses increase in number and clearness toward the end of his writings. As he
approached the end of his life he appears to have discerned futurity with more
exactness” (Clapham).


GaP. i HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





CHAPTER IL


Cnirroat, ann Exxcrrican Norms.—I. Biographical. Show. \T1°D (Stkhon). LXX. Zqde,


Joseph. Zeyd». King of the Amorites when the Israelites reached the borders of Canaan,—a
man of courage and audacity. Shortly before the appearance of Israel, he had dispossessed
Moab of a splendid territory. He did not temporise, like Balak, but fought at once..... Og.
‘yp. "Qy. The Amoritish king of Bashan, who ruled sixty cities (¢/. Josh, xiii, 12). One o
the last of the Rephaim, According to tradition, he escaped from the flood by wading beside
the Ark (Sale’s Koran, Note, chap. v.) He was supposed to be the largest of the sons of Anak,
and descended from Ad: gaid to have lived 3000 years, “ refused the warning of Jethro, sent


to him and his people as a prophet... .. Caleb, 173 (Calabh). LXX. Xddc8. Son of


Jephunneh, a Kenezite (ef, Numb, xxxii. 12; Josh. xiv. 6, 14). He was a ruler or prince, and
a head in the tribe of Judah. Apparently he was brave, conscientious, outspoken... . . Jepe


hunneh. 13D Y’phtinndh, LXX.’lepovwh, Father of Caleb, probably of an Edomite tribe,
called Kenezites, from Kenas, their founder, who was a son of Eliphaz, the son of Esau (gf,
Gen. xxxvi. 15, 42; 1 Chron. i. 53; Josh. xiv. 14... .. Joshua. YWIT Y’hoshua, LXX,


~ :

Inoods = whose help is in Jehovah (Gesentus): God the Saviour (Pearson). Son of Nun, tribe
of Ephraim (1 Chron. vii. 27). Born about the time Moses fied to Midian. The future captain
was at first aslave, Mentioned first in the fight against Amalek at Rephidim, where he led
Israel. When Moses ascended Sinai, Joshua accompanied him. He was one of the twelve
chiefs sent to spy out the land. He evidently was one of the satural leaders of Israel, and
therefore a man of character, force, and energy..... Nun. }9). Nun. In Syriac and
Arabic = a fish, LXX. Navy. Nothing is known of him.


IL Historical Allusions and Contemporary History. ‘ Amorite.” ‘IDX Emori. The


dwellers on the summits—mountaineers; one of the chief nations who possessed the land of
Canaan before its conquest by the Israelites, As ‘‘ Highlanders” they contrast with the
‘¢ Canaanites,” who were “ Lowlanders.” As children of the hills they were a bold, hardy race,
From the days of Abram to the time of Joshua this people fully maintained their character of
the ‘‘ warrior.” After the conquest of Canaan, nothing is heard ot them in the Bible, except
in the usual formula where the early inhabitants are occasionally referred to. .... Anakim
D’Ply “Anakim. A race of giants, so called either from their stature or strength. They were


descendants of Arba, and dwelt in the southern part of Canaun. The race appears to have
been divided into three families, Their chief city was Hebron... .. Of contemporary history
it is impossible to speak definitely,—it is one vast chaos, where the mind is lost in the wild
confusion of conflicting theories. In our limited space we dare not venture on more than,
Egypt was ; Assyria was possibly throwing out the rootlets of the future tree of her empire;
Greece was the habitation of scattered tribes; Phonecia probably was sending forth her fleets
to plough the ocean; but so uncertain are the records, silence is esteemed better than what
might be shown a baseless theory,

Ii. Natural History. Ver. 1. Red Sea. Heb. Suph, lit. “reeds,” seaweed, sedge, river-
grass, rushes: specially of the thick and strong rushes on the banks of the Nile, and of the
sedges of the Red Sea, from which this latter receives ita name of Yam Suph. The word in
this verse gives name to some place in the district of the wanderings. Ver. 25. ‘‘ Fruit of the
land.” ‘*'The Hebrews had three generic terms, designating three great classes of the fruits of
the land, closely corresponding to what may be expressed in English as (1.) Corn-fruit or field
produce; (2.) Vintage fruit ; (3.) Orchard fruit, he principal fruits are grapes, olives, figs;
those less common are pomegranate, apricot, walnut, almond, apple, quince, mulberry, date,
orange, lemon, citron, banana, and prickly pear. Ver. 44. ‘* As bees do.” Of bees in general
we say nothing, for there are so many handbooks on these busy little creatures. For the force
of the reference, see quotation from ‘‘ Park’s Travels,”

1V. Manners and Customs. The tone of the chapter, apart from such direct references as
the dwelling in tents, and moving from place to place, indicates a primitive people. Moses is
the father to them: they each bring their little troubles to him—“ he carries” as a father his
child—his words are authoritative. Ver.11. A complimentary wish. In early stages of
society, when life is simple, large families are a blessing. It is only in highly organised and
artificial forms of life that families become an extravagance. Ver. 13. The people lived in
families and tribes, Kinship, rather than geographical bounds, made divisions for the nation,
The tribal relations were long kept up. Ver. 28. ‘‘ Walled cities.” Warfare was of a personal
kind, the chief weapons being those by which a man could inflict injury on a man. With the
exception of the battering ram, the ancients had few means of assaulting fortifications. A


wall, though useless now, was of the utmost importance then. For the same reason, the .


‘‘great” and ‘‘tall” men were a terror to their foes. A giant was a ‘‘ somebody” in those

days. Ver. 39, ‘‘ Little ones. ... a prey.” The conquerors took captive the living, The

men who survived were generaliy put to death, sometimes the women too; bat the latter, for
4


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY ; DEUTERONOMY., OHaP, 2.





the most part, with the children, were made into slaves, This fact exemplifies the statement
in note on ver. 11; children were valuable, Ver, 27. ‘‘ Murmured in your tents.” Asa roving
and pastoral people they had no fixed habitation, Houses were unknown. ‘Their temple waa
only a fabric of skins and linen cloth and rope—a Tabernacle.

V. Chronology. The chronology of this Book, like that in all the post-Exodus, dates from
the escape from Kgypt, when the people entered on their real life of freedom (¢f, Exod. xii, 1, 2);
ow date in ver. 3 is, therefore, the eleventh month of the fortieth year from their leaving

Bypt.
VI. Literary Criticism. ‘‘On this side Jordan,” render, beyond Jordan. The Hebrew
word = ‘‘this side,” ‘‘other side” (¢f. Gesentus). ‘‘ The phrase b’eber hay-yarden, means
literally, ‘at the side or passage of Jordan’” (Speaker's Commentary). “In the plain”
MAY] Ba-k-ri-bah. Gesenius connects the word with one which means “burnt up,”


KS -e8 ¥:
“‘ waste,” therefore ‘sterile’? = desert. But besides this general meaning there is a special
significance, according to Gesenius, which the writer in ‘‘Smith’s Dictionary” accepts, when
the word is used with the article as in the present instance: the word then is a proper name,
and was applied to the country between the Dead Sea and the Elenitic Gulph (ef. Geographical
Notes). ‘Red Sea,” render, “over against Suph” (Speaker’s Commentary). ‘‘ Flags” (Benisch).
“It is impossible that our translators can here be correct in rendering Suph, the Red Sea:
(a) because that is invariably called ‘ Yam Suph’= sea of Suph; and (b) because Moses and
the people were at this time on the eastern side of Jordan (ver. 5), and, consequently, far
enough from the Red Sea” (Carpenter). “Dizahab.” Ait J} Di Zabab, The word should be


separated as it isin Hebrew. Aszahab means gold, the LXX. rendered it caraypicea, and the
Vulgate ubi auri est plurimum. It is probably the name of a place, Ver, 2. For position of
the verse ¢f. infra. Ver. 5. Moses speaks in the third person of himself. This need be no
difficulty. It was frequently done by ancient writers, both religious and profane : ¢f, John’s
** the disciple whom Jesus loved,” and Casar’s Commentary, the writer always speaks of him-
self in the third person..... ‘* Began,” better, ‘‘ undertook.” Ver. 6. ‘* Dwelt long
enough,” “‘sitten much” (Ainsworth). Ver.7. ‘‘ Nigh thereunto,” Hebrew, * his neighbours.”
Ver. 8. ‘‘Set,” Hebrew, “given” (Benisch). Ver. 13. ‘‘ Take,” Hebrew, ‘‘ give,” ‘ put,”
(Benisch). Ver. 15. ‘‘ Made,” Hebrew, ‘‘ gave” (Speaker’s Commentary). Ver. 17. ‘‘ Respect
persons,” Hebrew, ‘‘ acknowledge faces,” ‘‘ recognise a face’ (Benisch, cf. Gesenius). Ver. 22.
**Search,” Hebrew, ‘‘dig.” They were to uncover what was concealed, Ver. 23, ‘‘ The thing
leased me well, Hebrew, ‘‘ was good in my eyes.” Ver. 25. ‘‘ Brought,” ‘‘ restored ” (Benisch).
er. 26. ‘‘Commandment,” Hebrew, ‘‘mouth.” According to a common figure of speech
in Hebrew, the instrument is used for the thing accomplished by that instrument, Ver. 28,
** Discouraged,” Hebrew, “melt.” Ver, 27. ‘‘Murmured,” Hebrew, ‘‘ vituperated ” (Bentsch).
Ver. 41. ‘‘ Weapons of war,” or armour..... ‘“‘ Ye were ready to go up.” Rather, perhaps,
“ye made light of going up;” #.¢., ‘‘ye were ready to attempt it as a trifling undertaking.”
For further comments on this much-discussed verse, vide Speaker’s Commentary. Ver. 44. ‘In
Seir,” ‘‘from” Seir (Clapham). ‘‘ As bees do,” the same comparison in Iliad xvi, 259, &.
VII. Geographical. Jordan. JJ"). Yardén = to descend. LXX, Iop3dvys. Vul. Jordanis,


ealled now by the Arabs Esh-Sheriah = the watering-place. Has two sources: one rises at the
western base of a hill where Dan once stood, and gushes forth a great fountain, the largest in
Syria, and, mingling with the waters of another fountain which springs up under an immense
oak close by, forms the Leddan (ancient Dan), Four miles east, on a terrace of Hermon, at the
foot of a limestone cliff, is the second source, which bursts forth from a yawning abyss in a
gloomy cavern. Uniting, these two streams form the Jordan, which flows very rapidly through
a deep valley all its length till it is lost in the Dead Sea, Length about 200 miles..... The
Arabah (cf. ‘‘ Critical Notes,” ** Literary Criticism”), ‘‘ This is a name given to the deep,
low lying plain on both sides of the Jordan, which runs from the Lake of Gennesaret to the
Dead Sea, and stretches southward from the Dead Sea to Aila, at the northern extremity of
the Red Sea, as we may very clearly see from Dent. ii. 8, where the way which the Israelites
took past Edom to Aila is called the way of the Arabah, and also from the fact that the Dead
Sea is called the sea of the Arabah (Deut. iii. 17, iv. 49). At present the name Arabah is
simply attached to the southern half of this valley, between the Dead Sea and Red Sea;
whilst the northern part, between the Dead Sea and Sea of Galilee, is called El Ghor, though
several Arabic geographers extend the name Ghor from the Sea of Galilee to Aila” (Ked
and Deliizsch)..... Red Sea. *)D. Suph. (éf. ‘‘ Critical Notes,” ‘‘ Literary Criticism’’), Keil
and Delitzsch make Suph to be the Red Sea, ‘*Some reedy place out of Palestine” (Furst).
“‘Suph, probably a district on the frontier of Moab. Ptolemy mentions a people called
Sophonites, who dwelt in Arabia Petrsea, and who have been thought to take their name from


this place” (Carpenter). .... Paran. TINS Pa-rin = white, LXX. and Josh, apd»; (a.)

A desert = et-Tih; (6.) A mountain near Seir (Deut. xxxiii. 2; Hab. iii. 8); (¢.) Probably a

town (Smith’s Dictionary). ‘‘ Paran may either be mount Paran of Deut, xxxiii. 2, or a cit

' mentioned by Eusebius, Jerome, and several modern geographers near the mount” (Speaker's

Commentary... . » Tophel. aan Tophél = plaster, mortar. Probably identical with Tufileb
&


CHAP, L HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.,





(Robinson) ; and “a locality so called from the chalk-beds there” (First). “It is stilla eon. —
siderable place, some little distance south-cast of the Dead Sea” (Speaker's Commentary), —
** Numerous sprinvs and rivulets (ninety-nine according to the Arabs), the waters of which
unite below, render the town very agreeable. It is surrounded by a large plantation of fruite


trees — apples, apricots, figs, pomegranates, &c.” (Buckhardt)..... Laban. 129 Laban,


Identical with Libnah, this latter being the feminine form of the word; but whether the place
mentioned here can be identified with that mentioned Num. xxziii. 20, remains to be seen,


. +. Hazeroth, nis Khi&tzérdth = *‘ enclosures,” ‘hamlets.’ In Numbers xi. 85, xii,


16, xxxiii. 17, the LXX. renders it "Aonpw0, but here Addy. Though identified with
a station of the Israelites (Num. xi, 85), yet on insufficient evidence, Nothing is known —


for certain of the place... . . Dizahab (ef. ‘‘ Literary Notes”). .... ‘‘ Horeb.” ah Khoréb,


LXX. Xwpt8. ‘*A top of Sinai, on which the Mosaic law was announced, now G’ibl Misa,
Formerly Horeb was the general name, and, Sinai the more restricted ” (Furst). On the ques-
tion of the peculiar and contradictory use of ‘‘Horeb” in Deuteronomy, see Note in Kitto’s
Family Bible, and the articleg ‘‘ Horeb,” ‘‘ Sinai,” in the various Dictionaries, ‘‘ The fixed
use of the name Horeb, to designate the mountain group in general, instead of the special
name Sinai, which is given to the particular peak whereon the law was given, is in keeping
with the rhetorical style of the Book” (Keil and Delttzsch, of. &c.)

Kadesh Barnea, YIVA WP Kadésh Barnss. Kddys Bar}, Sometimes written Kadesh,


It is probable that the term ‘‘ Kadesh,” though applied to a city, had also a wider applica-
tion, and referred to a region, in which Kadesh-Meribah certainly, and Kadesh Barnes
probably, indicates a precise spot... . . The nearest approximation, then, which can be given
to a site for the city of Kadesh, may be probably attained by drawing a circle from the pasa
Es-Siifa, at the radius of about a day’s journey; its south-western quadrant will intersect the
‘¢ wilderness of Paran” or Et-Tth, which is there overhung by the superimposed plateau of the
mountain of the Amorites ; while its south-eastern one will cross what has been designated the
‘‘wilderness of Zin.” This seems to satisfy all the conditions of the passages of Genesis,
Numbers, and Deuteronomy which refer to it, The nearest site in harmony with this view
which has yet been suggested is undoubtedly the “ Ain-el-Weibeh” (¢f, Smith’s Dictionary).....
Ser, YYW = “rough” or ‘‘rugged.” Zmelp, There isa “land” of and “ mount” Seir (ef, _
Gen, xxxii. 8, xxxvi. 30, xiv. 6; and Deut. i. 2). Apparently they are the same. The original
name of the mountain ridge extended along the east side of the valley of the Arabah from the
Dead Sea to the Hlanitic Gulph. The name was derived either from Seir, the Horite (Gen,
xxxvi. 20), or, more probably, from the rough aspect of the whole country. The sharp and
serrated ridges, the jagged rocks and cliffs, the straggling bushes and stunted trees, give the
whole scene a sternness and ruggedness almost unparalleled. Mount Seir was originally
inhabited by the Horites, who were doubtless the excavators of those singular rock dwellings
with which the district abounds, They were dispossessed by the posterity of Esau (Deut. ii. 12),
The mount was the subject of a terrible prophetic curse (Ezek, xxxv.) .... Heshbon. yawn ‘


Khéshbon = stronghold, LXX. ’EseSér. The capital city of Sihon, king of the Amorites
(Num. xxi. 26), It stands on the boundary line between Reuben and Gad. The ruins of
Heshbon, twenty miles east of Jordan, mark the site of the ancient city. Chiefly celebrated
from its connection with Sihon. After the captivity it fell into the hands of the Moabites,
In the fourth century it was a place of note, but now desolate. The ruins of Heshbon stand
on 2 low hill rising out of the great plateau, and are more than a mile in circuit, but not a
building is entire. One remarkable structure remains with the workmanship of the different
ages visible—the massive stones of the Jewish period, the sculptured cornice of the Roman,
the light arch of the Saracenic, Many cisterns and a large reservoir remain. ,... B

JWT Hab-Bashin, almost invariably written with the article before it = the basalt land. A


district on the east of Jordan. It extended from the borders of Gilead on the south to Mount
Hermon on the north ; and from the Arabah or Jordan valley on the west to Salcah on the
east, At the conquest it was bestowed on the half tribe of Manasseh, and was proverbial for
its oaks and bulla, Astaroth. nanuy Ashtardth, LXX.’Acrapéé, A city on the east of


Jordan in Bashan, in the kingdom of “Og, doubtless 80 called from being a seat of the worship
of the goddess of the same name. For the fortunes of A., ¢f. Josh. xiii. 31; 1 Chron, vi. 71.
It subsequently passes from history, Jerome tells us it was about six miles from Ada, which
was twenty-five from Bostra, The only trace of the name that modern research has discovered
is Tell Ashterah (Ritter, Porter, &c.) Edrei. YTIR Edrvi, "Edpatv. There are two towns of


this name : one in the north of Palestine, the other to the east of Jordan. It is with the latter
that we have to deal. In Scripture it is only mentioned in connection with the victory of Israel
over the Amorites under Og. It was one of the two capitals of Bashan (Num. xxi, 33 ; Deut.
i. 4; Josh. xii. 4), and continued to be a large and important city till the seventh century A.D.
though no further reference to it is made in Scripture. The ruins of an ancient city,





ee


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY, omar. I,








bearing the name of Edr’a, stand ona rocky promontory, which projects from the south-weat
corner of the Lejah. The site a strange one—without water, without access, except most diffi«
eult, seems to have been chosen for its strength and security, The identity of this site with
the Edrei of Scripture has been challenged, but see ‘‘Smith’s Dictionary ” for full particulars,


- -.. Lebanon. y222 L’bhindn. AlSavos. A mountain range in the north of Palestine, The


3
name Lebanon means *‘ white,” and was applied on account of the snow which covers it for the
greater part of the year, or on account of the white colour of its limestone rocks, cliffs, and
peaks. There are two ranges parallel, named Lebanon and Anti-Lebanon, or Lebanon toward
the sun-rising, ¢.¢., Eastern L. It was from the western range Solomon obtained his timber.
The snow remains in patches the whole year on the summits of Lebanon. There is a very good
article on “‘ Lebanon” in ‘‘Smith’s Dictionary,” so too in Kitto..... Euphrates, WD


P'rath. Eigpdrns. Probably a word of Arian origin; and if so, means “the good and abound-
ing river.” ‘The Euphrates is the largest, longest, and most important river in Western Asia,
Its two chief sources are in the Armenian mountains. These two streams flow on, one 270, the
other 400 miles, till they meet at Kebban-Maden, where a river is formed 120 yards wide,
very deep and rapid. This flows nearly south in a tortuous course, forcing a way through the
ranges of Taurus and Anti-Taurus, as if it would break into the Mediterranean, but, opposed by
the ranges of Amanus and Lebanon, it turns south-east, and in this direction proceeds 1000
miles into the Persian Gulph. The length is 1780 miles, of which 1200 are navigable for boats
and small steamers. The greatest width of the river ia at a distance of 700 or 800 miles from
its mouth, while much lower down it is nearly 800 yards narrower, and not go deep by six feet.
The causes of this singular phenomenon are the entire absence of tributaries below the Khabour,


end the employment of water in irrigation... .. Eshcol. 2DUN Eshedl, "Eoxod. A wady


in the neighbourhood of Hebron, explored by the spies sent by Moses from Kadesh Barnea.
From this fruitful valley was brought a large cluster of grapes, which, from the meaning of
the word in Hebrew, explained to the spies the name of the place (Num. xiii. 23, 24). But it
may be instructive to remember that, when Abraham dwelt in this locality, the names of the .
three chiefs of the Amorites, his neighbours, were Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre; and possibly the
name of one may have attached itself to one of the fertile valleys near their home, when the
name would be Amoritic, not Hebrew. .... Hormah. MW Khidrmsh was the chief town


of a Canaanitizh tribe on the south of Palestine, reduced by Joshua. Ita ancient name was
Zephath (Judges i. 17). It became subsequently a city of Judah, though apparently belonging
to Simeon, whose territory is reckoned part of the former.


Saunin’s DisseRTaTion on DevtrRonomy, Cuap. I.


Moses, being about to die, recapitu-
lates the laws of God in the presence of
all Israel. When Moses was about to
die, he made a last effort to stamp on
the mind of Israel the law he had already
given, The speeches made on that occa-
sion form the Book of Deuteronomy—
the second law. These discourses were
not given all at once, on one day, but on
several occasions,

I. He briefly relates to the people
the most memorable events that befell
them from the time they left Mount
Horeb

(1.) The order they received to make
the windings toward the mountains of
the Amorites, &c. &c.

(2.) The sending of the spies; their
report; the murmurings and _punish-
ment of the people; the dreadful oath
of God that none should enter the Pro-
vaised Land.

3.) ‘The divers tours made by them.

(3 The victories gained over Sihon


and Og;; the distribution of the country
of the heathen.

(5.) The prayer of Moses for the re-
vocation of God’s sentence on himself.

(6.) The plagues and miracles,

II. Moses recapitulated all the laws

—moral, ceremonial, political, and mili-
tary.
IIL, Moses above all presses most
home to the people the law which the
Israelites stood in the greatest need of,
t.e., that which was calculated to re-
strain their boundless inclination towarda
idolatry, and which caused them so often
to relapse into it (cf. Deut. iv. 15, xiii. 6,
&e., xvii. 2, &e.

IV. Moses established the necessity
of knowing the law of God, and of
making it the object of perpetual medi-
tation. All must read it: the young
has no excuse tn his weakness, nor the
old in his infirmities (cf. vi. 6, 7, dec.)

¥Y. Moses set before the eyes of the
Israelites the great reasons ee, ought


Gap. 1


to induce them to make the laws of God
the rule of their behaviour.

(1.) All these laws terminated in the
love of God as their centre. (x. 12,
13).

tb) These laws are of themselves
sufficient to accumulate glory and hap-
piness both on nations and private per-
sons if they observe them religiously (¢/.
iv. 5, 6).

(3.) These laws were made by a Being
which had dealt out His wonders and
profuseness to a people for whom He
had made them (iv. 32).

(4.) These laws draw down number-
less blessings upon those who follow
them, and as many misfortunes on those
that break them (xi. 26).

(5.) These laws are endued with in-
trinsic justice (iv. 8).

(6.) These laws are adapted to the
faculties and understandings of those
for whom they were made (xxx. 11).

VI. Moses sharply reproaches the
children of Israel for their ingratitude,
This is why the Targum calls the book
the Book of Reproaches (cf. xxxii. 5, 6,
xv. 18, xxix. 30).

VII. Moses foretells the catastrophe
into which the people should fall through
their rebellions (¢f. xxviii. 62, &., xxxi.
1, &e.

oe that Moses had taken all the
care his wisdom and prudence could
suggest to engage the Israelites to be
faithful to God, he concludes in lamenting
the little success all these remonstrances
were likely to produce.— Hpitome of
Saurin’s lavitt, Dissertation.

Ver. 1. “ On this side,” or, on the out-
side, t.¢., beyond Jordan, as the Greek
translateth, This word (JAYI b’sbér)


signifieth both sides, and by circum-
stance of place is to be understood. To
those out of Canaan, it was on this side;
to the Israclites in Canaan, it was beyond,
or the outside of Jordan, where Moses
spake these things.—A insworth.

“On this side.” To those on the east,
it was this; to those on the weat of
Jordan, the other side.

“ The plain :” to wit, of Moab’s land,
as ver. 5; see Num. xxii. 1. There
Moses spake these things and died (Deut.
xxxiv. 5). Chald. saith Moses rebuked

8


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


them, “ because they had provoked God
in the plain.”— Ainsworth.

“Which Moses spake to au.” An
objection raised by some to these words,
and thence to the value of the book, ie
that al/ Israel could not hear. In answer
to this, it is said Whitefield was heard
distinctly half a mile off. In Australia
the “coey” can be heard at a distance
of two, or even three miles. Where the
air is clear and elastic, as it is in some
localities, sound is heard a very long
way off. That such was the case in the
Sinaitic peninsula seems almost certain
from a passage in Dean Stanley’s “‘ Sinai
and Palestine:” ‘ Among the charac-
teristics of Sinai, one must not be
omitted—the deep stillness, and conse-
quent reverberations of the human voice,
From the highest point of Ras Sasafeh
to its lowest peak, a distance of sixty
feet, the page of a book, distinctly but
not loudly read, was perfectly audible;
and every remark of the various groups
of travellers, descending from the heights
of the same point, rose clearly to those
immediately above them. It was the
belief of the Arabs who conducted
Niebuhr, that they could make them-
selves heard across the Gulf of Akaba;
a belief doubtless exaggerated, yet pro-
bably originated or fostered by the great
distance to which, in these regions, the
voice can actually be carried.”


A question sometimes raised with re-
gard to these early books of the Bible is,
how were they preserved? The following
may assist some in the presence of this
difficulty :—

“Various doubts have sometimes been
thrown out as to the existence of writ-
ings at this period. Waiving the evidence
of the Mosaic records, we may remark
that hieroglyphical inscriptions were
known upon stone in Egypt at least as
early as the fourth dynasty, or B.c. 2450;
that inscribed bricks were common in
Babylonia about two centuries later, and
that writing upon papyruses, both in the
hieroglyphies and the hieratic characters,
was familiar to the Egyptians under the
18th and 19th dynasties, which is ex-
actly the time to which the Mosaic
records would belong. It seems certain


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


ona. L





that Moses, if educated by a daughter
of one of the Ramesséde kings, would
be well acquainted with the Egyptian
method of writing with ink upon the
papyrus ; while it is also probable that
Abraham, who emigrated not earlier than
the 19th century before our era from the
great Chaldean capital Ur, would have
brought with and transmitted to his
descendants the alphabetic system with
which the Chaldeans of his day were
acquainted. There is thus every reason
to suppose that writing was familiar to
the Jews when they quitted Egypt ; and
‘the mention of it as a common practice
in the books of Moses is in perfect
accordance with what we know of the
eondition of the world at the time from
other sources,

“Some writers urge that the Jews
could not have learned alphabetic writing
from the Egyptians, since ‘‘ the mode of
representing ideas to the eye, which the
Egyptians employed till a period long
subsequently, was widely dsferent from
the alphabetic writing of the Hebrews.”
But the difference was not really very
great. It is a mistake to suppose that
the Egyptian writing was, except to a
very small extent, symbolical. Both in
the hieroglyphic and the hieratic, as a
general rule, the words are spelt phonett-
cally first, and are then followed by
a symbol or symbols.” — Rawlinson’s
“ Bampton Leciures.”


Ver. 2. “‘ This verse seems misplaced ; it
should come in between vers. 19, 20.”—
Horsley, cf. also Dr. Wall, Kennicott, &.

“‘Transcribers are apt to transpose
letters, words, or sentences. . . . Trans-
position of verses may be found in
Lamentations ii. iii, and iv.”—Jahn.

“ Eleven days’ journey.” ‘So many
days’ march for a foot army ; but Philo,
the Jew, saith a horseman might do it
in three days (triduo confict potuit).”—
Trapp.

“If it be objected that they spent
more days in that journey (Num. xi.—
xiii.), we answer that Moses might mean
there only the days in which they were
upon the march. For according to
Adrichomius, who had been upon tks
spot, the journey itself was too short to


take eleven days. However, no wonder
they were eleven days going it, consider-
ing the great number of their flocks, and
the bulk and weight of their carriage.”
— Bibliotheca Biblica.

“The way was plain, and known
between Horeb, whither God brought
them on purpose to serve Him, and
Kadesh Barnea, which was the’ begin-
ning of an habitable country (cf. Num.
xiii. 26, xx. 16).”—Maimonides.

“There is another route, not along
the plain of the Arabah and by Mount
Seir, but over the high ground to the
west.”— Annotated Paragraph Bible.

“Kadesh is named as the southern
point of the Promised Land. In this
verse, a8 in the first, the mind of the
reader seems directed to the past history.
It was but eleven days’ journey from the
Mountain of the Covenant to the Pro-
mised Land, yet in the fortieth year the
chosen people were still in the wilder
ness.” —Speaker’s Commentary.


Eleven days’ journey from Horeb to
Kadesh Barnea ;” and yet, in God’s pro-
vidence, the people required forty years
to accomplish it. What takes the short-
est time is not alway the best path. De-
sert wandering was a preparation for the
destined goal. However diversified the
opinions of men in religion, all are agreed
that the end and aim of life is not here.
Life is but a preparation. Man’s true
destiny is immortality. Two things
necessary for the man who would reach
his true destiny—

I, That we may reach our true des-
tiny, Christ must take hold of us,
Several forces in society are laying hold
of men—ambition, avarice, lust, pleasure,
pride, superstition. One or more, per-
haps all, grasp and hold men. They
extend around him like some dense
poisoning fog, robbing the man of both
light and strength. While environed
with such, or indeed any form of sin,
Christ would break His way into us
with help. “I came not to call the
righteous but sinners” (cf. similar texts;
cf, also 1 Tim. i. 14, 16; 1 Pet. ii, 3;
Acts x. 36, xiii. 38, 39; Col. ii. 13).

il. That we may reach our true
destiny we must take hold Christ.


GHAP, L





(a.) We take hold of Christ by faith

Him,

(o.) We show our faith in Him as
well as our love to Him by keeping His
commandments (John xiv, 15, xv. 10;
James ii. 17, 18; Gal. v. 6),

(c.) We also take hold of Christ by
taking refuge in His atonement,

“In the East there is a tree which
is a non-conductor of electricity, The
people know it, and, when a storm comes,
they flee to it for safety. Beautiful
picture of the Saviour! Beautiful em-
blem of Calvary! It is a non-conductor
of wrath. Get underneath it, and you
are safe for ever.” —Thomas Jones,


Ver. 3. “ Fortieth year” of Israel’s
coming out of Egypt. In the first
month of this year, Mary (Miriam),
Moses’s sister, died (Num. xx. 1). In
the first day of the fifth month thereof,
Aaron, his brother, died (Num. xxxiii.
38) ; and now, at the end of the year,
Moses himself dieth, when he had re-
peated the law, and renewed the covenant
between God and His people Israel.—
Ainsworth,

Moses spoke what the Lord had com-
manded him; in other words, Moses gave
the people what God had given him (cf,
Acts iii. 6), Though the words were
Moses’s, the thing uttered was of God.
Some speak according to the wisdom of
the world: they can tell much about its
craft, villany, rottenness, hollowness ;
and they preach selfishness, more or less
refined, as a means of personal defence,
and the true source of success, Some
speak according to one thing; others
according to something else: Moses
spoke according to what God had given
him. He therefore spoke God’s truth,

I. Because Moses spoke God’s truth
he uttered what would be advantageous
tothe people. The path of happiness is
the way of wisdom. Wisdom is happi-
ness as well as pleasant (Prov. viii.),
True wisdom is the fear of God (Job
xxviii, 28) The man who declares
God’s truth instructs in wisdom and
leads men to happiness. Happiness is
what men are seeking. Those who con-
duct others into happiness meet an
wnivereal want. Blessed is the man

10


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY ; DEUTERONOMY.





who supplies widespread demands! He
givea bread to the hungry.
“The happy have whole days, and these they
use ;
The unhappy have but hours, and those they
lose.” —Dryden.
“True happiness (if understood)
Consists alone in doing good.”
—-Somerville,
“No man is blest by accident or guess;
True wisdom is the price of happiness.”
— Young.


‘The only happiness a brave man
ever troubles himself with asking much
about is the happiness to get his work
done. Not ‘I can’t eat!’ but ‘I can’t
work |’—that was the burden of all wise
complaining among men.”—Z’ Carlyle.

‘Happiness is no other than sounde
ness and perfection of mind.”—Anto
ninus.

“ Happiness... the inward com-
placence we find in acting reasonably.”
—Atterbury.

“ There are two ways of being happy:
we may either diminish our wants or
augment our means; either will do; the
result is the same. It is for each man
to decide for himself, and do what
happens to be the easier, If you are
idle, or sick, or poor, however hard it
may be to diminish your wants, it will
be harder to augment your means. If
you are active and prosperous, or young
and in good health, it may be easier for
you to augment your means than dimi-
nish your wants. But if you are wise,
you will do both at the same time,. . .
and if you are very wise, you will do
both in such a way as to augment the
general happiness of society.” — B.
Franklin,

“ Religion directs us rather to secure
inward peace than outward ease.”—Til-
lotson,

“The happiness of life consists, like
the day, not in single flashes (of light),
but in one continuous mild serenity.
The most beautiful period of the heart’s
existence is in this calm, equable light,
even though it be only moonlight or
twilight. Now the mind alone can
obtain for us this heavenly cheerfulness
and peace.”— Richter.

IL. Because Moses spoke what God
gave him, he could speak—


HOMILETIOAL COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY:


Har, L





6.) With power.
a.\ With cowrage—God on his side,
“ He holds no parley with unmanly fears;
Where duty bids, he confidently steers,
Faces a thousand dangers at her call,
er, trusting in his God, surmounts them


6) With courage.


“Courage consists, not in blindly
overlooking danger, but in seeing it and
conquering it.” —Réchter.

‘“‘A great deal of talent is lost in the
world for the want of a little courage.
Every day sends to their graves a num-

‘ber of obscure men, who have remained
in obscurity because their timidity has
prevented them from making a first
effort; and who, if they could have
been induced to begin, would in all pro-
bability have gone great lengths in the
career of fame.”—Sidney Smith.

“The truest courage is always mixed
with circumspection; this being the
quality which distinguishes the courage
of the wise from the hardiness of the
rash and foolish.”—Jones of Naylands,

“Courage mounteth with occasion.”
— Shakespeare.

An example of courage.—Henry III,
king of France, one day said to Palissy
the potter, who was a Calvinist, that
‘he would be compelled to give him
(Palissy) up to his enemies unless he
changed his religion.” ‘ You have often
said to me, sire,” was the undaunted
reply of Palissy, “that you pitied me;
but as for me, I pity you, who have
given utterance to such words as, ‘I
shall be compelled.’ These are unkingly
words ; and I say to you, in royal phrase,
that neither the Guises, nor all your
people, nor yourself, are able to compel
a humble manufacturer of earthenware
to bend his knee to statues.”


(b.) With power: he would speak as


one having authority, and not as the

scribes (cf. Matt. vii. 29). His words

were not the echoes of another man’s

experience : the words spoken represent

things real and living in his own heart.

“There is no keeping back the power we
have ;


He hath no power who hath no power to
use.” —Bailey.


«“ Power shows the man.”—FPittachus,


“He speaks with power, because as
strong as heaven’s heat, and as its bright.
ness clear” (Hill); or “as the rock of
ocean, that stems athousand wild waves
on the shore,”—Campbell.

III. Because Moses spoke what God
gave him to speak, he relieved himself
of a great responsibility.

(a.) Commissions are sometimes in-
trusted to men by God which they are
afraid to execute. They thereby entail
calamity upon themselves and all con-
nected with them (cf. Jonah).

(8.) Duties imposed by God, if ne
glected, bring desolation on the man
and his family (¢f. Achan, Judges vii.).

(c.) Knowledge, wisdom, visions of
the Divine glory, are vouchsafed to men
to be used for the improvement of the
world, the upholding of the Church, and
the honour of God. If misused, the
consequences will be terrible (cf. Balaam,
Solomon, our own Lord Byron).

(d.) Money, influence, opportunity, is
intrusted to many in these days. Such
is not to be lavished on ourselves. God
gave it: He expects it to be used in His
service. Moses recognised this. His
power, his thoughts, came from God, he
used them for God, and therefore spoke
what God gave him to speak. He thus
relieved himself of a great responsibility.
To all are intrusted “ talents”—five,
two, one. If we hide, or misuse, or
waste, God will punish, and take from
us even what we have (ef. Shakespeare’s
Julius Cassar,” iv. 3—


“ There is a tide in the affairs of men,


And we must take the current when it
serves,
Or lose our venture.”


“ Opportunity has hair in front, be-
hind she is bald; if you seize her by
the forelock you may hold her, but, if .
suffered to escape, not Jupiter himself
can catch her again.”

‘ Miss not the occasion ; by the forelock take


That subtle power, the never-halting Time,
Lest a mere moment’s putting off should


make
Mischance almost as heavy as a nee
—Wo


‘All men, if they work not as in a
Great Taskmaster’s eye, will Bee wrong,


OmaP, I.


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY.





work unhappily for themselves, and for
you.”—-Carlyle.

“Thousands of men breathe, move,
and live, pass off the stage of life, and
are heard of no more. Why? They do
not partake of good in the world, and
none were blessed by them; none could
point to them as the means of their re-
demption ; not a line they wrote, not a
word they spoke, could be recalled, and
so they perished; their light went out
in darkness, and they were not remem-
bered more than the insects of yesterday,
Will you thus live and die, O man im-
mortal? Live for something. Do good,
end leave behind you a monument of
virtue.” —Chalmers.

“No man is born unto himself alone.

Who lives unto himself, he lives to none:

The world’s a body, each man a member is,

To add some measure to the public bliss,


Where much is given, there much shall be
required,” — Quarles.


Ver. 4. “ After he had slain Sihon.”

If Samson had not turned aside to see
the lion that not long before he had
slain, he had not found the honey in the
carcass (Judges xiv. 8). So if we re-
cognise not our dangers, deliverances,
and achievements, we shall neither taste
how sweet the Lord is nor return Him
His due praise. So true thankfulness is
required,

I. Recognition,

II. Estimation.

III. Retribution (cf. Ps, exvi. 3, 7,
12.—Trapp.

The slaughter of Sihon and Og was
an encouragement to Israel for their after
wars, and an argument to move them
unto thankful obedience to the law now
repeated. — Ainsworth,

“Sihon, the king of the Amorites,
which dwelt in Heshbon.”

For situation of Heshbon, ef, “ Cri-
tical Notes.” Meaning of Heshbon
is “stronghold.” Sihon dwelt in a
stronghold. Here was shelter and
safety. In doing this he showed his
wisdom. But the wisest is sometimes
unwise. Sihon betrayed his humanity.
He left his stronghold, and so was guilty
of two foolish things: he left a strong-
hold, and he joined the heathen to fight
against ae and His people. These

2


words are fraught with instruction, fos
they bring Sihon before as as an example
and warning.

L Sihon as anexample. He did well
to dwell in a strongbold.

(a.) A stronghold is a place fortified
by nature or art: it is made strong by
God or man. It is a place of security.
The soul needs a place of security where
to flee from spiritual foes. The Psalm-
ist frequently spoke of God as his for-
tress (cf. Ps. xi. 2, xxxi. 3, lxxi. 3, xci.
3, cxliv. 2).

Shakespeare has well said—

“God is our fortress, in whose conquering
6

Tattia resolve to acale their flinty bulwarks ™
To which we may add from the same
writer—

“Tt - a forted residence ’gainat the tooth ef
ime,

And rasure of Oblivion.”

To the Christian, God in Christ is the
stronghold. Though the imagery for the
most part (Christ as a Rock) is that of
8 foundation (Matt. vii. 24; Rom. ix
33; 1 Pet. ii 8), yet the metaphor is
open in other places for other interpre-
tation (cf 1 Cor. x. 4). Christ as a
rock is a rock to be made use of by
man, Man is to use Christ as a foun-
dation to build upon. Christ will be to
men now what the rock was to Israel
in the desert: that whence flows the
stream of spiritual life. Men are to
drink of this water or build on this
foundation—it matters not which meta-
phor is used—by faith (cf. Acts xvi. 31;
1 Cor, iii, 10-16; John xvi. 7).

(5.) Where a man has security he has
peace. Because the Christian feels
secure in Christ he rests. Dwell on the
power of faith in producing a sense of
security and rest (cf. Binney’s Pract
Nat. of Faith).

II. Sihon as a warning. He left the
stronghold where he had enjoyed peace
and protection to join the enemies of
God. No better warning for the young.
If we forsake God, God will forsake us,
“‘ Those that honour me I will honour.”
“ Those that seek shall find.” There are
two sources of temptation to the inex-
perienced : tnguisitiveness and pleagure.

(a.) Inquisitiveneas has not infre


HOMILETIOAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY,


CHAP. L





quently tempted the young to leave the
safe shelter of faith in Christ to dabble
in the muddy currents of scientific and
philosophic speculation, and to rush into
the storms raised by supposed discoveries
of unbelief. Such have quickly found
they trod a path beset with thorns, To
such Sihon is a warning.

(6.) Pleasure has induced men to for-
sake the garden about the Cross, where
Rest, Joy, Safety, and Peace lingered,
notwithstanding the transverse shadows
upon the ground, to taste fruits of trees
that grew beyond. They were not satis-
fied with what Christ gave. The angels’
food sickens. They lust for the things
of Egypt (cf. Eve in the garden). The
Bible is thrown aside for the novel.
The prayer-meeting is exchanged for the
play. Virtue sometimes even is lost
(ef. Samson). Contrast the choice of
Hercules in Xenophon’s “‘ Memorabilia.”

“To what gulphs

A single deviation from the track

Of human duties lead.” — Byron.

(c.) Gain and worldly reward have
induced some to forsake God and His
Church (cf. conduct of Balaam, Judas;
Num. xxiii. 10, xxxi. 8, 16; Mic, vi. 5;
2 Pet. ii. 15; Jude 11).

Men in the present day desire the
“wages of unrighteousness” and “ the
pleasures of sin,” and for them pay the
price, “unrighteousness,” “sin,” the
DEATH of their soul: they betray “ the
Lord of life and glory,” “crucify Him
afresh, and put Him to an open shame,”
Let such take warning of Sihon, king of
the Amorites, who forsook his stronghold
to join the enemies of God.


Ver. 5. “In the end of this fortieth
year, in the beginning of the month
Shebat, Moses called the people toge-
ther, saying, The time of my death draw-
eth nigh; if any one therefore hath forgot
anything that I have delivered, let him
come and receive it; or, if anything
seem dubious, let him come that I may
explain it. And so they say in Siphri,
If any one have forgotten any constitu-
tion, let him come and hear it the second
time ; if he need to have anything un-
folded, let him come and hear the eapla-
nation of it.” — Maimonides on this verse.


“Began Moses to declare.”
plain.” — Patrick.

He “ began,” or, better perhaps, “ un-
dertook,” to “declare the law,” #e,
explain and elucidate it. Such is the
force of the Hebrew verb INI (béér),


a word implying the pre-existence of the
matter on which the process is employed,
and so the substantial identity of the
Deuteronomic legislation with that of
the previous books, LXX. dsacapijoas:
Vul. explanare.—Speaker’s Commentary.

“ Began.” Willingly took upon him,
for the word implies willingness and
contentedness (cf, Gen. xviii. 27). So
all ministers should feed their flocks
‘willingly and of a ready mind” (1 Pet,
v. 2). Moses began to declare as Jesus
(of. Luke xii. 1; Matt. xvi. 6). ‘“ Disciples
began to pluck,” &c. (Matt. xii. 1).

“ To declare.” To make plain, clearly
manifest to the understanding of the
people, as in Hab, ii, 2. A thing is said
to be made plain in writing that he may
run that readeth it.— Ainsworth.

Ni = to be willing, not began. In
Gen. xviii. 27, this word is rendered by
“T have taken upon me” (Exod. ii. 21).
“ Moses was content.”—Delgado,

The best inheritance that a rich man
can leave to his children is Christian


“ Ko


instruction in the discipline and admo-


nition of the Lord, and thorough educa-
tion in the arts and sciences.—@eter.

He who really fears God will say
nothing concerning Him but that which
proceeds from his innermost heart, and
vow nothing but what he is resolved
inviolably to keep.— Hengstenberg.

“ Declare.” The Hebrew word means
properly to engrave, to hew in stone:
which is there used of the deeper im-
pressing and imprinting on the heart by
means of exhortation and explanation.—
Gerlach.

The address of Moses is in perfect
harmony with his situation. He speaks
like a dying father to his children. The
words are earnest, inspired, impressive.
He looks back over the whole of the
forty years of their wandering in the
desert, reminds the people of all the
blessings they have received, of the in-
gratitude with which they have so often

13


cHaPr, L


repaid them, and of the judgments of
God, and the love that continually broke
forth behind them ; he explains the laws
again and again, and adds what is neces-
sary to complete them, and is never
weary of urging obedience to them in
the warmest and most emphatic words,
because the very life of the nation was
bound up with this; he surveys all the


storms and the conflicts which they have |


passed through, and, beholding the future
in the past—viz., apostasy, punishment,
and pardon—continue to repeat them-
selves in the future also.— Hengstenberg.


“ On this side Jordan,” &c., dc.

Moses repeated the law as soon as he
had opportunity, and circumstances re-
quired it. He did not wait till the pro-
mised land was entered. The work of
to-day was not delayed till the morrow.
It was done at once. He did it where
he was—in the land of the Gentiles—
surrounded with heathen—in the coun-
try of foes, (Cf. here Carlyle’s words
“ America is here or nowhere.”) Trapp
with no little humour remarks on these
words, “ And he was not long about it.
A ready heart makes a riddance of God’s
work, for being oiled with the Spirit, it
becomes lithe and nimble and quick of
despatch.” Three practical hints—

I, What is to be done do at once,
Moses on this side of Jordan began to
speak. Had Moses been a boy at school,
he would not have put off his prayers
till he got home where there were no
school-fellows to chaff. He would have
said them then and there,


‘* Let us take the instant by the forward lip,”
—Shakespeare.


“Shun delays, they breed remorse ;

Take thy time while time is lent thee 5
Creeping snails have weakest force ;

Fly their faults, lest thon repent thee,
Good is best when soonest wrought ;
Lingering labours come to nought,”

é —Southwell,
‘* At thirty man suspects himself a fool ;
Knows it at forty, and reforms his plans;
At fifty chides his infamous delay,
Pushes his prudent purpose to resolve 3
In all the magnanimity of thought
Resolves: and re-resolves: then dies the
game,” — Young.


We find out some excuse or other for
deferring good resolutions,”—Addison,
14


HOMILETIOAL COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY,





“There is no moment like the pre
sent.”— Maria Edgeworth.

Thou art a passenger, and thy ship
hath put into harbour for a few hours,
The tide and the wind serve, and the
pilot calls thee to depart, and thou art
amusing thyself and gathering shells and
pebbles on the shore till they set sail
without thee. So every Christian who,
being on his voyage to a happy eternity,
delays and loiters, and thinks and acts
as if he were to dwell here for ever.—
Jortin,

IL. Do not think that there will be a
more propitious time than the present,

(1.) Dallying with duties does not
diminish difficulties.

(2.) Delay positively increases difficul-
ties. Power unused decreases, If duty
is deferred a day, we are a day’s wasted
strength the weaker.

(3.) We know what is to be done now;
to-morrow it may be forgotten. Cares
of life will usurp attentions. The duties
are pushed aside—choked down—killed,
Weeds grow faster than corn (cf. parable
of the sower). Cares and duties geome
quicker than time.

“Conviction, were it never so excel-
lent, is worthless till it convert itself
into conduct. Nay, properly, convic-
tion is not possible till then, inasmuch |
as all speculation is by nature endless,
formless, a vortex amid vortices: only
by a felt indubitable certainty of experi-
ence does it find any centre to revolve
round, and so fashion itself into a system.
Most true is it, as a wise man teaches
us, that “doubt of any sort cannot be
removed except by action. On which
ground, too, let him who gropes pain-
fully in darkness or uncertain light,
and prays vehemently that the dawn
may ripen into day, lay this other pre-
cept well to heart, which to me was of
invaluable service: ‘Do the duty which
ltes nearest thee,’ which thou knowest to
be a duty! Thy second duty will already
have become clearer.” —Carlyle,

‘ILL. Do some good things in this life
—in the desert, so called, on this side
Jordan. Do not wait till heaven is
reached, that angels alone may be wit-
neas of your good deeds. Moses did
not defer till the promised land was


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY,


rE


reached. He did what he was able out
of the promised land. It was well he
did. He never reached Canaan. Had
he put off all till then, nothing would have
been done, Perhaps you may never
reach heaven: probably you will not if
there is so little of the spirit of Christ
in you as to permit an utterly indolent
life. Remember Dives! Do some-
thing worth remembering, that you may
have one pleasant memory to carry into
hell with you: perhaps a sufficiency of
such reminiscences may so brighten the
gloom of those infernal regions as to
make the hell a heaven.

“How dangerous to defer those mo-
ments which conscience is solemnly
preaching to the heart! If they are
neglected, the difficulty and indisposi-
tion are increasing every month.” —John
Foster.


Ver. 6. The first and introductory
address of Moses to the people is here
commenced. It extends toch, iv. 40, and
is divided from the second discourse by
vers, 41-49, which are obviously of a
different character from those which
precede and follow them. Addressing
the people on the very threshold of the
promised land, Moses summarily recalls
to them the manifold proofs they had
experienced of the care and faithfulness
of God toward them, and the manifold
instances of their own perverseness and
rebellion. These their sins had shut
them out during a whole generation
from the inheritance covenanted to be
given to their fathers, The warning is
thus most effectively pointed—that they
should not by new transgressions debar
themselves from those blessings which
even now lay before their eyes; and the
way is appropriately prepared for that
recapitulation and reinforcement of the
law of the covenant which it is the main
purpose of Deuteronomy to convey.—
Speaker's Commentary.

““Dwelt long enough.” ‘From the
third month of the first year (Exod. xix,
1) to twentieth day of the second year
after they came out of Egypt (Num, x.
11), they stayed at Mount Sinai, which
is the same with Horeb, they being only
two tops ef the same mountain, one of


OHAP, i,





them something higher than the other,
as they are described by those who have
taken a view of them.”—Patrick.

Ainsworth more correctly says: “They
came to that mount in the third month
after their departure out of Egypt (Exod.
xii, 1, 2), and removed from the mount
‘the twentieth of the second month in
the second year’ (Num. x. 11, 12); so
they remained there almost a year, where
they received the law, or Old Testament,
and had made a Tabernacle for God to
dwell among them: from thence God
called them by word and sign, the cloud
removing (Num. x. 11, 13, 33); to
journey toward Canaan, the land pro-
mised to Abraham, the figure of their
heavenly inheritance by faith in Christ.
The law is not for man to continue
under, but for a time, till they be fitted
and brought unto Christ (see Gal. iii,
16, 17, 18, iv. 1-5; Heb. iii. 18, 19,
iv. 6-11.” ;

“The great Primate of Ireland thinks
that Moses spoke from here to chap. iv.
40 on February 20, and on the Sabbath
day.”—Bibliotheca Biblica,

“In Horeb.” It bas been remarked
as a discrepancy that Sinai of the other
books is alway called Horeb in Deut-
eronomy. But thisis met by the note in
Exod. xix. 2, where it is shown that
Horeb is the general name of the whole
mountain, and Sinai is the special
name of a particular part of it. This
distinction {is scrupulously observed
everywhere in the Pentateuch. The
name Sinai is, however, not wanting in
the book, for we find it in xxxiii. 2 (¢f.
long note on Exod. xix. 2, “ Kitto’s
Family Bible,” Sinai, in Die.—Kittto.

Humbled they must be, and hammered
for a season : sense of misery goes before
a sense of mercy.—T7'rapp.

Dr. Wright says “by Horeb,” but I
know not his reason, as they were “t»
Horeb.”— Delgado.

“Dwelt long enough” implies that
the purpose for which Israel was taken
to Horeb had been answered, #.e., they
had been furnished with laws and ordin-
ances requisite for the fulfilment of the
covenant, and could now remove to
Canaan to take possession of the pro-
mised Land. The word of Jehovah mei

15





tioned here is not found in this form in
the previous history ; but, as a matter of
fact, it is contained in the Divine in-
structions that were preparatory to their
removal(Num, i, 4, ix. 15, x. 20),and the
rising of the cloud from the Tabernacle,
which followed immediately afterwards
(Num. x. 1). ‘The fixed used of the
name Horeb to designate the mountain
group in general, instead of the special
name Sinai, which is given to the parti-
cular mountain upon which the law was
given, is in keeping with the rhetorical
style of the book.—Keil and Delitzsch,
“Duwelt.” “Sitten much.”—Atnsworth.


“The Lord our God spake unto us.”
Benisch renders the verse—“The Eternal
our God,” &c. These words are power-
fully suggestive of fellowship with the
unseen universe. Contact with the
verse is like wandering in the depth of
some virgin forest, dark, boundless, at
midnight the twinkling stars above only
revealing the intense, mysterious dark-
ness, and the hidden terror. Whether
this speech was audible or silent, whether
heard by the sense of the imagination,
matters very little. The word God spoke
was heard somehow, and to the hearer the
word was real, as well as the speaker.
Two thoughts suggested here—

I. Man has a capacity to hold com-
munion with God.

(a.) This is done by means of a special
and peculiar faculty. As the eye sees,
and the heart loves; so the spirit that
is in man communes with the Spirit that
is in God.

(b.) This faculty may be alive or dead,
“In the day thou eatest thereof thou
shalt surely die” (cf. Gen.).

IL Man’s power of hearing God de-
pends upon his relationship with God.
When Christ heard His Father speak, the
people said it “thundered.” | When
Paul heard the voice of Christ by the
way, those with him heard it not
(Acts xxii. 9). When the Spirit de-
scended upon Jesus as a dove, John the
Baptist and Jesus beheld it, but we do
not know that the people saw it,

“Communion with God will, even in
this life, greatly increase our conformity
to Him ; the truth of this is confirmed

16


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





by common observation. Assimilation
is always a consequence of association
with others. There is in man a natural
aptness and tendency to imitate those
who are his most constant companions,
If two persons very dissimilar in disposi-
tion, habits, and manner of expression,
were for a few days only to associate to-
gether, they would visibly approximate
each other. Just so the praying soul,
by conversing with God, is in some mea-
sure assimilated to His likeness. The
object of worship will in some measure
always be the object of imitation, God
is the standard of moral excellence, and
by contemplating His perfections our
corruptions are counteracted, His image
18 enstamped upon us, and our minds are
raised above their natural level. Thus
the exercise of ferveat prayer elevates,
strengthens, purifies, comforts, and en-
riches the believing soul, They who
would be rich in grace must be much in
prayer to God: He will beautify them
with the beams of His holiness, as
Moses’s face shone when he returned
from the mount; ‘bdeholding in the
exercise of faith and prayer the glory of
the Lord, they are changed into the
same image from glory to glory.’ And
herein the work of prayer on earth re-
sembles that of praise in heaven; for
which more exalted worship it is, no
doubt, intended ultimately to prepare
us.” —Christian Family's Assistant.
Anything lower than a life of com-
munion with God in Christ is repudiated
by the Christian idea as an imperfect
and sinful life. It may possess much
that the world calls virtue—it may be
honest, industrious, and self-sacrificing—-
it may even show a strength and con-
sistent manliness that some manifesta
tions of the Uhristian life are found te
fail in; but, nevertheless, it is of an in-
ferior quality. Ut not merely comes
short of it, but it does not really touch
the Christian ideal : for it is impossible
to separate the life of man from God
without fatal injury to that life. If God
ts, and if we are His creatures, our being
cannot grow into any healthy or perfect
form while we remain divorced in spirit
and in love from Him. Certain elements
of character may flourish in us, but cer-


FOMILETICAL COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY.


OHAP. I,





tain others, and still more important,
elements must be wanting.—Dr. 7'ulloch,
“You will find it more difficult to
walk closely with Jesus in a calm than
in a storm, in easy circumstances than in
straits. A Christian never falls asleep in
the fire or in the water, but grows drowsy
in the sunshine.”—John Berridge.
Communion with heaven—


*¢ When one who holds communion with the

skies

Has filled his urn where the pure waters
rise,

And once more mingles with us meaner
things,

*Tis even as an angel shook his wings;

Immortal fragrance fills the circuit wide.”


— Cowper.


Ver. 7. “Turn you, take your
journey,” ¢.¢., “Resume the journey long
intermitted.”— Patrick.

“The Amorites, as the most warlike
and powerful people, stand here for all
the Canaanites.”—Gerlach.

‘“‘ Mount of the Amorites,” te., to the
mountain district occupied by the
Amorites, reaching into the Negeb, and
part of the territory assigned to the tribe
of Judah. The Amorites, as the leading
people of Canaan, here stand for the
nations of that country generally (see
ver. 44); and “the mountain of the
Amorites, and the places nigh thereunto
(or more literally, “All its neighbours”),
denote the whole district, which is more
particularly specified in the concluding
part of the verse.”—Speaker’s Commen-
tary.

“Canaan was naturally divided, ac-
cording to the character of the ground,
into the Arabah, the modern Ghor ; the
mountain, the subsequent mountains of
Judah and Ephraim; the lowlands
(sh’phélah), t¢., the low flat country
lying between the mountains of Judah
and the Mediterranean Sea, and stretch-
ing from the promontory of Carmel
down to Gaza, which is intersected by
only small undulations and ranges of
hills, and generally includes the hill
country which formed the transition
from the mountains to the plains, though
the two are distinguished in Josh. x. 40,
and xii. 8; the south land (négeb), lit.
dryness, aridity, from 333, to be dry or

B


arid. Hence the dry, parched land, in
contrast to the well-watered country
(Josh. xv. 19; Judges i, 15), was the
name given to the southern district of
Canaan, which forms the transition from
the desert to the strictly cultivated land,
and bears for the most part the character
of a steppe, in which tracts of sand and
heath are intermixed with shrubs, grass,
and vegetables, whilst here and there
corn is also cultivated ; a district, there-
fore, which was better fitted for grazing
than for agriculture, though it contained
a number of towns and villages (cf.
Josh, xv. 21-23); and the sea-shore, 1.¢.,
the generally narrow strip of coast run
ning along by the Mediterranean Sea
from Joppa to the Tyrian Ladder, or
Ras el Abiad, just below Tyre. The
special mention of Lebanon in connection
with the land of the Canaanites, and the
enumeration of the separate parts of the
land, as well as the extension of the
eastern frontier as far as the Euphrates,
are to be attributed to the rhetorical ful-
ness of the style.”—Keil and Delitzsch.


Ver. 5-8. Subject: God’s address to
His people. “The Lord our God spake”
(ver. 6). The words were spoken to
Israel. Israel in a special and pre-
eminent sense was God’s peopie (Exod.
ili, 7, v. 1; of. “‘ My people” in Concord-
ance). They were the covenant people
as far as the covenant then extended.
Though the grace and truth came by
Jesus Christ, yet the Law was given by
Moses, The Jew had an earnest of the
future greater gift. Of this fact we are
in a measure reminded by the sketch of
their history given in the chapter, as
likewise by the relation of Moses to their
history. He was the prophet. The
prophet is the mouthpiece of God. Moses
spoke and acted only for God: he was
but the vicegerent: God was the true
King of Israel. His glory was displayed
to Israel in miracle and providential
protection, But even more specially and
pre-eminently than the Jew is the Chris-
tian Church the people of God. Tosuch
this passage, in its spiritual application,
is full of instruction.

L God in His address to His people
enjoins action. ‘Not slothful” is the

M7


CHAP. I


apostolic command, ‘ Ye have dwelt”
(Ainsworth ; ‘ sitten much’) “ long
enough.” The time of inactivity is
over. “Turn you, take your journey.”
God enjoins on His people to be like
Himself. He is ever active. The whole
seven days round His energies are going
forth in creating and blessing. For six
days He creates: on the seventh He is
active in blessing (cf. Gen. ii. 1, 3).
Not less active than the Father is the
Son. Week-day and Sabbath He exerted
Himself to make man happier and the
world brighter. His reason for this He
gives in John v.17. It is not unnatural,
therefore, that God seeks in His people
qualities so largely developed in Him-
self. God does not want idlers in His
vineyard. Man was put into the garden


of the world to work (cf. Gen. ii. 15).


In the parable, too, the men had to go
and labour who received the penny (ef.
Matt. xx. 8). “Call the labourers.”

However, God permits some rest. Life
is not all work, Storm and calm, battle
and peace, make history.


But still the law of life and growth is, |


the more we do within certain limits the
more we are able to do. This is true both
physically and spiritually. People of
impaired health by proper exercise be-
come strong. The morally weak are
strengthened by the exercise of trial. It
was on this account that Paul “ gloried
in tribulation.” It made him spiritually
greater. So men find now. The more
kind a man tries to be, the more he is.
So with faith, patience, hope. Cf. Abra-
ham’s faith and its growth: first he
leaves home; then he offers his son in
obedience to the Divine injunction
uttered in his heart. It is easier to
leave home than sacrifice one’s own
child. But Abraham was led up to this
latter. God speaks both in the words
of Scripture and in the voice of life’s
circumstances and conditions, ever elo-
quent, saying, “Turn you, take your
journey.” In other words, “ Vo some-
thing.” As children of God, be like
your fathers, Let what energies you
possess go forth in activity, and thus by
the action of to-day prepare for greater
activity on the morrow.

II. God advises with regard to the

12


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY.


nature, direction, and extemt of this
action.

(a.) Nature of the action, Let it be
action with a purpose in view. Some
people are always beating the air. Much
energy is spent in noise and flurry, but
no work is done. Have an aim in life,
“Go to the mount of the Amorites.”

(0.) Direction of the action. Two
hints with regard to that—

(1.) Let it go forth. It does not de
for a man’s action to turn inon himself.
Uniform selfishness is as injurious as
constant introspection; and ceaseless
introspection is as ruinous as unmixed
selfishness, Live for others as well as
self : work for others.

(2.) This is modified by another hint,
Go to what is near first. in kindly
thought for the universe, a man is not
to forget his own. Cf. 1 Tim. v. 8.
Jesus when dying for the world did not
forget His own mother at His feet.

(c.) Hatent of the action. Though we
are to begin with what is near, though
what is at hand is: of primary import,
we are not to restrict our thoughts nor
our actions to our own. Begin at the
near, then proceed to what is more re-
mote, till the whole world is affected by
your life: eg.—

(1.) First to the plain, Read part
of the Bible easily understood and ap-
plied. Interpret providence as far as
you can trace a Father's hands. What
cannot be understood leave for a future
day and clearer lights.

(2.) After this go to the Awl. Do not
mind a difficulty sometimes. A little
adversity strengthens the soul. Trust
is perfected in suffering. Many a seed
has matured into a noble plant when cast
down into the earth.

(3.) Now you may proceed to the
vale. Reverently step where the long,
deep shadows fall. There is the “ valley
of the shadow of death”—“ the valley
of humiliation” —“ the valley of vision.”
Here the soul is quickened and brought
into that region of experience that Paul
designates as being “ hidden with Christ
in God.”


(4.) Thus prepared with “the whole |


armour of God,” go to the “ south.”
Here were hills infested with foes. Se


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


CHAP. 1


Se Sct ee a a ae A


the Christian, after mounting the Hill
of Transfiguration with Christ, where for
@ moment the Divine glory is mani-
fested, has to go back again to a world
where man has to contend with demons
(of. Matt, xvii. 14-18)—where he has
to grapple with many a spiritual foe,
wolves in sheep’s clothing, the lion that
seeks to devour, the subtle serpent, But
go to the “ south.” God “has not called
us to bondage”—the bondage of the
cloister: or to linger in dim-lighted re-
ligious cell, as if life was to be consumed
in feeling. “Fight the good fight of
faith.” Go where the enemy awaits.

(5.) Then comes the reward. Having
gone to the “south,” the people might
turn aside to the sea. Here an entirely
new field of experience was to break
upon their vision. Hitherto they had
wandered amid arid sands and rocky
wastes. Now they come to the sea,
where the beauty and glory of the
heavens would be reflected in the silent
depths of the waters, grace and mystery
being added (cf. Ps. cvii. 23, 24). So
does God bring the Christian after long
and hard toil to gaze into those depths
of love and grace which are as oceans
mirroring the midnight skies,

(6.) After such revelation of God’s
glory and power, the people of God can
go forth to war with the Canaanite.
The kingdom of Christ is extended to
Lebanon (the far north)—to the river
(the far east). The whole world is filled
with the glory of the Lord.

Such are the various stages of Chris-
tian experience and work. From what
is simple to what is complex, from the
near to the distant, the soul lives and
labours till all be complete.

IIL. God, in His address, points out
how rightly-directed action will bring
its own reward. ‘Behold, I have set
(Heb. ‘given’) the land before you: go
in and possess,”

(a.) True work is sure to bring re-
compense of some kind.


%¢ Tf little labour, little are our gains ;
Man’s fortunes are according to hia pains,”
— Herrick,


It, first, brings external reward. A
day’s work brings the day’s wager. The


sowings of spring are followed by the
harvests of autumn.

It, secondly, brings an internal reward
in & man’s own nature and being.


** Bervice shall with steeled sinews toil,
And labour shall refresh itself with hope,”
—Shakespeare,


“Moderate labour of the body con-
duces to the preservation of health, and
cures many initial diseases."—Dr. W.
Harvey.

‘Excellence is never granted to man
but as the reward of lab’ ar.”—Sir J.
Reynolds.

(6.) Show what work is. Distinguish
work from pleasure. Pleasure is the
expending of energy without any end
or purpose save the sensations caused
by the act of waste, whereby pleasure
has been defined as “dissipating enjoy-
ments ;” work is energy expended for a
purpose. In its idea it is conservative,
Work is action to get a return for the
energy so spent, both to recuperate
and increase the power thus employed.
Pleasure seeks nothing save the sensa-
tion; work demands a recompense. God


promises to work its recompense. “ Go
tn and possess.”
Ver. 9. “Iam not able.” “ Political


and ecclesiastical labours are very great,”
— Luther.

“None have so hard a tug of it as
magistrates and ministers.”—7'rapp.

“Tf we had not business and cares and
fears above all private persons, we should
be equal to the gods.”—Dwo. Cassius,

““ Moses constrained to this not only
by the consciousness of his own inability,
but by the advice of Jethro and the
command of God (cf. Exod. xviii. 14,
18, 19, 21, 23).”—Ainsworth.

“Tam not able.” ‘We do not read
before now that Moses spake thus; but
Jethro spoke thus, Exod. xviii., and gave
advice (Exod. xviii. 21) to get help, which
Moses took (ver. 24), and then told the
people what Jethro said.” — Patrick.

“ At that time.” After the giving of:
the law.—Selden.

“T spake unto you,” &e. “It seems
that in the following account two his-
tories are comprised in one ; the ap-

9


CHAP. 1.


pointment of the judges at the advice
of Jethro (Exod. xviii.) and the installing
of the seventy elders by the communi-
cation of the Spirit to them (Num, xi.
16). The first institution, which was of
man’s origin, received its consecration
by the latter act. The division of the
whole people into corporations under
heads, also inspired by the Spirit of God
as Moses, made the whole unformed
mass into one people.”—Gerlack,


“T am not able,” &ec.

I. His was work entirely beyond
eocial help. Such labour becomes more
difficult from the loneliness of the worker.
Many a minister feels his work hard
through his solitude,

II. Such work often entails more self-
denial than mortal man can endure.
God’s grace goes a long way. Still man
has the weakness of the flesh to sap his
energies, “It is not good for man to
be alone.”

III. It was work involving self-denial
for the very people who caused him all
his troubles and anxieties,





The character of Moses,

“The ancients are full of it. ...
His piety, his meekness, his patience
and self-denial, his magnanimity, his
impartiality, his public spirit and tender
love to his nation, his wisdom and
judgment, his learning, and all those
adorning qualities and happy accom-
plishments that distinguished this great
and excellent man (not even the grace-
fulness of his person omitted), are there
mentioned with such handsome sim-
plicity and plainness of style and narra-
tion, as is nowhere else to be found, and
perhaps cannot be imitated ; such as at
once recommends the pattern of the
man and vouches the truth of the story.”
— Bibliotheca Biblioa,

“‘T am not able to bear you,” &c. A
tone of sufferingand weariness is in these
words, The true leaders of men are not
infrequently compelled to go counter to
the prejudice, vice, and sin of their age.
Every age has repeated the past and
foreshadowed the future in that parti-
cular, Moses was true to his vocation.
Sorely he suffered.

20


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.
2





I. The depravity of his age.

(a.) The people a horde of barbariang,

(6.) Coarse, selfish, idolatrous.

(c.) Almost blind to the spiritual.

Il. The magnanimity of his character,

(a.) True antidote of an evil genera
tion is a magnanimous leader. More
is done by example than by precept.

(.) The burdens of life make a truly
great character greater,

Compare with this the effect of the
pure, magnanimous life of Jesus Christ
on His generation—the Centurion, &e.


Ver. 10, The Lord God had multi-
plied the people. Their increase was
not owing simply to a power in them-
selves. God is the actor.

“As the stars.” “A greater number
than can be told.” —Clapham Patrick.


“The Lord our God hath multiplied
you.”

When Moses said this, it was with
the impression that he had said one of
the most inspiriting and congratulatory
things that he could say. Compare Ps.
exxvii. 5. “ Happy is the man that has
his quiver full.” In no way could
Moses have expressed his idea of God’s
beneficence more than this. The subject
suggested to us here is the benignity of
God. Three facts might well be consi-
dered in conjunction with this subject—

I. God’s benignity is a fact ever before
the eye of man’s investigating intellect,
Adduce Plato’s: “God is beauty and
love itself”’—an outburst of adoration
caused by His purified intellect gazing
on the outspread universe in this genial
atmosphere and refined light of grace.

What was it but this led Bishop
Horne to exclaim, “When we rise
fresh and vigorous in the morning, the
world seems fresh too, and we think
we shall never be tired of business or
pleasure ; but by the time the evening
is come, we find ourselves heartily so ;
we quit all our enjoyments readily and
gladly ; we retire willingly into a little
cell ; we lie down in darkness, and resign
ourselves to the arms of sleep with per-
fect satisfaction and complacency,”

Or take again that beautiful passage
of Emerson’a—


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY.


CHAP, L,





“The method of nature: who could
ever analyse it? That rushing stream
will not fail to be observed. We can
never surprise nature in a corner; never
find the end of a thread; never tell
where to set the first stone. The bird
hastes to lay her egg; the egg hastens
to be a bird. The wholeness we admire
in the order of the world is the result
of infinite distribution. Its smoothness
is the smoothness of the pitch of the
cataract. Its permanence is a perpetual
inchoation. Every natural fact is an
emanation also, and from every emana-
tion is a new emanation. If anything
could stand still, it would be crushed
and dissipated by the torrent it resisted ;
and if it were a mind, would be crazed
as insane persons are—those who hold
fast one thought, and do not flow with
the course of nature ;—not the cause,
but an ever-novel effect. Nature de-
scends always from above. It is un-
broken obedience. The beauty of these
fair objects is imported into them from
a ‘metaphysical and eternal spring.”

II. God’s benignity is a fact ever
impressing our general consciousness.
Not only has the intellect its special
sphere of observation, of means to end,
and adjustment of cause to effect ; but
the whole consciousness has that press-
ing upon it which makes the subject of
it cry out in a wild rapture, “ God is
indeed good !”

III. God’s benignity is a fact ever
appealing to our faith. What is more
startling than to be told that God is
good. God is good! and we think of
the earthquake where thirty thousands
went into the mystery of the shadows
in a moment. The benign God! and
the storm and the shipwreck loom up
as some phantom to haunt our peace.
We think of widows: we hear the sob
of the orphan. The maiden’s love is
blasted, and a weary soul goes on its
solitary course for years, hoping that
there may be a future, and that the
spirit of the loved one hovers near.

But God shows His benignity by
drawing near in sympathy. Hearts are
not left to sigh alone. There is siill
a voice to be heard when “ the thorn”
is most painful, “My grace is sufficient.”


It is in this profounder and tenderex
way God’s benignity constantly appeala
unto our heart, and our heart’s deepest
faith.


Ver. 11. “The Lord God of your
fathers make you a thousand times so
many more as ye are, and bless you, as
He hath promised you.”

Subject: The prosperity of Zion de-
sired. Not to exert ourselves for those
committed to us argues a want of love
for them, but there is a bound to man’s
power. The care of the people devolv-
ing upon Moses proved too much for
him. He therefore retired from the
whole duty, and dealt only with the
chief cases, relegating the remainder to
magistrates. He had now arrived at the
borders of Jordan and the last month
of his life, and was enjoined by God to
make a farewell memorial ; so the gene-
ration immediately coming after him,
having the history of their fathers so
deeply stamped upon them, might serve
God with more fidelity than their
fathers had. It was in this farewell he
felt called upon to make a reference to
the act instigated by Jethro—the ap-
pointing of magistrates—lest there might
be any feeling on the part of the people
at his so doing ; and, to show his zeal
in their service, he concludes with this
blessing: “The Lord God of your
fathers,” dc.

This benevolent wish of his will lead
me to consider the prosperity of God’s
Israel—

1, As a matter of promise, To the
promises of God relating to this subject
Moses refers: ‘‘The Lord bless you, as
He hath promised you /” God has pro-
mised innumerable blessings to those
who are of Israel according to the flesh.
Cf. Gen. xv. 5; Jer. xxxiii, 22 ; Deut,
xxx. 5; Amos ix, 11-15 ; Zech. viii. 3-8,
viii, 13, 18-23; Jer. xxx. 19. Innumer-
able blessings, too, has God promised to
His spiritual Israel, That these are in-
eiuded in the wish of Moses there can
be no doubt. Cf. Gen. xxii. 17, 18;
Gal. iii. 7-9, 13, 14.

Let us, then, consider the prosperity
of Israel—

IL. Asan object of desire. ‘ my that

a1


Caar, I.


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





the Lord God of our fathers would mul-
tiply His people a thousandfold, and
bless them as He hath promised them !”
If any of you need a stimulus to concur
in this wish, reflect on—

(1.) The benefit that will accrue to
every converted soul.


[Were we to contemplate a soul actually taken
out of hell, and translated to a throne of glory
in heaven, we should say indeed that such an
one had reason to rejoice, Yet, what is it leas
than this that is done for every child of God?
Are we not doomed to perdition ? Is there any
child of man that is not “by nature a child of
Wreca ” ? consequently, if delivered from con-
demnation, ‘‘is he not a brand plucked out of
the fire”? Is he not at the very time that he
ig turned from darkness to light turned also
“ from the power of Satan unto God”? Does
he not actually “ pass from death unto life’?
And is he not ‘‘delivered from the power of
darkness, and translated into the kingdom of
God’s dear Son”? Reflect then on this, as
done for only one soul, and there is reason,
abundant reason, for every benevolent person
in the universe to pant for it. But consider it
as extended to thousands and millions, yea,
millions of millions, even the whole human
race, and who should not pant and pray for
that? See what commotion is produced in
heaven even by the conversion of one soul ; for
“there is Joy among the angels in the very pre-
sence of God over one sinner that repenteth.”
And what must we be who feel so indifferent
about the conversion and salvation of the whole
world? Verily we have need to blush and be
confounded before God for the coldness with
which we contemplate His promised bleasings.]


(2.) The honour that will redound to
God.


[Behold our fallen race! Who is there
amongst them that bears any measure of re-
semblance to the image in which man was
created? Who regards God? Who does not
practically say to God, ‘Depart from me; I
desire not the knowledge of Thy ways”? But
let asoul be apprehended by Divine grace, and
converted to the faith of Christ, and what a
different aspect does he then bear! Verily,
the whole work of creation does not so
brightly exhibit the glory of God as does this
new created being. Brilliant.as are the rays of
the noonday sun, they do not display even the
natural perfections, and still less the moral per-
fections of the Deity, as he, the new-born soul,
who, from the image of “his fatler the devil,”
is transformed into the image of God Himself
in “righteousness and true holiness.” Now,
too, he begins to live unto his God, and by
every possible means to exalt His glory in the
world, acknowledging Him in all things,
serving Him in all things, glorifying Him
in all things, Is there a man that 19 in
any ines sensible of his obligations ta

2





God, and not desirous that such eonverta
should be multiplied? Did David “shed
rivers of tears for those who kept not God’s
law,” and shall not we weep and pray that
such persons may be converted to God and
made monuments of His saving grace? But
conceive of this whole world that is in rebellion
against God converted thus, and God’s will done
on earth as it is done in heaven; and shall
this be to us no object of desire? Verily, we
should take no rest to ourselves, nor give any
rest to God, till He accomplish this blessed
work, and till ‘‘ all the kingdoms of the world
become the kingdoms of His Christ.”]


(3.) The happiness that will arise to
the whole world.


[Every soul that is converted to God becomes
‘Sasa light” to those around him, and ‘‘salt,”
to keep, as it were, from utter putrefaction
the neighbourhood in which he dwells. In
proportion, then, as these are multiplied, the
very world itself assumes a different aspect.
‘* Instead of the brier there grows up the fir-
tree, and instead of the thorn there grows up the
myrtle-tree,” till at last ‘‘ the whole wilderness
shall blossom as the rose,” and this “ desert
become as the garden of the Lord.” Inced say
nomore. The wish of Moses is, I think, the
wish of every one amongst you; and youare all
saying with David, “Blessed be God’s glorious
name for ever; and let the whole earth be
filled with His glory.” Amen and amen.]


You will ask, then, What shall we do
to accelerate this glorious event? God
works by means. Learn a lesson from
Moses’s act. He received assistance.
Let the zeal of the Church be fanned
into life. Let the Church help the
clergy. Then will God’s kingdom
come. [Abridged.]—Stmeon.


Ver. 11. In this book Moses repeats
the chief laws to the people. This he
does because the generations that first
heard them had passed away: a new
one was in its place. Much that had
taken place he therefore repeats, This
led him to refer to their trying and
quarrelsome disposition, and the ap-
pointment of magistrates to deal with
their several cases. The subject, to be -
considered thoroughly, would afford
three ample heads of discourse, viz. :—

IL. The qualifications required in those
that were to be appointed rulers over
the people. They were to be wise men,
and understanding, and known among
their tribes.

IL The persons to whom the election


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


CHAP, I.





or choice is referred, which were the
several tribes over whom they were to
rule: Take ye, or, give ye, as it is in
the original, s.¢., choose ye, as the word
signifies,

IIL The person who deputed them to

their office, and invested them with their
authority : and that was Moses himself,
their chief leader ; he who was appointed
over them by God, and under God on
earth supreme. ‘Take ye wise men,
&ec., and I will make them rulers over
you.”
_ The first only is dealt with on this
occasion, 4.¢., this qualification of a
ruler. ‘‘Choose wise men,” &c, In
speaking to which I shall—

(1.) Explain the terms in which these
qualifications are expressed.

(2.) Show how necessary those quali-
fications are to form a good magistrate.

(3.) Set forth the great benefits and
advantages which such magistrates are
—(a.) to their sovereign, (b.) to the
people ruled, and (c.) the honour they
bring to themselves.—Condensed from
Wheatly on this passage.


Ver. 11. “ The Lord God of your
fathers make you a thousand times so
many more than ye are, and bless you,
as He hath promised you.” There was
but one thought on this subject in the
mind of both Moses and the Psalmist.
“ Happy is the man that hath his quiver
full: ” and, ‘ Lo, children are an heritage
of the Lord: and the fruit of the womb
is His reward.” Such a view of a
social problem, which is now such a
difficult one to some of the most
thoughtful, could only be taken by
men who had a strong and living faith
in the providence of God, and who
lived in times and countries where food
was more easily procured than it is now
in civilised countries, and where the
habits of the people were very simple.
Still, if men were content to be more
simple in habit and life, the same
sentiment might be expressed to-day as
was sung as a joyful song by Moses and
the Psalmist. The words read in sucha
spirit as characterised these two writers
suggest these two considerations—

I. That children ought to be esteemed


blessings, and that he who has a numerous
offspring ought to be thankful to God
for them: for children are the heritage
of the Lord.

IL That God is the sole Author and
Disposer of these blessings ; “ The Lord
God... make, &c., and bless as He hath
promised,”

I, Children ought to be esteemed
blessings, &e. It is a blessed thing to
the parent of a numerous offspring,

or

(1.) Such a man-is a public blessing to
the kingdom in which he lives; for the
riches of a kingdom consists in the
number and multitude of its inhabi-
tants. Cy the conduct of the Romans,
famed for the wisdom of their laws and
prudence of politics, which was guided
by this maxim from the first foundation
of their government, and who endea-
voured by all means in their power to
augment the numbers of their people,
and rather chose to make their city
the asylum of the worst of men than
want inhabitants. To this end they
framed so many honorary laws, and
granted so many and great privileges to
the parents of many children,

(2.) A numerous offspring is a valu-
able blessing with respect to private
families, and that mutual comfort and
support which those who came origi-
nally out of the same loins yield to
one another. These bonds are insepar-
able when the same interest are bound
by natural affection.

(3.) A numerous offspring is a valu-
able blessing to the parent himself. The
Jew looked forward to the Messiah being
born of his family: the Christian can
see a new heir of righteousness, There
is joy in their birth: there is pleasure
in their after-life if the child is trained
aright,

IL God is the sole Author and Dis-
poser of these blessings. Cf. Ps. cxxvii
3. This blessing is called an heritage.
An heritage is an estate got by ancestors,
and descends to us lineally without our
painstaking. God is our Ancestor, from
whom we enjoy all favours.

Three lessons are gathered from the
subject of this verse—

(a.) Let those who have et


learn from hence to wait with patience
the Divine pleasure, to continue in prayer
and alms-deeds, and to be fruitful in
good works ; and if they have not chil-
dren after the flesh, they will have a
multitude who will call them blessed,
and who in the endless ages of eternity
will be to them as children.

(b.) Let those who have a numerous
family of children be thankful to God
for bestowing these blessings on them,
and use their utmost endeavour to make
them blessings indeed, by grounding
them in the principles of religion and
bringing them up soberly and virtuously
to some lawful calling.

(c.) Those who have had children and
are deprived of them, either by natural
death, or, which is worse, by any unfor-
tunate accident, may hence learn to re-
sign themselves to the will of God, and
entirely to depend on His good provi-
dence.—Abstract of Sermon by Lewis
Atterbury.

‘*T know he’s coming by this sign, —
That baby’s almost wild!
See how he laughs and crows and starte,—
Heaven bless the merry child !

He’s father’s self in face and limb,

And father’s heart is strong in him,

Shout, baby, shout! and clap thy hands,

Yor father on the threshold stands.”

—Mary Howitt,

“T love these little people ; and it is
not a slight thing when they, who are
8o fresh from God, love us,”— Dickens,

“Good Christian people ! here lies for
you an inestimable loan: take all heed
thereof; in all carefulness employ it:
with high recompense, or else with heavy
penalty, will it one day be required
back.” —Carlyle.

“ Be ever gentle with the children God
has given you; watch over them con-
stantly ; reprove them earnestly, but
not in anger. In the forcible language
of Scripture, ‘Be not bitter against
them,’ ‘Yes, they are good boys,’ I
once heard a kind father say. ‘I talk
to them very much, but do not like to
beat my children—the world will beat
them.’ It was a beautiful thought,
though not elegantly expressed. Yes ;
there is not one child in the circle round
the table, healthful and happy as they
look now, on whose head, if long enough

24


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





spared, the storm will not beat. Ad-
versity may wither them, sickness may
fade, a cold world may frown on them,
but amidst all, let memory carry them
back to a home where the law of kind-
ness reigned, where the mother’s reprov-
ing eye was moistened with a tear and
the father frowned ‘ more in sorrow than
in anger.’ ”"—F. Burritt.

“Call not that man wretched who,
whatever ills he suffers, has a child te
love.” — Southey.

“Of all sights which can soften and
humanise the heart of man, there is none
that ought so surely to reach it as that
of innocent children enjoying the happi-
ness which is their proper and natural
portions.” —Southey.

“Tam fond of children. I think them
the poetry of the world, the fresh flowers
of our Mearths and homes; little .-
jurors, with their ‘natural magic,’ evck-
ing by their spells what delights and
enriches all ranks and equalises the
different classes of society. Often as
they bring with them anxieties and cares,
and live to occasion sorrow and grief, we
should get on very badly without them.
Only think if there was never anything
anywhere to be seen but great grown-up
men and women! How we should long
for the sight of a little child! Every
infant comes into the world like a dele-
gated prophet, the harbinger and herald
of good tidings, whose office it is ‘to
turn the hearts of the fathers to the
children,’ and to draw ‘the disobedient
to the wisdom of the just.’ A child
softens and purifies the heart, warming
and melting it by its gentle presence ; it
enriches the soul by new feelings, and
awakens within it what is favourable to
virtue, It isa beam of light, a fountain
of love, a teacher whose lessons few can
resist. Infants recall us from much that
engenders and encourages selfishness,
that freezes the affections, roughens the
manners, indurates the heart: they
brighten the home, deepen love, invi-
gorate exertion, infuse courage, and
vivify and sustain the charities of life.
It would be a terrible world, I do think,
if it was not embellished by little chil-
dren.” — Binney.

“ Unless you court the privacy of the


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY,


=


domestic circle, you will find that you
are losing that intimate acquaintance
with those who compose it, which is its
chief charm and the source of all its ad-
vantage. In your family alone can there
be that intercourse of heart with heart
which falls like refreshing dew on the
soul, when it is withered and parched
by the heats of business and the intense
selfishness which you must hourly meet
in public life. Unless your affections
are sheltered in that sanctuary, they can-
not long resist the blighting influence of
a constant repression of their develop-
ment, and a compulsory substitution of
calculation in their stead. Domestic
privacy is necessary, not only to your
happiness, but even to your efficiency ;
it gives the rest necessary to your active
powers of judgment and discrimination ;
it keeps unclosed those well-springs of
the heart whose flow is necessary to float
onwards the determination of the head.
It is not enough that the indulgence of
these affections should fill up the casual
chinks of your time; they must have
their allotted portion of it, with which
nothing but urgent necessity should be
allowed to interfere.”— W. C. Taylor.


Vers. 10, 11. Moses here beautifully
recalls to the nation’s mind memories of
the past, in which mercies received at
the hand of God are very prominent.
To this is added a prayer that the
future may be as the past, but fuller.
In connection with this subject are two
thoughts, more or less impressive to
various hearers, according to the ex-
perience of their lives,

IL Man stands in a continued rela-
tion to the past. No moment in the
present or future can ever be wholly
separated from the past. The feelings
indulged in and sentiments expressed
yesterday will influence life through all
after years. A heart is more closely
attached to you or deliberately alienated.
Your whole after career will be more or
less influenced by that one act.

It is highly necessary, while by each
present we are making our past which
is so to influence our future, that we
consider this. The past becomes a
man’s life. The present very often is


Onur. L





nothing. It is but the dividing line
between that just done and what we
are about to do. The past stretches
through long years. From it comes
all a man’s knowledge, feeling, experi-
ence. It is his life; we would almost
say himself. He was made by that
past.

II. The past gives form to the hopes
and aspirations of the future,

“Tt is necessary to look forward as
well as backward, as some think it
always necessary to regulate their con-
duct by things that have been done of
old times; but that past which is so
presumptuously brought forward as a
precedent for the present, was itself
founded on an alteration of some past
that went before it.”— Madame de Stael.

“‘ As the pleasures of the future will
be spiritual and pure, the object of a
good and wise man in this transitory
state of existence should be to fit him-
self for a better by controlling the
unworthy propensities of his nature
and improving all his better aspirations,
to do his duty, first to God, then to his
neighbour ; to promote the happiness
and welfare of those who are dependent
upon him, or whom he has the means
of assisting ; never wantonly to injure
the meanest thing that lives; to encour-
age, as far as he may have the power,
whatever is useful and tends to refine
and exalt humanity; to store his mind
with such knowledge as it is fitted to
receive and he is able to attain; and
so to employ the talents committed to
his care that, when the account is
required, he may hope to have the
stewardship approved.”—Southey.

On the knowledge of the past we
reason for the future. From the past
comes experience. Experience tells what
is good. That a wise man desires,


Ver. 12. Moses found the work too
much for himself alone, he therefore
sought assistance. This is but a local
application of the principle laid down
in Genesis: “It is not good that man
should be alone.” Man for the most
part needs help, sympathy, and encour-
agement in his work. A few proud
natures wander lion-like, alone through

25


CHAP, I,


HOMILHTICAL COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY.


A LR


the world; but their life is hard, un-
natural, solitary. ‘The solitary,” God
has taken and “set in families.”

“Hear your complaints, remedy your
grievances, determine your controver-
sies.”—Clapham.


“

Ver. 12. “ How can I bear you
alone?” The anguish cry of the
fathers has provided language for the
children. The sufferings of one age
have provided the vehicle of expression
for the sufferings of the next, Thus
Moses in this moment of trial has done
a service for after-ages. Two lessons—

I, The most honoured men are put
into situations of extreme difficulty and
suffering,

Il. Great faith has great trials.

“Examination and trial of a
scholar hurts him not, either in his
learning or in his credit; may, it ad-
vanceth him much in both; his very
examination ruba up his learning, puts
much upon him, and sends him away
with the approbation of others. And
thus in the trial of faith there is an
exercise of faith; faith examined and
tried prove a faith strengthened and
increased. Some things sometimes prove
the worse, and suffer loss by trial; but
the more faith is tried the more faith is
enlarged.” —Things New and Old.


Ver. 12, “ How can I bear you
alone?” The interrogative form of
statement is sometimes the most em-
phatic mode of statement. Moses does
not distinctly state that he was severely
tried. But his words imply that much.
The words of Moses are echoed by a
million hearts, who are crying, How shall
I bear this burden, this circumstance,
this strife, this loss, this sorrow ?

I. Trial is the heritage of every life.


*¢ Trials must and will befall.”


All would gladly flee them. Itisim-
possible. The necessity of life, and still
more of growth in spiritual life, is trial.

II. Distinguish between ¢rial and
the effect of transgression. They may
both be forms of suffering ; indeed, the
same form. They may tend to have
the same effect upon our spirit, “of life

26


unto life or death unto death;” but
there is this vital difference—the one
can be escaped, avoided ; the other
cannot,
friend by his own temper: he cannot
at all times restrain the whim and
temper of his friend, which also rob
him of hallowed friendship. Trials
come from without: the effects of our
transgressions from within. By care,
grace, self-restraint, many of the so-
called trials of life might be lessened,
for the majority are only the effects of
transgression of some kind, and rest
entirely with ourselves.

III. Though there may be real trials
from without which we cannot avert,
and though much of the suffering which
we endure might be averted, and the
causes lie in ourselves, still the whole
may be cheerfully met, and received as
@ discipline at the hand of God; for
suffering of all kind, no matter whence
the cause, if permitted to have the right
effect, tends to chasten and purify the
spirit.

IV. In trials of all kinds, whether
they come through the body in the
guise of pain, or whether they directly
attack the emotions dressed as anguish,
the most efficacious way of dealing with
them is a humble and prayerful com-
mittal of ourselves to the care and pro-
vidence of God.

V. Prayer for help, trust in God, the
hope of either removal or supporting
grace according to the trial, is the true
way to commit ourselves to God. To
fret only wears out. Complaint em-
bitters. Resignation to the Divine will,
Memories of brighter pasts, hopes of
happier futures, enweave around the
storms of life a halo of light and glory
given by the Sun of Righteousness,
Himself shining from where we cannot
see Him.


Ver. 13. “Bring ye unto me wise
and understanding men, and esteemed
throughout your tribes.”— Delgado.

“Known among their tribes.” Their
several tribes were to approve of them
and to vouch for their character. These
were in this respect a sort of figure of


the College of Bishops, of whose ordina


A man can avoid losing his


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





tion, St. Cyprian tells us, such care was
and ought to be taken, that it was a
great irregularity and omission in their
ordination if the neighbouring Bishops
of the province did not come together to
the people of the diocese over which the
Bishop to be ordained was to preside,
and if he was not elected in the presence
of the people, as who should be perfectly
well acquainted with his whole life and
eonversation (Ep. Ixvii. 172). See
Origen, Comm. on Lev. viii. 5, quoted
in Bib. Bib,


In Deut. i. 9-13, Moses is represented
as having proposed the appointment of
these judges to the people himself,
which, it is said in the text, was sug-
gested and proposed to him by his
father-in-law, Jethro—a circumstance
which has been considered as involving
a considerable difficulty. One would
almost think that the way in which we
have stated the fact was in itself enough
to show that there is in reality no discre-
pancy between the two passages ; but to
avoid all misconception of the matter,
we transcribe the following from Dr.
Greaves :—

“There is a great and striking differ-
ence between those statements, but there
is no contradiction, Jethro suggested to
Moses the appointment; he probably,
after consulting God, as Jethro inti-
mates, ‘If God shall thus command
thee’ (ver. 23), referred the whole
matter to the people, and assigned the
choice of individuals to them, The
persons thus selected he admitted to
share his authority as subordinate
judges. Thus the two statements are
perfectly consistent. But this is not
all: their difference is most natural. In
first recording the event, it was natural
Moses should dwell on the first cause
which led to it, and pass by the appeal
to the people ag a subordinate and less
material part of the transaction ; but in
addressing the people, it was natural to
notice the part they themselves had in
the selection of those judges, in order to
conciliate their regard and obedience.
How naturally, also, does the pious
legislator, in his public address, dwell on
every circumstance which could improve





OHAP, L





his hearers in piety and virtue! The
multitude of the people was the cause
of the appointment of the judges; how
beautifully is this increase of the nation
turned to an argument of gratitude to
God! How affectionate is the bless-
ing with which the pious speaker inter-
rupts the narrative, imploring God that
the multitude of the people may in-
crease a thousandfuld! How admir-
ably does he take occasion, from men-
tioning the judges, to inculcate the eter-
nal principles of justice and piety, which
should control their decisions! How re-
mote is all this from art, forgery, and
imposture! Surely here, if anywhere, we
can trace the dictates of nature, truth,
and piety.”—Carpenter, An Hxamtina-
tion of Scrip. Dif.


‘Wise men.” “ Rulers’ actions exem-
plary. If the mountains overflow with
water, the valleys are the better; and
if the head be full of ill humours, the
whole body fares the worse. The actions
of rulers are most commonly rules for the
people’s actions, and their example pass-
eth as current as their coin. If a pea
sant meet luxury in a scarlet robe, he
dares be such, having so fair a cloak for
it, The common people are like tem-
pered wax, easily receiving impressions
from the seals of great men’s vices; they
care not to sin by prescription, and
damn themselves with authority. And
it is the unhappy privilege of greatness
to warrant by example as well others’
as its own sins; whilst the unadvised
vulgar take up crimes on trust and
perish by credit.”—Things New and Old.

“Known.” “ Public men must have
public spirit. Plutarch records an excel-
lent speech of Pelupidas when going out
of his house to the wars; lis wife came
to take her leave of him, and with tears
in her eyes prays him to look to himself.
©O my good wife !’ said he, ‘it is for pri-
vate soldiers to be careful of themselves,
not for those in public place; they must
have an eye to save other men’s lives,”
Such a spirit becomes every man in
public place; flesh and blood will be
apt to prompt a man that it is good to
sleep in a whole skin: why should a
man hazard himself and eee

2


CHuaP, L


into danger? But let such know that
men in public places are to have public
spirits, and to take notice that though
there be more danger by standing in the
gap than getting behind the hedge, yet
it is best to be where God looks for them
to be.” —Things New and Old.

“Get you wise men,” d&c. Moses
was not unwilling to share his hon-
ours with others. He is an old
man. Much of the ambition of youth
is dying out, The pressure of anxiety
and care is great. With the justice
characteristic of his noble nature he
did not ask men to share his labours
without sharing his honours, A few
homiletical points are—

I. No unworthy or selfish ambition
to be cherished. Share your honour
with those who divide with you your
care and toil. How different would
many a wife’s life have been had all
husbands been governed by this prin-
ciple! Both the rich and the poor daily
give us examples. Too many arise like
him of whom Milton says—

‘* One shall rise
Of proud ambitious heart, who, not content
With fair equality, fraternal state,
Will arrogate dominion undeserved


Over his brethren, and quite dispossess
Concord and law of nature from the earth.”


II. Contrast with this picture the
action of Moses. No merely nominal
superiority to be coveted. Position may
be had sometimes by theft. Thrones
are sometimes stolen as well as trinkets
from a Jady’s table. Place is sometimes
gained by flattery. But what is such
nominal superiority? True position is
power.

‘* The true ambition there alone resides
Where justice vindicates and wisdom guides,
Where inward dignity joins outward state,
Our purpose good, as our achievement great 3
Where pub.ic blessings public praise attend,
Where glory is our motive and our end:
Would’st thou be famed? Have those high

acts in view
Brave men would act though scandal would

ensue.” — Young.


Position of every kind is always a
tacit acknowledgment of willingness for
service, for the possessor of place is
ever proclaiming his power to work.
And as soon as a man cannot work it is

28


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY ; DEUTERONOMY,


his duty to retire from office, Moses
shows his true manhood in his act. He
spurned nominal superiority. He pre
ferred abdication, which his act virtually
is, to holding of the reins of steeds of
which he no longer had control.

III. The most actively fraternal spirit
to be cultivated. Sir Walter Scott ably
and earnestly advocated this principle
when he said, “The race of mankind
would perish did they cease to aid each
other. From the time that the mother
binds the child’s head, tili the moment
that some kind assistant wipes the
death-damp from the brow of the dying,
we cannot exist without mutual help.
All, therefore, that need aid have a
right to ask it from their fellow-mortals ;
no one who holds the power of granting
can refuse it without guilt.”

** A happy bit hame this auld world would be

If men when they’re here could mak’ shift

to agree,

An’ ilk said to his neighbour, in cottage

an’ ha’,

*Come, gi’e me your hand—we be brethren a’,

I ken na why ane wi’ anither should fight,

When to ’gree would make a’ body cosie

an’ right ;

When man meets wi’ man, ’tis the beat way

ava

To say, ‘Gi’e me your band—vwe are breth-

ren a’,” —Robert Nicol.


IV. This spirit easily cultivated by
those who walk with God as Moses did.
The secret of every truly great life lies
in that fact, “ He walked with God.”
Enoch needed not to see death, for he
walked with God. Those who walk
with God have God dwelling in them.”
Know ye not that ye are the temple of
God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth
in you? If any man defile the temple
of God, him shall God destroy : for the
temple of God is holy, which temple ye
are” (1 Cor. iii. 16,17). “Secret things
belong unto the Lord,” said the author
of Deuteronomy ; to which the Psalmist
is able to add, ‘‘ The secret of the Lord
is with them that fear Him.” God
lights that subtle fire in the heart of the
believer by the gift of the Holy Spirit,
so that all the dross of evil is consumed
away and the pure gold of Being alone
left. Moses was one of those long in
the furnace of affliction. And beautiful


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





as he when the snows of a hundred
and twenty winters whitened his head.
By the same process, by the same spirit,
by the same cultivation, may men to-day
become as the man Moses was some five
and thirty centuries ago.


Ambition proves tts own ruin. “The
poisonous aconite, so much desired of
the panther, is purposely hung up by the
hunters in vessels above their reach,
whereof they are so greedy, that they
never leave leaping and straining thereat
till they burst and kill themselves, and
so are taken. Thus do men aim at
honour and greatness too high for their
reach, and too great oftentimes for their
merit ; for an ambitious heart overgrown
with this rank aconite neither admits
of the beams of grace to mollify its
hardness nor the bounds of nature to
restrain the swelling ; but is unnaturally
csrried to wrong those of his own blood
that are living, and to blemish the hon-
ourable fame of his predecessors that are
departed. Such tyrants may bear them-
selves up for a time, but in the end they
shall find that, though Divine justice
hath leaden feet, she hath iron hands ;
though slow in coming, yet she strikes
home.”—Sir R. Dallington.

The poisonous nature of ambition.
** As poison is of such force that it cor
rupteth both blood and spirit, besieging,
seizing, and infecting the heart with
venomous contagion thereof, quite alter-
ing the complexion and condition of the
man that hath drunk it, so the pestifer-
ous desire of sovereignty, though it
seize on a mind of mild and mansuet
disposition, yet it is of such forcible
operation, as it not only altereth man’s
nature, but maketh man unnatural.”—
Sir R. Dallington.


Ver. 15. Of. “Critical Notes.”

“Chief of your tribes.” ‘ They were
the fitter for this high employment be-
cause men of quality. They were less
liable to be corrupted by bribery, from
which Moses took such care that all
judges should be so free that he ex-
pressly required they should be mep
hating covetousness (Exod. xviii. 31).”
— Bibliotheca Biblica.


O4P, i,





In the oath administered to judges,
Solon put in a special clause to prevent
bribery, which is quoted in Demosthenes’
oration against ‘limocrates, “I will
receive no gift upon the account of my
sentence; neither I myself, nor anybody
else for me ; nor another with my know-
ledge, by any artifice or devise whatso-
ever.” —Vide Patrick on Pass.

“Officers.” DOW, Shotérim, of,
“Biblical Treasury,” vol. i. p. 158,a long
note found in Michaelis on Shotérim,

Shotérim, one set over a thing, an
overseer, arranger; administrator, men-
tioned with judges, Deut. xvi. 18, with
elders, Deut. xxxi. 28, with elders and
judges, Jos. viii. 33, with elders, judges,
and heads, Jos. xxiii. 2, with guide and
ruler, Prov. vi. 7, They were chosenfrom
people, Num. xi. 16. They had to make
commands known tothe people, Jos. i. 10.
To conduct the levies of soldiers, Deut.
xx. 5. They were officers in cities,
1 Chron, xxiii. 4, xxvi. 29; sometimea
filled higher dignities, 2 Chron. xxvi. 11.
They also regulated affairs in the camp,
Josh. viii, 33. The translation ygayua-
revs, scribe, LXX. sofro, Syr., does not
sult.— Fiirst’s Lex.

“Wise men and known ”—in other
words, true men. Two kinds of men in
the world. Men of the world—imita-
tions of the true thing, counterfeits of
immortality ; and true men—men full
of the spirit of wisdom, full of the
Holy Ghost, Acts ii. 4, iv. 8, vi. 3, vii.
55, xi. 24, &c—known men—men
known of God and man; known of God
because of the truth of their life; known
of men because of the power of their
life—men of Christ.

I. Men of the world. These follow
the course of expediency. They adopt
@ corrupt worldly religion. Their God
is a golden calf. They worship pro-
sperity, know only what is seen,
drop the unfortunate, are entirely
ignorant of the religious principles
taught by James (cf. James i. 27).
Widows, poor, afflicted, unfortunate, too
troublesome, too expensive,

II. Men of Christ. What a contrast
these men present! As different as
Hezekiah and Manasseh, These true
men of Christ have distinctive Las


OHAP, i.





in their life. Conduct governed by the.
law of their Master (Matt. v. 44;
John xv. 12; Luke vi. 31).

(a.) These men will eventually suc-
ceed (1 Sam. ii. 30).

(b.) These men always strong (Jer.
L 34; Matt. xxviii. 20).

(c.) Though such have their season of
gloom, a light yet arises on their path.

* Sometimes a light surprises
The Christian while he sings;


It is the Lord, who rises
With healing in His wings.”


Magistrates to be men of understand-
wg. Heraclitus being sick, examined
his physician concerning the cause of
his sickness; but finding that he was
ignorant thereof, he would take none of
his physic, saying, “If he be not able
to show me the cause, he is less able to
take away the cause of my disease,”
Thus there are many sores and sick-
nesses in &@ commonwealth, a thousand
ways of cheating. The generality of
men is, as Ovid said of Autolycus, “ fur-
tum ingeniosus ad omne,” witty in all
kinds of wickedness; indeed the world
is set upon wickedness (1 John v. 19).
And such is the subtilty, too, of offen-
ders, that the trim tale of Tertullus (Acts
xxiv.) goes current till the Apostle comes
after him and unstarches it. How easy
is a fair glove drawn upon a foul hand,
—a bad cause smoothed over with
goodly pretences! So cunning, so
wary, and so wise are the many, that,
as Cesar said of the Scythians, it is
harder to find them than to foil them ;
like the cuttlefish, they can hide them-
selves in their own ink-floods, they
cover themselves with their own devices,
The magistrate, that physician of the
body politic, had need of wisdom,
knowledge, and understanding that he
may keep that one ear open for the
innocent, whether plaintiff or defendant:
he must be a man of experience, in-
dustry, and judgment to catch all
the guilty with the hook of justice,
who are crafty and slippery to avoid
them, that he may be able to put away
the very causes of corruption.

Magistrates must be examples. It
is said in the praise of Moses that he

30





HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


was a mighty man both in word and
deed (Acts vii. 22); not mighty in word
only, a8 many governors are, to com
mand strongly, but mighty also in
deed, to do it accordingly. As Tully
reports of Julius Cmsar that he was
never heard saying to his soldiers /te
tlluc, “ Go ye thither,” as if they should
go into service and he stay behind in the
tent; but Venite huc, “Come hither ; let
us give the onset, and adventure our
lives together ;” a great encouragement
for the soldier to follow when he sees his
captain march before! Thus it is that
if the magistrate will persuade the
people to anything, he must show the
experience of it first in himself; or if
he will command the people anything,
he must do it first himself and by him-
self ; otherwise, if he exact one thing,
and do another, it will be said that he is
like a waterman, who rows one way and
looks another. (Cf. Sermon preached
1622, before Prince Charles at St
James’s.

“ Made them heads.” “ A good magis-
trate or minister is the support of the
place where he lives, Men use to fence
and defend, to keep watch and ward
over their cornfields whilst the corn
and fruit are in them unreaped, un-
gathered; but when the corn is inned
and safe in the barn, then is open-tide,


-as they say; they lay all open, throw


in the fence, and let in beasts of all
kind; nay, sometimes they set fire on
the stubble, Thus every zealous ma-
gistrate, every godly minister, every
good Christian is, as it were, a fence, a
hedge to that place, that parish where
they live; and when they are once
plucked up, when they are taken away
by death, or otherwise removed, that
kingdom, that place, that parish lies
open to all manner of ruin and destruc-
tion.”—Things New and Old,


Vers. 9-15. This appointment of
the “ captains ” (¢f. Exod. xviii. 21 sqq.)
must not be confounded with that of
the elders in Num. xi. 16 sqq. The
former would number 78,600 ; the
latter were seventy only. The time
and place, and indeed the transactions
themselves, were quite different, The


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY.


only common point between the two
lies in the complaint of Moses, ver. 12,
which bears some verbal resemblance
to Num, xi. 14-17. But, as in both
cases, the grievance Moses had was of
the same kind, there is no reason why
he should not express it in the like
terms. It is, in fact, a characteristic of
the speech of early times, and one
exemplified in every ancient record, to
employ the same or similar combine-
tions of words for like occasions, instead
of inventing new combinations for each.
Such similarities afford no proof what-
ever of the writers having other like
passages in view. Very ancient langu-
ages had not that variety and flexibi-
lity of expression which belongs to the
modern languages of Western Europe.
“Tt has been observed that in Exodus
the appointment of the captains is de-
scribed as made. before the giving of
the law at Sinai; here it seems to be
placed immediately before the people
departed from Horeb, é¢, a year later.
But it is obvious that Moses is only
touching on certain parts of the whole
history, and with a special purpose,
God had given them a promise, and
willed them to enter on the enjoyment of
it. Moses too had done his part, and had
provided for the good government and
organisation of their greatly increased
multitude. All was ready for the full
- accomplishment of the promises before
the camp broke up from Horeb. The
order of statement is here rather sug-
gested by the purposes of the speaker
than by the facts. But it is neverthe-
less quite correct in the main point,
which is that this important arrange-
ment for the good government of
the people took place before they
quitted Horeb to march direct to the
Promised Land. This fact sets more
clearly before us the perverseness and
ingratitude of the people, to which the
orator next passes, and shows, what he
was anxious to impress, that the fault
of the forty years’ delay rested only
with themselves,”—Speaker’s Comm.


Ver. 16. A good chargs. Those
that are advanced to honour must know
that they are charged with business, and


CHAP. %





must give account another day of theis
charge,

I. He charges them to be diligent
and patient. ‘Hear the causes.” Hear
both sides, here them fully, hear them
carefully ; for nature has provided us
with two ears, and he that answereth a
matter before he heareth it, it is folly
and shame to him, The ear of the
learner is necessary to the tongue of the
learned (Isa. 1. 4).

II, To be just and impartial. “Judge
righteously.” Judgment must be given
according to the. merits of the case,
without regard to the qualities of the
parties, The native must not be
suffered to abuse the stranger, nor the
great the small. No faces known in
judgment.

III. To be resolute and courageous.
“Ye shall not be afraid of the face of
man.” Be not overawed to do an ill
thing, either by the clamours of the
crowd or by the menaces of those
possessing power.

IV. He gave a good reason to enforce
this charge. ‘The judgment is God’s.”
You act for God—act like Him, His
representatives, if you judge unright-
eously you misrepresent Him. —
Henry.

Cf. Solon’s oath. “I will hear the
accuser and the defender both alike,”
Quoted by Patrick.


Ver. 16. “As their person and en-
dowments made them considerable,
they were therefore designated with the
honourable title Schofetim “ (Shoph’-
tim)” and were also called Elders, a
title of honour among the Jews and
other nations,” — Patrick,

Cf. Alderman = Elderman.


Vers. 15, 16. Subject: Organisa-
tion,

There is nothing clearer in history
than that men stand in relation to one
another of superior and inferior. That
very fact necessitates gradations of
position ; all cannot be first, all cannot
be last. The point to be determined is
every man’s faculty, and his adaptation
for a particular sphere. The narrative
before us provides us with oo soil a


OHAF, L





principle concreted into a tangible form.
Moses —chiefs of tribes — captains —
officers,

Society could not exist without or-
ganisation. Organisation would break
up without leaders (cf. various epochs in
history when society has been shattered
for want of able leaders). Natural
history as well as the history of humanity
enforces this truth. The bee has its
queen ; a flock of sheep, a herd of deer
their leader,

Three things about true leaders—

I. They must be chosen of (od.
Moses was thus appointed ; so Joshua,
These subordinate rulers were chosen by
the same, though in a subordinate man-
ner. Moses as God’s vicegerent selected
them from those who had God’s stamp
upon them—ability and acknowledged
position. To him that has shall be
given.

II. Being chosen by God, they must
walk according to the Divine counsels,
“The book of the law of the Lord shall
not depart out of thy mouth; but thou
shalt meditate therein day and night,
that thou mayest observe to do accord-
ing to all that is written therein; for
then thou shalt make thy way pros-
perous,” dc. (Josh. i. 8). God never
endows man with independence. He is
raised high, but is ever subject to God.
It was because Satan overlooked this,
according to our great poet, that he fell
from his high estate. However that
may be, man quickly learns that he who
lives without God soon finds that God
can live without him,

III. In proportion as leaders acknow-
ledge God, so He prospers them (cf.
Josh. i. 8) ; “for then thou shalt make
thy way prosperous, and then thou shalt
have good success.” “They that honour
Me will I honour,”

Four thoughts on organisation—

I. Organisation facilitates the develop-
ment of individual talent,

II. Organisation consolidates Chris-
tian society assembled in one place.

III. Organisation presents most for-
midable front to the enemy,

IV. Organisation promotes healthful
spiritual development.—Dr, Parker.

“Judge righteously.” It was a shame

32


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY.





for Ceesarto confess, “ Meliorcausa Cassi,
sed denegare Bruto nihil possum” (The
ease of Cassius was the better, but | am
unable to deny Brutus anything); and
Henry the Emperor (the seventh of that
name) is much taxed in story for that,
being appealed unto by a couple of law-
yers, who contended about the sove-
reignty of the empire, they first making
agreement betwixt themselves that he
for whom the Emperor should give
sentence should win a horse of his
fellow-lawyer: now the Emperor fairly
pronounced truth to be on his side
that spake most for his power and
authority, whereupon this proverb was
taken up, “Alter respondet sequum, sed
alter habet equum” (The one hath the
right on his side, but the other rides the
horse). Thus it is that partiality per-
verteth right and corrupteth judgment,
whereas the law is plain. “‘ You shall
have no respect of person in judgment,”
&c. And the Apostle’s charge unto
Timothy is, that he do nothing xara
wpdoxdsow, by tilting the balance on one
side,

Magistrates should be men of courage.
“Eilvidius Priscus, being commanded
by Vespasian either not to come into
the senate, or being there, to speak no
thing but what he directed, made answer,
that being a senator, it was fit he should
go into the senate; and being there, it.
was his duty to speak in his conscience
what he thought to be true; and then
being threatened, if he did so, he should
die, further added, “That he never as
yet told him that he was immortal ; and
therefore,” said he, “do what you will,
I will do what I ought; and as it is in
your power to put me unjustly to death,
so it is in my power to die resolvedly
for the truth.” Here now was a brave-
spirited heathen, fit for Christian imita-
tion ; for he can never be a faithful man
that is afraid to speak his mind. Men
of public employment for the people’s
good must and ought to stand up for
the truth, to be men of courage, men of
resolution, not fearing the frown of any
whatsoever ; not echoing out the dictates
of others, but freely speaking their own
thoughts without any fear at all”—
Things New and Old.


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY ; DEUTERONOMY.


ee


CHAP, i.





Magistrates to be impartial in justice,
Selucus, that impartial lawgiver of
the Locrians, made a law against adul-
terers, that whosoever should be found
guilty thereof should have his eyes put
out. It so happened that his son proved
the first offender, Sentence was pro-
nounced, execution ready to be done;
whereupon the people earnestly en-
treated the judge his father that he
would pardon the fact, who, upon
serious deliberation, put out one of his
own eyes and one of his son’s, and so
showed himself a godly father and an
upright judge together. Thus it is that
magistrates, like the earth, should be
immovable, though the winds should
blow at once from all points of the com-
pass ; not to favour friends, nor fear the
frowns of enemies, but to proceed im-
partially according te the merits of the
eause that is before them (Prov. xviii.
5).


Ver. 17. Duty of magistrates, Part
of Moses’s solemn charge to the judges
of Israel. Jehoshaphat in substance said
the same (cf. 2 Chron, xix. 6). Charge
was necessary then—now—as long as
men are subject to weakness, negligence,
corruption, or passion, The words
imply—

L The judgment is God’s.

IL Ye shall not fear man.

III. The subject may see the sin and
danger of opposing, disobeying, and
vilifying magistrates.—7’. Wilson.


Ver. 17. The authority of magis-
trates. ‘For the judgment is God’s,”
Moses here enforces the charge given
to the judges of Israel. He repeats (cf.
Ley. xix. 15) it to procure reverence for
the judges, and to encourage the judges
to be fearless. Moses had done as much
as he was able to procure the faithful
execution of so high a trust: he “took
the chicf of the tribes, wise men” (ef.
ver. 15), To the natural character of
the men he adds the support of a good
reason why they should do what was
sight: “‘ The judgment is God’s.” Firat
they derive authority from Him, the
fountain of power (cf. Prov. viii. 15) ;
secondly, they judge in His cause, and

c+]





assert the honour of Him that loveth
righteousness” (cf. Ps. xi. 7). Work
of righteous judgment—dividing be-
tween good and evil, subduing the
violent, detecting villainy, punishing the
guilty, shielding the innocent, restrain-
ing the vindictive, protesting against
all flattery. Considering that the judg-
ment is God’s, it becomes imperative that
we do right. Two lines of thought—
I. What regard is due to the person
that judges for God.
IE. What obligations are laid upon
him.


Ver. 17. Those who act for God as
His vicegerents must act like Him.
He will protect them in doing right,
and call them to account if they do
wrong.—Tract Soe. Com.

“Be not afraid of any man.”— Del-
ado.

“‘ He shall not respect persons.” “Not
look to the face,” dc. Cf. Crit. Notes.
Cf. also the ancient custom of painting
and sculpturing Justice with her eyes
veiled.— Bb, Bid.

The Thebans painted their magistrates
without hands, and the chief of them
without eyes, to put them in mind that
they were not in any degree to be swayed
by favour or bribe.— Bib. Brb.

Cf. Homer’s description of Ulysses,
Od. 4.

** Ulysses let no partial favours fall ;

The people’s parent, he protected all.”
—Pope's Homer.

“Ye shall hear small as well as great.”
“ Be equally disposed patiently to attend
to the cause of a poor man as of a
great, and to do him as speedy and
impartial justice. (See Lev. xix. 15.)
And here the Hebrew doctors tell us
of some singular practices in their courts
to preserve the dispensation of exact
justice; for .f one of the contending
parties came into them richly clothed
and the other poorly, they would not
hear him till both were clothed alike.
Nor would they suffer one of them to sit
and the other to stand, but both of them
either sat or stood. And if they sat,
one of them was not permitted to sit
hugner than the other, but they sat by
each other’s side.” —Patrick. of


Omar. I,





“Courage and undaunted resolution
are altogether necessary qualities for a
judge.” — Patrick.


Ver, 17. In this verse, in a most un-
disguised manner, we have most em-
phatically enforced a social virtue—
justice, God never taught that reliyion
might be divorced from morality. When
Moses spake thus: when the author of the
Proverbs says— “A false balance is an
abomination to the Lord:” Isaiah—
“ Thus saith the Lord, Keep judgment
and do justice, for My salvation is near
to come and My righteousness to be
revealed :” Amos—“ Let judgment run
down as waters and _ righteousness
as a mighty stream:” Jeremiah—“ He
Judged the cause of the poor and needy,
then it was well with him: was not
this to know Me? saith the Lord” (ef.
the endorsement of Jesus across these
passages, Matt. v. 17-20): Paul—(Rom.
ii, 13; Phil. iv. 8; Col. iv. 1; Rom.
vii 1): and James—“ Pure religion and
undefiled before God the Father is this,
-.. to keep one’s self unspotted from
the world,” d&c. &c., to chap. ii. 10: we
have, from Moses to James, divinely in-
spired men proclaiming thereisno divorce
between religion and morality ; and to the
man who pretends to a religious life while
he ignores moral and social duties let there


be but the one word—“ What God has-


joined together let no man put asunder,”

In the fulness of this verse we have
the various steps of injustice referred to;
and placed in startling juxtaposition is
a fact that should be as a barrier to
obstruct all such evil courses. Let us
observe—

I, That the first step towards evil is a
playing with it in our own mind. The
inspired penman knew what he was
saying when he warned against “ respect-
ing.” What is admired is loved—is
imitated. The mind silently is brought
into harmony with it, What was it the
young man did whose later life was
marked with some of the most terrible
vices of manhood4 It was so simple a
thing as yielding to impure thought—
permitting unchaste images to take a
lodgment in his fancy. How was it
that the young woman whose life was

34


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY.


darkened with scenes no woman should
have beheld took the first step? Was
it not by respecting certain friends
whom she ought not to have respected }
The voice of the charmer should have
been recognised. In her own thoughts
she cherished him.

II. We cannot indulge in the thought
without its becoming incarnate in some
form, which is action. Moses knew that
men could not rest content with simply
respecting. Ifthe great were respected
the small would be ignored: indeed,
not only would the small be ignored,
there was a danger of their being
silenced in their pleadings, and justice,
which was their right, being taken from
them, In like manner we cannot afford
for a moment to think evil of God. If
we give place to such a thought, the mind
takes an attitude which soon becomes
open rebellion,

IIL We cannot play with evil with-
out enervating our moral nature. The
man who respects the great and ignores
his duties to the small loses the “ fear
of God,” and in its place enthrones the
fear of man. “ Ye shall not stand in
awe of the face of man.”

IV. The barrier that God would raise
up around every man to restrain his
feet from wandering is the fact of His
presence—His sovereignty: ‘“ The judg-
ment is God’s.” The most impressive
comment that can be offered here is
what was spoken to Saul on the way to
Damascus: “It is hard for thee to
kick against the pricks,”


Ver. 17. This ia part of a solemn charge
which Moses gave to the judges of
Israel. The same in effect did Jehosha-
phat give to his judges (2 Chron. xix.
6). If such was necessary then, it 18
now, and will be as long as men shall


. be as they now are—subject to weak-


ness, negligence, corruption, passion,
The words of the text suppose this.
The words, though few, imply much
instruction,

I, “ The judgment is God’s.” Why,
then, the magistrate’s power and autho-
rity is from God.

II. “ Ye shall not be afraid of the face
of man.” This teaches the magistrate


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY,


Ads duty, d¢, that he is not to pervert
justice for any worldly consideration ;
no, not for the fear of death.

III. The subject may here see the
sin and danger of opposing, of disobey-
ing, of vilifying the magistrate in the
due execution of his officaa He is God’s
minister; his judgment, if just, is the
very judgment of God; God is with
him in judgment, and will certainly
avenge him if he is despised.— 7. Wil-
son's Sermons,


Ver. 17, “‘ The judgment is God's.”

In these words Moses enforces that
solemn charge which he gave to the
judges, He repeats it to procure vene-
ration for their character, to remind
them of their own dignity, to raise
them above the power of fear, prejudice,
and tnterest. Here was a forcible reason
for faithfulness in executing their high
trust. Their authority was from God ;
the work was God’s. It concerns the
judge to know whose authority he has
that he may be righteous; it concerns
the people that they may be obedten
I shall therefore show—

I. What regard is due to the persons
that judge for God.

(a.) They are to be treated with
tender regard.

(b.) The nature of their office requires
more than ordinary veneration ; for un-
less we preserve a just notion of the
sacred authority that is vested in the
ministers of judgment, they will scarcely
be a terror to evil-doers—they will bear
the sword in vain.

(c.) For the sake of those in public
station we should endeavour to suppress
all pernicious principles,

IL What obligations are laid upon
them.

(a.) No sordid hopes of advantage,
no fear, partiality, or pity, must be
allowed to pervert.

(.) “ Let no man despise you.” You
must retain a just value of yourselves
and support your character.

¢.) Judges must check vice.

da.) Justice and merey should go
hand in hand.—T7. Newlin.

Vers. 16, 17. “I charged,” &e, The
parts of this charge are—


OHAP, 1


I. Patience to hear causes.

IL. Justice in judging righteously
(John vii. 24).

III. Courage (Lev. xix. 15; Deut,
xvi, 19; 1 Sam. xvi. 7; Prov, xiv. 23),

IV. Prudence. The cause too hard
you bring to me.— Kidder,


Vers. 16, 17. Subject: Not to abuse
entrusted power. All power is en-
trusted. Though men apparently make
their own position in the world, yet
what they acquire is in accordance with
ability given by God. We have many
cases of abused power. Achan is an in-
stance. He had the power of serving
God by destroying what he found. He
kept it. Power abused. Herod is
another instance of one who abused
power.

L. Power may be abused by not using
it at all. Cy. Saul with Agag.

II. Power may be abused by using
it in a wrong direction, Herod (cf.
Matt. xiv. 1-13). Here is an example of
power used in a wrong direction.

(a.) It injured his own moral nature,

(6.) It encouraged others to wrong.

(c.) It brought injury to the upright.

In warning the judges against the
abuse of power, Moses thought of all
this and much more,


Ver. 19. ‘‘That great and terrible wil-
derness” (cf. viii. 15). This language
is by no means applicable to the whole
peninsula of Sinai, even in its present
deteriorated state. It is, however, quite
such as men would employ after having
passed with toil and suffering through
the worat parts of it, the southern half
of the Arabah; and more especially
when they had but recently rested from
their marches in the plain of Shittim,
the largest and richest oasis in the
whole district.—Speaker’s Commentary.

“The Divine blessing has not bestowed
the same degree of fruitfulness on every
part of Caanan. This fertile country
is surrounded by deserts of immense
extent, exhibiting a dreary waste of
loose and barren sand, on which the
skill and industry of man are able to
make no impression. The only vegetable
production which occasionally iia the


Omar. L








eye of the traveller in these frightful
solitudes are a coarse sickly grass thinly
sprinkled on the sand, a plot of senna or
other saline or bitter herb, or an occa-
sional acacia bush. Even these but
rarely present themselves to his notice,
and afford him but little satisfaction when
they do, because they warn him that he
is far distant from a place of abundance
and repose. Moses, who knew these de-
serts well, calls them ‘great’ and ‘ ter-
rible,’ ‘a desert land,’ the ‘waste howl-
ing wilderness.’ But the completest
picture of the sandy desert is drawn by
the pencil of Jeremiah, in which, with
surprising force and beauty, he has ex-
hibited every circumstance of terror
which the modern traveller details with
s0 much pathos and minuteness—
‘Neither say they, Where is the Lord
that brought us up out of the land of
Egypt, that led us through the wilder-
ness, through a land of deserts and of
pits, through a land of droughts and of
the shadow of death, through a land
that no man passeth through, and where
no man dwelt.’”—Pazton,

“That great and terrible wilderness.”
To those familiar with the reality of
which the seen and temporal are but
shadows, these words are very sugges-
tive of another desert, and the way by
which God’s people travel through it.
Souls are born in a spiritual Egypt.
Life is a kind of desert wandering of
trial, “great,” “terrible” at times,
But there 1s a way through it; for unto
the redeemed One has said in the heart’s
mystic silence, “I am the Way :” “ Lo!
Z am with you.”

I. The way of the redeemed.

1.) Long.

3 Difficult.

(3.) Sometimes apparently lonely,

(4.) A desert way.

IL The rectitude of that way.
a right way, for

(1.) It is the Divine way. God led
them along it by a cloud and fire,

(2.) It is the way to the promised
reward,

Salt deserts, In traversing the region
between Egypt and Ghuzzeh, the Gaza
of the Bible, my course, during most
of the forenoon, lay through a suc-

36


It is


” HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY. DEUTERONOMY,








cession of basins or valleys, where
the surface of the ground was moist,
and covered with a thin incrustation of
salt. It was so slippery here that the
camels could with difficulty keep erect ;
one of thei actually fell at full length
with a groan which it was piteous to
hear. We were not far at this time
from the Mediterranean, of which we had
glimpses now and then. It is quite pos-
sible that a strong wind from the west
causes the sea occasionally to overflow
the entire tract, and on its receding, the
water left in the low places evaporates
and encrusts the earth with salt. There
are other deserts, or parts of deserts, in
the East, as travellers inform us, which
present a similar peculiarity, though the
salt may be formed, in those cases, in a
different manner. Perhaps the most
remarkable among these is the region
south of the Dead Sea A soil of this
nature must, of course, be unproductive.
Nothing grows there, and the means of
supporting life are wanting. It may be
to this feature of an Eastern desert,
aggravating so much its other evils, and
rendering it unfit to be the abode of
men, that the prophet Jeremiah refers
when he says of the ungodly man, “ He
shall inhabit the parched places in the
wilderness, in a salt land and not in-
habited.”—Professor Hackett.

The deserts. “Few who have not
visited Eastern lands can form any ade-
quate idea of the nature of a desert.
In those wide-spread plains the hand
of man is powerless, Nature holds
sway as on the morning of creation ;
in primeval wildness she displays her
terrors and her magnificence, and art
and science sink down helpless and ap-
palled before the barriers which she has
erected. As the traveller recedes from
the habitation of man, and the tokens
of civilisation begin to disappear, the
scene becomes wilder and more desolate;
a few stunted patches of parched and
scanty herbage here and there meet the
eye ; vast blocks of stone are scattered
over the sand ; no cooling streams, no
refreshing groves, break the monotony
of the prospect; the sun pours down a
flood of burning and dazzling light, and
the distant mountains glow in the hot


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





OHAP. 1.





and dusky horizon. The strength of
man seems to melt away within him,
and the camel, ‘the ship of the desert,’
paces onward with languid step, By
night the piercing winds are scarcely
less endurable than the heat by day.
The mountainous portions of the desert
afford some of the most awfully sublime
scenery that the world can exhibit ; and
here the terrors of the plains are miti-
gated by shade and water. Such was the
wilderness where the children of Israel
wandered for forty years.” —H. Christmas.


Ver. 21. The journeyings of the
Israelites in the wilderness afford an
inexhaustible fund of instruction to us,
The history of their deliverance from
Egypt, their trials and supports, and
their final entrance into the land of
Canaan, so exactly corresponds with the
experience of believers in their journey
heavenward, that we are never at a loss
for an illustration of that which is in-
visible from that which actually took
place amongst God’s ancient people.

The Israelites, after one year spent
in the wilderness, were now arrived on
the very confines of Canaan, and the
exhortation which I have now read to
you was part of the address of Moses to
them encouraging them to go up and
take possession of the land. And as-
suming (what I need not now stand to
prove) the justness of the parallel be-
tween their state and ours, the words
before us contain—

I. The command given us in reference
to the Promised Land. There is for us,
as there was for Israel, ‘‘a rest” pre-
pared (Heb. iv. 8, 9), and we are
bidden to take possession of it,

(1.) By right, as the gift of God.

[Canaan was given to Abraham and his seed
by God Himself. God had a right to give it
to whom He would, The former possessors
were but tenanta at will; if God saw fit to
dispossess them, no wrong done them, This
is said to satisfy the mind of those who feel
repugnance to the transfer of the land from
the Canaanites to Israel.

In relation to the land we are called to

ess no such feeling can exist, Heaven is
the free gift of God to Abraham’s spirituad
seed, as Canaan was to the natural. It is
given to them in Christ Jesus (Tit. L 2;
2 Tim. i, 9).


This command do we give; in the name of
Almighty God, to every one of you who be-
lieve in Christ, “Go up and possess the land,”
which the Sovereign of the universe, of His
own love and mercy, has given to you.]


(2.) By conflict, as the fruit of victory.


[Though the land was given to them, they
were yet to gain it by the sword. We also
have enemies to fight. The world, the flesh,
and the devil obstruct. All must be van-
quished before we can sit down tothe promised
inheritance. Nor let it be thought that
heaven is less a gift on this account; for
though we fight, it is not our own sword that
gets us the victory. It was ‘‘God Himself
who drove out the inhabitants” of the earthly
Canaan, and it is through God alone that our
weapons produce any effect in subduing our
enemies before us (¢f. John vi. 27; Ps,cxv. 1).]


Together with this command we are
taught—

IL The way in which we should
address ourselves to the performance of
it. The command of God to us is
positive, as that to them also was; and

(1.) Our obedience to Him should be
prompt.

[I am persuaded they would have done well
if they had never thought of sending spies to
search out the land, and to tell them against
what cities they should direct their first
efforts. It was a carnal expedient, as the
event proved. True, ‘‘Moses was well
pleased”’ with the proposal; but he would
not have been well pleased if he had clearly
seen from whence it issued and what would
be the result of it. He saw in it only a de-
termination to go up; he discerned not the
mixture of unbelief, What need had they to
search when God had searched and was about
to lead them? (ef. ver. 33). Had they said te
Moses, ‘ Pray to God for us to direct us, and
we are ready to go,’ they would have done well;
but, by trusting to an arm of flesh they fell.

In like manner we should obey the Divine
mandate without delay. We should ‘‘not
confer with flesh and blood ;” we should not
be consulting how we may avoid the trials
which God has taught us to expect; but
should look simply to the Captain of our sal-
vation, and follow implicitly His commands,
regarding no word in comparison of His, nor
ever dreaming of a more convenient season
than the present. What He calls us to do we
should “do” instantly, and ‘‘ with all our
might.”]

(2.) Our confidence in Him should be
entire.


[They were bidden “‘ not to fear or be dis-
eouraged.” So neither should we “‘ fear”
any dangers that may threaten us, or ‘‘be
diseouraged” under any trial we may be
cailed to endure. As for iene ” of


GHAR, I,





HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





cities “walled up to heaven,” what are they
tous? Is not ‘‘ He greater that is in us than
any that can be in them”? If Jehovah be on
our side, what have we to fear? We may say
of all our enemies, as Joshua did of those he
was called to encounter, ‘‘ They are bread for
us ;” and shall not only be devoured as easily
as a morsel of bread, but they and all that
they have shall be our very support, invigor-
ating our souls by the energies they call forth,
and augmenting the happiness which they
labour to destroy. Whatever may occur, we
should never stagger at the promise through
unbelief, but ‘‘be strong in faith, giving
glory to God.” We should go forward in the
spirit of the holy Apostle, ‘‘ If God be for us,
who can be against us !’’]


III. Hear then, believers, and follow
my advice,
(1.) Survey the land.


[See whether it be not the glory of all lands,
“a land flowing with milk and honey.”
‘*Come up to Pisgah, and look down upon it,”
I would rather say, Come up to Zion, and be-
hold its length and breadth. See it. Taste
its fruit, Take in your hand ‘the grapes
of Eshcol.” ‘* Not one of its inhabitants
ever says, Tam sick.” ‘No sorrow there, no
sighing, no pain, no death” (ef. Isa, uxziii.
24; Rev. xxi. 4, 23; Rom. viii. 18). Tell
me, is it not worth the conflict? Only keep
that glorious object in view, and you will
never sheath your sword till you have gained
the victory.]


(2.) Perform your duty,


[Gird on your swords. Go forward against
the enemy. Make no account of any ob-
stacles, Think neither of the strength nor the
number of your enemies. Say not, ‘Shall
the prey be taken from the mighty,” &., &o.
(Isa, xlix. 24, 25). Be not discouraged by
a sense of your own weakness, Go on simply
depending upon God (ef. 2 Cor, xii. 9, 10;
Isa. xli. 10). With confidence do I address
you thus; for the Lord Jesus Himself has
said, ‘‘ Pear not, little flock; for it is your
Father's good pleasure to give you the king-
dom.” Only ‘fight the good fight of faith,”
and you shall be ‘‘more than conquerors
through Him that loved you.”]— Simeon
(Abridged),


Ver. 21. In this verse we have a
mind at home with God opening itself
to the gaze of the world. What simple
trust—reverent faith—holy dependence
sparkle in the words! Among the many
suggestions of this verse, let us notice—

L That it indicates the bent of a
good man’s mind, It is Qodwards,
God is in all his thoughts. The ar
rangement of life is of God: the past
Full of God: the present is blessed by

38


5 tea


Him: the future swayed by Him
Three characteristics of the good man—
1.) He is of an earnest spirit.
2.) He is humble,

(3.) He is devout,

IL It delineates the power of a good
man’s faith,

(1.) His confidence. ‘The Lord thy
God hath set the land before thee,” dc.
“ Nothing but innocency and knowledge
can give sound confidence to the heart.”
— Bishop Hall. “Confidence in one’s self
is the best nurse of magnanimity.”—&
Philip Sidney,

(2.) His perseverance. “Go up and
possess.” ‘‘ Persevere is applied only
to matters of some importance which
demand a steady purpose of the mind ;
persist is used in respect to the ordinary
business of life, as well as on more
important occasions. A learner perse-
veres in his studies: a child may persist
in making a request until he has ob-
tained the object of his desires.”—Crabo,
Synonyms.

“Great effects come of industry and
perseverance.”— Lord Bacon.

“Those who attain any excellence
commonly spend life in one common
pursuit; for excellence is not often gained
upon easier terms.”—Dr, Johnson.

“He plies her hard, and much rain
wears the marble.” Shakespeare.

“If there be one thing on earth truly
admirable, it is to see God’s wisdom
blessing an inferiority of natural powers
where they have been honestly, truly, and
zealously cultivated."— Dr. Arnold.

(3.) His hope. “Fear not, neither be
discouraged.”

“Tt is said of Abraham that he
believed in hope against hope. What
is the meaning of these words? The
passage intends to express that Divine
hope overcame human hope. This ia
the hope which redounds to the glory of
God, because it is an act of homage
rendered to His omnipotence. He that
is destitute of such hope can have ne
pretence to saving faith, and not to
believe in the promises which God has
made to us is an evidence that our
souls are altogether fixed upon the toys
and vanities of earth. That which the
world calls wisdom is nothing more thas


| HOMILETIOAL OOMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





foolishness in the sight of God, and
disbelief in His word argues a stupid
indifference allied to the brute, Faith
and hope repose upon the same founda-
tion—the Word of God. The Christian
believes in spite of the evidence of his
senses, and he hopes for blessings which
cannot yet be discerned by the senses.
There is no faith where there is doubt
and uncertainty ; there is no hope where
there is hesitation.” —Chrysostom,


*¢ Reflected on the lake, I love
To see the stara of evening glow,
So tranquil in the heavens above,
So restless in the wave below.
Thus heavenly hope is all serene;
But earthly hope, how bright so e’er,
Still flutters o’er this changing scene,
As false, as fleeting as ’tis fair,’”’


Cease every joy to glimmer on my mind,
But leave—oh! leave the light of Hope
behind!” —Campbell.


“ A man cannot drown so long as his
head is above water; hope lifts up the
head and looks up to the redemption
and salvation that is to come in another
world in its fulness and perfection.”
—Polhill,

IIL It reveals the source of a good
man’s power, “ Behold, the Lord thy
God hath set,” &. Think of Moses
speaking thus after a hundred and
twenty years of life. Some grow tired
of life and distrustful of God before
they are thirty. For a hundred and
twenty years Moses had lived near to
God—he had so lived that God could
bless him—God was therefore in all
his thoughts.

(1.) God imparts strength to the good
for the performance of the most arduous
duties.

(2.) The resources of infinite strength
always within the reach of the good
man.

(3.) The method by which to realise
this power is prayer.

There is an excellent story of a young
man who was at sea in a mighty raging
tempest, and when all the passengers were
at their wits’ end for fear, he only waa
merry; and when he was asked the reason
of his mirth, answered, “ That the pilot
of the ship was his father. and he knew


CHAP, L


that his father would have a care of
him.”— Pulpit Illustrations.

Necessity of Perseverance. “The philo-
sopher being asked in his old age
why he did not give over his
practice and take his ease, answered,
‘When a man is to run a race of forty
furlongs, would you have him sit down
in the nine and thirtieth and so lose the
prize?’ We do not keep a good fire all
day, and let it go out in the evening
when it is coldest, but then rather lay
on more fuel, that we may go warm to
bed. Thus he that stakes the heat of
geal in his age will go cold to bed, and
in a worse case to his grave. To con-
tinue in giving glory to Christ is no less
requisite than to begin; though the
beginning be more than half; yet the
end is more than all. The God of all
perfection looks that our ultimatum
vite should be His optimum gloria,
that our last works should be our best
works, that we should persevere in good-
ness to the end.” Things New and Old.

Goodness. “The parts and signs of
goodness are many. If a man be gra-
cious and courteous to strangers, it
shows he is a citizen of the world, and
that his heart is no island cut off from
other lands, but a continent that joins
to them; if he be compassionate to-
wards the afflictions of others, it shows
that his heart is like the noble tree that
is wounded itself when it gives the
balm ; if he easily pardons and remits
offences, it shows that his mind is
planted above injuries, so that he can-
not be shot ; if he be thankful for small
benefits, it shows that he weighs men’s
minds, and not their trash; but, above
all, if he have St. Paul’s perfection, that
he would wish to be an anathema from
Christ for the salvation of his brethren,
it shows much of a Divine nature and
a kind of conformity with Christ Him-
self.” —Lord Bacon,

God the fountain source of all our
blessings, It is said of Hadrian VI.,
that having built a stately college at
Lovain, he set this inscription over the
front in golden letters, “ Trajectum
plantavit, Lovanium rigavit, sed Cesar
dedit incrementum” (Utrecht planted
me, fer there he was born j ’ Lovain


Omar, E


HOMILETIOAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERON OMY.





watered me, for there he was bred ; but
Ceesar gave the increase, who from the
ferula brought him to the crosier, of a
schoolmaster made him Pope of Rome).
A witty passenger, reproving his folly,
under-wrote, “‘ Here was no room for God
to do anything.” Thus God may be said
not to be in all the thoughts of self-
seeking men: they do not, with those
ancients, preface to their words, ‘‘ Theos,
Theos,” but intervert a great part of the
price with that ill couple, turning God’s
glory into shame, loving vanity, seeking
after lies, such as, in the original, will
deceive their expectations; of which
sort, by a speciality, is that smoke of
popular applause, which, the higher it
mounts, the sooner it vanishes and
comes to nothing.— Pulpit Illustrations.

Reward of perseverance. “I recol-
lect in Queen’s County to have
seen a Mr. Clerk, who had been a
working carpenter, and when making a
bench for the session’s justices at the
courthouse, was laughed at for taking
peculiar pains in planing and smooth-
ing the seat of it. He smilingly
observed that he did so to make it easy
for himself, as he was resolved he would
never die till he had a right to sit there-
upon ; and he kept his word. He was
an industrious man—honest, respect-
able, and kind-hearted. He succeeded
in all his efforts to accumulate an in-
dependence ; he did accumulate it, and
rightly. His character kept pace with
the increase of his property, and he
lived to sit as a magistrate on that very
bench which he sawed and planed,”—
Sir Jonah Barrington.


Vers, 22, 23, (cf. Num. xiii. 1, 2).
There is no real discrepancy between
these passages, The plan of sending
the spies originated with the people,
and, as in itself a reasonable one, it
approved itself to Moses; was sub-
mitted to God and sanctioned by Him;
and carried out under special Divine
direction. The orator’s purpose in this
chapter is to bring before the people
emphatically their own responsibilities
and behaviour, It ia, therefore, import-
ant to remind them that the sending
of the spies, which led immediately to

40


their murmuring and rebellion, was
their own suggestion.

It is frivolous to object that the
generation which had sinned thus was
dead, and that Moses was addressing
men who had had no concern in the
events to which he is referring. That
this fact was present tu the speaker's
mind is clear from vers. 34, 35; nay, it
was the very aim he had in view, to
warn the present generation not to fol-
low their fathers in their perversity, and
so defraud themselves of the promised
blessing, as their fathers had done. It
is but natural that Moses, who had been
the leader of the congregation all along,
should, when addressing it collectively,
treat it as the same which he had
brought forth from Egypt, and had now
for the second time conducted to the
Promised Land.

The following verses to the end of the
chapter give a condensed statement,
the fuller account being in Num. xiii,
xiv., of the occurrences which led to
the banishment of the people for forty
years into the wilderness. The facts
are treated with freedom, as by one
familiar with them, addressing those no
less so, yet in consistency with the more
strictly historical record of Numbera.—
Speaker's Commentary.


Vers. 22, 28. What a contrast these
two verses present. The first brings
before us the people, with commendable
prudence, arranging for carrying out a
great plan; the second presents the
most pitiful, contemptible picture one
can imagine—the same people, because
difficulty presented itself in the way of
the purpose being conducted to success,
cowardly crying outas the veriest abjecta,
Well might the words of Job xvii. 11
be quoted in connection with ver, 28:
“My purposes are broken off.” The
world is full of broken purposes, Every
heart is filled with its tombstones raised
over dead intentions and desires. The
true cemetery is the human heart, Look
at it—full of dreams of youth—early
ambitions—grand schemes of self-profit,
or national benefit, or boundless philan.
thropy. All dead. Two thoughts—

L All men have, and have had, pur


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


> SC





poses, The thought makes one shudder.
The conflict of feeling too intense to
endure. ‘There were purposes of wealth,
the present reality is poverty—the very
want of a dinner. Recall Jolnson’s
plans, purposes, and poverty.

“He told Sir Joshua Reynolds that,
one night in particular, when Savage
and he walked round St. James’s Square
for want of a lodging, they were not at
all depressed by their situation ; but, in
high spirits and brimful of patriotism,
traversed the square for several hours,
inveighed against the minister, and
‘resolved they would stand by their
country.’”—Bosteell’s Life of Johnson.

“The longer i live the more I am cer-
tain that the great difference between
men—betweea the feeble and the power-
ful, the great and the insignificant—is
energy, tnvincable determination—a pur-
pose once fixed, and then death or
victory / That quality will do anything
that can be done in this world ; and no
talent, no circumstances, no opportu-
nities, will make a two-legged creature
a man without it.”— Buxton,

II. All men can tell us something
about purposes. One can tell us of
purposes carried into effect. Another
looks to the earth and points to some-
thing lying there snapped as a broken
spear, and with a deep-drawn moan
groans out—‘‘ my purpose.”

Both these men can instruct. The
successful man can show how his success
was realised : the unsuccessful can reveal
the causes of his failure, Both are
governed by a law, if we only knew


it.

What is the law of success$ The
law varies with the sphere in which the
success is to be attained, and the nature
of the success sought ; if the success be
earthly merely, then the law of success
is in seifishness and ability, or, as one
has expressed the idea on its optimist
side, “success is the child of cheerful-
ness and courage ;” if, however, the
success sought is heavenly, then the law
that governs it will be faith in God,
and a heart inspired by God’s Spirit to
do right at any cost. In the one case
success is in the possession of a theng ;
in the other in what one és,


OHAP. I,


**Failures are with heroic minds the stepping.
stones to success.” ——


“Tt is far from true, in the progress
of knowledge, that after every failure
we must recommence from the begin-
ning. Every failure is a step to success;
every detection of what is false directs
us to what is true ; every trial exhausts
some tempting form of error. Not only
so, but scarcely any attempt is entirely
a failure; scarcely any theory, the re-
sult of steady thought, is altogether
false; no tempting form of error is
without some latent charm derived
from truth.” — Whewell.

“If you wish success in life, make per-
severance your bosom friend, experience
your wise counsellor, caution your elder
brother, and hope your guardian genius.”

—Addison.

“So Jotham became mighty, because
he prepared his ways before the Lord
his God.”—Hebrew Chronicles.

“The talent of success is nothing
more than doing what you can do well,
and doing well whatever you do, with-
out a thought of fame.”—Longfellow.

“T confess,” says a thouchtful writer,
“that increasing years bring with them
an increasing respect for men who do
not succeed in life, as those words are
commonly used, Ill success sometimes
arises from a conscience too sensitive,
a taste too fastidious, a self-forgetfulness
too romantic, a modesty too retiring. I
will not go so far as to say, with a
living poet, that the world knows no-
thing of its greatest men; but there are
forms of greatness, or at least of excel-
lence, which ‘die and make no sign;’
there are martyrs that miss the palm,
but not the stake; heroes without the
laurel, and conquerors without the
triumph.”

‘Whosoever will live altogether out of
himself, and study other men’s humours,
shall never be unfortunate.”—Sir W
Raleigh.

“Those who believe in a future state of
rewards and punishments act very ab-
surdly if they form their opinion of a
man’s merits from his successes. But
certainly, if I thought the whole circle
of our being was included between our


births and deaths, I should think a


CHAP, B,


man’s good fortune the measure and
standard of his real merit, since Provi-
dence would have no opportunity of
rewarding his virtue and perfections
but in the present life. A virtuous un-
believer, who lies under the pressure of
misfortune, has reason to cry out, as
they say Brutus did a little before his
death, ‘O virtue, I have worshipped
‘thee as a substantial good, but I find
thou art an empty name.’ ”—A ddison.


‘* Had I misearried, I had been a villain ;
For men judge actions alway by events:
But when we manage by a just foresight,
Success is prudence, and possession right.”

—Higyons,


«To judge by the event is an error all
abuse, and all commit; for in every
instance, courage, if crowned with suc-
cess, is heroism; if clouded by defeat,
temerity. When Nelson fought his
battle in the Sound, it was the result
alone that decided whether he was to
kiss a hand at a court, or a rod at a
court-martial.”—Colton.


Ver. 24. “Came unto the valley of
Eshcol.” In Num. xiii, 22-24, we
have a full account of this visit, likewise
the meaning of the word Eshcol given.
It means “bunch” or “cluster” of
grapes (Num. xiii. 24).—/Fiirst. The
grapes must have been a welcome sight
to the desert-worn travellers. Dr.
Livingstone tells us something of this
feeling: “In latitude 18° we were re-
warded with a sight which we had not
enjoyed for a year before—large patches
of grape- bearing vines. ‘There they
stood before my eyes. The sight was
#o entirely unexpected that I stood for
some time gazing at the clusters of
grapes with which they were loaded,
with no more thought of plucking than
if I had been beholding them in a
dream.”

“A cluster of grapes of Eshcol, the
magnificent richness and size of which
may be judged from the circumstance of
its being carried on a pole, supported
on the shoulders of two men. Eshcol
still retains its celebrity for the produce
of grapes. Sir M. Montefoire lately got
a bur«b a yard long.”—Jamieson,

43


HOMILETIOAL COMMENTARY: DEUTBRONOMY.





Ver. 25. “It is a good land which
the Lord our God doth give us,”

These words were spoken primarily
with regard to the Land of Promise:
but much that was spoken of that pro
mised land, the natural Canaan, may be
applied with great propriety and equal
force to that promised inheritance of the
saints—the spiritual Canaan of the soul,
It matters little what image be used for
representing that gift (¢f. Rom. vi. 23)
of God, for which among the millions
of men’s words no one word has been
found adequate for its expression,
whether we compare it to the “ promised
land” of Palestine, or to “wisdom ;”
for in qualifying the expression of the
idea we simply follow the leadings of
the metaphor, and, whether we say that
“it is a good land which the Lord our
God doth give us,” or, ‘“ wisdom’s ways
are ways of pleasantness,” we in the
end say the same thing though by dif-
ferent terms, just as we say one-half or
two-quarters or five-tenths, The Chris
tian heritage of a holy and perfected
life, through faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ, is a “good land” full of rich-
ness and fatness, a land of milk and
boney ; it is also very “pleasant.” It
is pleasant because good: it is good
because pleasant. Though the pleasant-
ness of religion is always difficult of
recognition to the young disciple, it is
only so because the Cross of Christ has
to be carried by the flesh before that
Cross can lose its weight, and its mate-
rial be woven into a crown. Religion
is believed to be good because possessed
by the best of men: the assurance of its
pleasantness comes by the experience of
its power. “That pleasure is, in the
nature of it, a relative thing, and so im-
parts a peculiar relation and correspond-
ence to the state and condition of tie
person to whom it is a pleasure ”—
South, Religion is “ good” or “plea
sant” from its own inherent nature.

I. Because it is the proper pleasure
of that part of man which is the largest
and most comprehensive of pleasure, .¢.,
his mind: a substance of a boundlesa
comprehension,

\. In reference to speculation, as it
sustains the name of understanding,


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY ; DEUTERONOMY.





2. In reference to practice, as it
sustains the name of conscience,

IL Because it is such a pleasure as
never satiates or wearies ; for it properly
affects the spirit, and a spirit feels no
weariness, as being privileged from the
causes of it.

The pleasures of the table pall; the
pleasures of exercise grow into weari-
ness ; but in fulfilled duty is a pleasure
(ef. work and its joy). How much more
in religion! As much as religion is
nobler than work,

III. Because it is such as to be in no
one’s power to take from us, but only in
his who has it; so that he who has the
property is also eure of its perpetuity.
This can be said of no other form of
enjoyment, All pass in the using, or
are taken away by time. We are at
the mercy of men. But though men
take away our life they cannot take
away that joy of our religion.

“There is nothing that can raise a
man to that generous absoluteness of
condition, as neither to cringe, to fawn,
or to depend meanly; but that which
gives him that happiness within himself,
for which men depend upon others
For surely I need salute no great man’s
threshold, sueak to none of his friends
or servants, to speak a good word for
me to my conscience, It is a noble and
a sure defiance of a great malice, backed
with a great interest; which yet can
have no advantage of a man but from
his own expectations of something that
is without himself. But if I can make
my duty my delight; if I can feast,
and please, and caress my mind with
the pleasures of worthy speculations
or virtuous practices; let greatness and
malice vex and abridge me if they can:
my pleasures are as free as my will: no
more to be controlled than my choice,
or the unlimited range of my thoughts
and my desires.”— South,


“Took of the fruit,” &,

Subject: Fruitfulness.

I. Notice the idea of the text as
applied to the land. It was fruitful.
Fsheol was noted for its fruit. As
fruit was gathered from the land, the
land was therefore good. It had re-


OH4P, L,


ae


ceived God’s gift of capability, God’s
gift is not the effect of man’s labour:
though man’s apprehension is necessary
for the grasping of what God holds out.

II. Notice the idea of the text in ita
moral bearings, The caterpillar ever
encases the butterfly. So physical facta
inwrap a moral truth.

(a.) Fruit is the result of cultivation.
True in their native state, when wild
and uncultivated trees bear some fruit;
but such fruit is not to be compared
with that produced by care and cultiva-
tion. The best fruit is the product of
art. God works by means.

(2.) Suggests inquiries with regard te
our own fruitfulness, ‘ Examine your-
selves, whether ye be in the faith,” was ©
an apostolic injunction, and one that no
man can dispense with,


Vers. 25, 26. “A good land which
the Lord our God doth give us: not-
withstanding ye would not go up.”
God gives bountifully, but the devil
strews impediments in the path that
leads to possession. The brave, faithful,
hopeful, and strong trample over them
and realise succesa; the cowardly, faith-
less, hopeless, and weak are terrified by
these lions in the way, and die ignoble
deaths in the presence of what might have
been rich possessions. Here we have
plainly that though God gives a kingdom
—a goodly land— we fail to possess it, be-
cause we refuse, through our fears and on
account of impediments, to enter upon it.

I. Our animal appetites come into »
collision with spiritual progress.

“It is reported of the hedgehog that
he goes to a pile of apples, and gathers
up as many as he can upon his prickles,
and when he comes to his hole, he goes
in with his prickles but leaves his apples
behind him. Thus how many there are
who have wallowed in the apples of their
pleasures, with many a prick and twinge
of conscience, who when they shall de-
scend, as shortly they must, to their
holes of darkness, shall be compelled to
leave all their sweets of false delight
behind them, and carry with them no-
thing but the stings and soars of a
wounded conscience.”

There will be no spiritual fruit there.

43


Ona?, f.


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





In the pursuit of gross pleasure, the
spirit is killed,

IL The lower in man, which belongs
to the seen and temporal, urges to the
sacrifice of the higher and spiritual. In
every life there is a Job’s wife saying,
“Curse God, and die.” No man is free
from the voice that whispered in the ear
of Judas; some there are who sell the
Christ for a paltry few pieces of silver.
Adam did that. He bought the present
at the cost of the whole future. So
Esau ; a birthright, for a mess of pot-
tage. It is foolish: more so, criminal.

TIL When this is done retribution
begins here. God does not wait till
man comes into the sphere and region

of the eternal to punish. Punishment

follows quick upon the sin, in many
cases, in this world. Israel was turned
back into the desert. David was
punished by “the sword” that never
left his house (¢f 2 Sam. xii. 10).
Character is lost. Health departs.
Friends are alienated. The heart grows
cold and is hardened. Sin slays sym-
pathy with what is divine. Saul had
his kingdom taken from him.


Beware of the lusts of the flesh—
“When the oyster opens himself to the
sun, being tickled with the warmth
thereof, then his enemy, the crab-fish,
stealeth behind him, and thrusteth in
his claw, and will not suffer him to shut
again, and so devoureth him. The like
is written of the crocodile, that being
so strong a serpent as he is, and im-
pregnable, yet, when he is gaping, to
have his teeth picked by the little bird
called trochil, his enemy, the ichneumon
creepeth into his body, and ceaseth not
to gnaw upon his entrails, till he hath
destroyed them. Think upon the urchin
and the snail: whilst the urchin keeps
himself close in the bottom of the hedge,
he is either not espied or contemned ;
but when he creeps forth to suck the
tow, he is dogged and chopped in. So
the snail, when he lies close, with his
house on his head, is esteemed for a
dead thing and not looked after; but
when in liquorishness to feed upon the
dews that lie upon the grass, or upon
the sweetness of the rose-bush, he will

44


be perking abroad, that the gardener
findeth and smashes him. The lesson
is: we must not yield to the sweet baits
of the flesh, but we must mortify our
members upon the earth, and ever beware
that we seek not our death in the error
of our life : otherwise if we wilfully offer
ourselves to be led as an ox to the
slaughter, and as a sheep to the shambles,
what marvel if we have our throat cut,
or be led captive of Satan at his will.”

The danger of fleshly lusts.—“It is
said of the torpedo, a kind of dangerous
sea-fish, that it is of so venomous a
nature, that if it chance to touch but
the line of him that angles, the poison is
thereby imparted to the rod, and thence
to the hand of him that holds it ; where-
upon the party is so benumbed and
stupefied on a sudden that he loses the
use of his limbs Even so, when en-
chanting lusts insinuate themselves in-
to, or indeed but barely touch upon,
voluptuous minds, they grow, with the
companions of Ullysses not only brutish,
but withal so senseless, that they have
not the power to think a good thought,
or to do a good action.”—Things New
and Old.

“For there is no doubt but a man,
while he resigns himself up to the brut-
ish guidance of sense and appetite, has
no relish at all for the spiritual, refined
delights of a soul clarified by grace and
virtue. The pleasures of an angel can
never be the pleasures of a hog. But
this is the thing that we contend for;
that a man, having once advanced him-
self to a state of superiority over the
control of his inferior appetites, finds an
infinitely more solid and sublime plea-
sure in the delights proper to his reason,
than the same person had ever conveyed
to him by the bare ministry of his
senses, His taste is absolutely changed,
and therefore that which pleased him
formerly becomes flat and insipid to hia
appetite, now grown more masculine and
severe.” — South.

The character of the profligate George
Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, is well
known to all who are acquainted with
the reign of Charles IL “ He was,” as
said ‘he Earl of Clarendon in his history,
“a man of noble presence ; he had great


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





liveliness of wit, and a peculiar faculty
of turning serious things into ridicule
He had no principles of religion, virtue,
or friendship, Pleasure, frolic, and ex-
travagant diversion, were all he regarded.
He had no steadiness of conduct; he
could never fix his thought nor govern
his estate, though it was at one time the
greatest in England. He was bred about
the king, and for many years had a great
ascendancy over him; but at length he
drew a lasting disgrace upon himself,
and ruined both body and mind, fortune
and reputation. The madness of vice
appeared in him in very eminent in-
stances; and at last he became con-
temptible and poor, sickly, and sunk in
all respects, so that his conversation was
as much avoided as ever it had been
courted.” His own state of mind ean
be best learned from his letter to Dr.
Barrow: ‘Oh what a prodigal have I
been of the most valuable of all posses-
sions—time. I have squandered it with
a profusion unparalleled; and now, when
the enjoyment of a few days would be
worth the world, I cannot flatter myself
with the prospect of half a dozen hours,
How despicable, my dear friend, is that
man who never prays to God btt in the
hour of distress! In what manner can
he supplicate that Omnipotent Being in
his afflictions, whom, in the time of his
prosperity, he never remembered with
reverence. Do not brand me with infi-
delity, when I tell you that I am almost
ashamed to offer up my petitions at the
throne of grace, or to implore that
Divine mercy in the next world which
I have scandalously abused in this,
Shall ingratitude to man be looked upon
as the blackest of crimes, and not ingra-
titude to God? Shali an insult offered
to the king be looked upon in the most
offensive light, and yet no notice be
taken when the King of kings is treated
with indignity and disrespect?... I
am forsaken by all my acquaintances:
utterly neglected by the friends of my
bosom and the dependants of my bounty ;
but no matter; I am not fit to converse
with the former, and have no abilities to
serve the latter. Let me not be wholly
cast off by the good. Favour me with
8 visit a8 soon as possib:s Writing to


CHAP. I,


you gives me some ease, especially on a
subject I could talk of for ever, I am
of opinion this is the last visit I shall
ever solicit from you; my distemper ir
powerful. Come and pray for the de
parting spirit of the poor unhappy

“ BUCKINGHAM.”

In Cunningham’s “ Lives of Eminent
and Illustrious Englishmen,” we have
the following concerning the same man.
*‘ About the period of Charles’s death,
his own health became so much affected
that he was reluctantly compelled to
retire into the country to recruit himself.
The spot which he made choice of with
this view was his own manor of Helmesa-
ley, in Yorkshire, Here he generally
passed his time betwixt the sports of
the chase and the pleasures of the table,
An ague and fever, which he caught by
sitting on the ground after a long hunt,
terminated his life. The attack was so
sudden and violent that he could not
be removed to his own house, but was
conducted to a wretched village inn,
where, after languishing three days, he
expired, unregretted, and almost unat-
tended. He had lived the life of a pro-
fligate, and he died the death of an out-
cast. It is impossible to say anything
favourable o* such a man as Villiers,
whose sole aim throughout life seems to
have been self-gratification, and who
scrupled not to commit any crime in the
pursuit of this single object.”

The death of Voltaire. —‘‘ In the midst
of his triumphs, a violent hemorrhage
raised apprehensions for his life:—
D’Alembert, Diderot, and Marmontel,
hastened to support his resolution in his
last moments, but were only witnesses
to their mutual ignominy, as well as to
his own. Here let not the historian
fear exaggeration. Rage, remorse, re-
proach, and blasphemy, ail accompany
and characterise the long agony of the
dying atheist. His death, the most ter-
rible ever recorded to have stricken the
impious man, will not be denied by his
companions in impiety, Their silence,
however much they may wish to deny
it, is the least of those corroborative
proofs which might be adduced. Not
one of those sophisters has ever dared te
mention any sign of dieaesre tran


OmaP. L


quillity evinced by their ‘ great chief’
during the space of three months, which
elapsed from the time he was crowned
in the theatre until his decease, Such
@ silence expresses how great was their
humiliation in hisdeath!....

“The conspirators had strained every
nerve to hinder their chief from consum-
mating his recantation; and every avenue
was shut to the priests whom Voltaire
himself had sent for. The demons haunt-
ed every access ; rage succeeded to fury,
and fury to rage again, during the re-
mainder of his life. Then it was that
D’Alembert, Diderot, and about twenty
others of the conspirators, who had beset
his apartment, never approached him
but to witness their own ignominy ; and
often he would curse them, and exclaim
—‘ Retire! It ia you who have brought
me to my present state! Begone! I
could have done without you all; but
you could not exist without me! And
what a wretched glory you have pro-
cured me!’ Then would succeed the
horrid remembrance of his conspiracy.
They could hear him the prey of anguish
and dread, alternately supplicating or
blaspheming that God against whom he
had conspired ; and in plaintive accents
he would cry out, ‘O Christ! O Jesus
Christ !’ and then complain that he was
abandoned by God and man. The hand
that had traced, in ancient writ, the
sentence of an impious and reviling king,
seemed to trace before his eyes the horrid
blasphemies which he had so often
uttered. In vain he turned his head
away ; the time was coming apace when
he was to appear before the tribunal of
Him whom he had insulted; and his
physicians, particularly M. Tronchin,
calling in to administer relief, thunder-
struck, retired, declaring ‘ that the death
of the impious man was terrible indeed.’
The pride of the conspirators woald
willingly have suppressed these declara-
tions, but it was in vain. The Mareschal
de Richelieu fled from his bedside, de-
claring ‘it to be a sight too terrible to
be sustained;’ and M. Tronchin, ‘ that
the furies of Orestes could give but a
faint idea of those of Voltaire.’”—A dbde
Barrwel, quoted in “The Christian's
Sketch Book.”

46


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





Vers. 21 and 26. “Go up.”... “ Ye
would mot,”

What is this but unbelief on the part
of Israel? Though God had promised
to give the land, the people had refused
to take it. Why? Because a few
cowardly spies said, “It will be hard
work.” And the work became harder
to the minds of this people because they
had no faith in God, who helps in the
accomplishment of all work. If they
had believed God, difficulty would have
been nothing.

I, God might have abstained from all
interferences in the life and action of
Israel. But He was pleased to identify
Himself with His people (¢f. Heb. xi.
23-27).

II. God continues that interest spirit-
ually. Those who believe He helps.
Those who believe not are condemned,
powerless, ruined (John iii. 18).

III. When salvation is provided, the
anger of God will be great if it be re
fused (cf. Pharaoh). Israel hardened
his neck. ‘He that hardens his heart
is suddenly cut off.”

IV. Help is provided for the sinner,
but many will not accept it. “ Ye would
not go up.”

a.) Its necessity—man is dead.
6.) Nature of the help—life (cf John
x. 10). ;

(c) Its completeness (cf. work of

Christ).


Vers. 26-30. Pictures presented here :

1. A calm righteous man, vers. 26
and 29,

2. Impotent rage, vers. 27, 28.

3. Perfect confidence in personal des-
tiny, vers, 29, 30.


Vers. 26-36. There is something very
brave and outspoken in these words.
Picture a man standing up before an
infuriated people with the calmness that
the tone of this passage implies. (Cf.
a great political leader rebuking a Hyde
Park or Trafalgar Square popular de-
monstration.) The Christian minister
is at times in such position. He must
preach a truth unsavoury to the na
tural man. Let there be the same
calm, brave outspokemmess, and force ef





HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


OMAP, I





dignity. Moses’ power in the God who
was speaking through him. Four
points—

I, His entire self-possession.

Il, A co-operator with God.

IIL His power to adapt himeelf to
great crises,

IV. He could rebuke, because he
knew much and loved much. His posi-
tion among the people the result of his
identifying himself with them in their
need (Heb. xi. 23-27).


Ver. 26. “‘ Ye would not go up,” &c.
* Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft,”
said a later oracle. Calm reflection
compels one almost to say that rebellion
against God is insanity, No good, ulti-
mately, is gained by it.

I. All trifling with the Divine law
involves at least the degradation of him
who trifles with it (cf. vers. 33, 34).
Sometimes his accomplices (ef. Ananias
and Sapphira). Sometimes his friends,
even though they be innocent (ef.
Achan). “Sin of father visited upon
children,” &c,

IL All honour of the law secures
exaltation in the kingdom of heaven
(cf. 36-38). ‘They that honour Me
will I honour.”

(a.) Law of God in harmony with
man’s constitution,

(6.) God’s law is God’s advice for
man to act by.

IIL Man is to regulate his conduct
by divine law, and not by human
standards. “Act from a maxim at all
times fit for law universal.” — Kant.
He who walks at noon lighted by a
taper will be held guilty for all the con-
sequences of such act. These men had
to suffer all the effects possible on one
act of folly and wrong.

IV. There is one characteristic in
which the law of Christ is one with
the law of Moses. Obedience to it is
necessary. ‘If ye love Me, keep My
commandments” (cf. John xiv. 21).
“Tf a man love Me,‘he will keep My
words,” said Christ, “and My Father
will love him,” The Father’s love con-
sequent on the keeping of the words,

V. Let us take warning, and be care-
“al how we treat the law of Christ, lest,


through unbelief and consequent failure
of purpose, we be shat out of a better
country (cf. all the early chapters of
Epistle to the Hebrevrs).


“Ye rebelled,” &c.

Human conduct is affected by the
religious life of the community. We
cannot live without God without losing
spiritual life (cf. John xvi. 4-17). Such
alienation acts most ruinously upon the
heart life, which is the centre of being
and the source of our activities.

I. God’s covenant forsaken.

II. This means entering into cove-
nant with the devil. He that is not
for, is against.

III, Man becomes blinded to right.

IV. His blindness prevents his seeing
the precipice of ruin on which he standa,


“Ye would not,” d&e,

Here are people who knew the will
and command of God, yet would not
obey. “Ye would not go up. From
the words we may infer—

L The possibility of knowing the
law, but obstinately and persistently
transgressing it (cf. Judas, Byron, Vol-
taire). These al] knew what was right.

II. The possibility of having the law
of God enforced upon us by a divinely-
inspired and appointed prophet with-
out it affecting us. How many hearers
every Sunday murmur at preachers, men
of God and true! Moses spoke: the
people heedless. They would be the
same if one spoke from the dead (Luke
xix. 29-31).

IIL The law of God must be obeyed
whether it meet our approbation or not.
It is Goa’s law ; that is sufficient.

(a.) Show it is God’s law.

(b.) God’s law may be known from
its harmoniousness with the highest
principles of right in our being; and
from its meeting the necessary require-
ments of man’s nature,

(c.) No command of God contrary to
the law of the universe (cf. teaching of
Christ — nature was the language of
His thoughts).

The inconsiderate multitude.

“We see by experience that dogs do
alway bark at those they pny not $

&


OHAP. L





aud that it is their nature to accompany
one another in those clamours: and so
{t is with the inconsiderate multitude,
who, wanting that virtue which we call
honesty in all men, and that especial
gift of God which we call charity in
Christian men, condemn without hear-
ing, and wound without offence given.—


Sir Walter Raleigh.


“ Notwithstanding.” Although God
had done so much, this was their only
return, Nothing is more strongly
marked in some dispositions than in-
gratitude.

‘* On adamant our wrongs we all engrave,

But write our benefits upon the wave.”

—King.
** Ingratitude! thou marble-hearted friend :
More hideous, when thou showeat thee in a


child,

Than the sea monster.” —Shakespeare.

“We seldom find people angrateful as
long as we are in a condition to render
them services.” — Rochefoucauld.

Of such it may be said, “ Gratitude
is a sense of favours yet to come,”

“ Ingratitude is abhorred of God and
man.” —J) Estrange.

“He that calls a man ungrateful
sums up all the evil that a man can be
guilty of.” —Srwift.

“ One ungrateful man does an injury
to all who stand in need of aid.”— Pub.
lius Syrus,

Ingratitude reproved.

“An empty bucket that is let down
into a well doth, as it were, open its
mouth to receive the water; but being
drawn up full showeth his bottom only
to the well that gave it, The sea
receives her moisture from heaven,
sweet and pleasant, but returns it salt
and brackish. The clouds by the power
of the sun-beams are exhaled from the
earth ; but, being once mounted, they
darken that air and obscure that sun
that raised them. The frozen snake in
the fable stingeth him that refreshed it,
Thus it is with all unthankful men,
men ungrateful to God; He ladeth daily
with benefits and blessings, and they
lade Him with sins and trespasses,”—
Things New and Old.

“Athensus reporteth of Milesing that,

48


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





having brought a dolphin alive, and
letting him go again into the sea; after.
wards, himself being cast away by ship-
wreck, and ready to perish in the midst
of the waters, the do!phin took him and
carried him safely to shore... It is
more than beastly ingratitude for any
ian to reward evil for good.”—Things
New and Old,


Ver. 27. “Ye murmured.” “And
you took your sons and daughters into
your bosoms.”— Targum of Jonathan.

“ Because the Lord hates,” &e. “This
evil saying Moses would not have his
enemies say (Deut. ix. 28). It shows the
height of their sin which imputed that to
hatred wherein God manifested His love
(Deut. iv. 37, vii. 8).”—Ainsworth.

“Lord God hated us.” An instance
of how men rush to conclusions from
insufficient premises. For homiletie
purposes we might notice—

I The impossibility of correctly educ-
ing ultimate principles and formulating
doctrines thereon from a limited number
of facts,

II. The danger of permitting feeling
to usurp where judgment should rule.

III. The temptation to exaggerate
extraordinary circumstances into utterly
false facts.

IV. The danger of determining the
will and nature of God by human wisdom
and experience alone,

V. The necessity of knowing God (ef,
passages in New Testament where know
tng God is referred to) before affirming
anything of Him. Moses knew God.
How differently would he have inter.
preted His providence. Could God bu:
speak to every man, much of the mystery
and mercy in many lives would instantly
disappear. Read Scripture, They tes-
tify of God.


“Ye murmured in your tents,”

It must have been a stirring sight to
see the thousands of Israel standing in
the doors of their tents :—A wild horde
of semi-barbarians, fierce in their rage,
and almost ungovernable, What a
Dicture of a sinful world, where all men
are uncultivated in the ways of holiness
and submission—a frantic host of moral





HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


and spiritual maniacs. More than once
had Moses such an experience, No
penitence; no submission; no hope:
rage on every face.

L The sorrow of this people had re-
ference to the loss of what they esteemed
valuable. Things are not valuable to
the multitude for what they are in them-
selves, but according to people’s ideas of
them. (Cf. Bear robbed of her whelps.)
Fierce! The whelps precious to the
bear. There ts real worth—a some-
thing valuable in itself.


** Greatness and goodness are not means, but
ends:
Hath he not alway treasures, alway friends,
The good great man? Three treasures,—
Love and Light,
And calm Thoughts, regular as infant's


breath ;

And three firm friends, more sure than day
or night,—

Himself, his Maker, and the Angel
Death.” — Coleridge.


“ Sorrow being the natural and direct
offspring of sin, that which first brought
sin into the world must, by necessary
consequence, bring in sorrow too.”—
South,

Man has a true cause for sorrow when
he loses his soul, as he does by sin, for
he loses something really valuable. For
such many are satisfied, with very quiet,
well-behaved sorrow indeed.

IL This sorrow was more passionate
and all-absorbing, because of the unex-
pectedness of its cause. This grief came
as a sudden pain. It was acute, not
chronic. Long pains deaden.

“The violence of sorrow is not at the
first to be striven withal; being, likea
mighty beast, sooner tamed with follow-
ing than overthrown by understanding.”
—Sir. P. Sydney.

Enmity to God.—“It profits us no-
thing to be peaceful toward all men if
we be at war with God ; it is no good to
us if all men approve, and the Lord be
offended ; neither is there any danger,
though all shun and hate us, if with
God we find acceptance and love.”
Chrysostom.

“No man can certainly conclude
God’s love or hatred to any person from
what befalls him in this world.”—
Tillotson,

by


CHAP. L


‘From the instant of our birth we
experience the benignity of Heaven, and
the malignity of corrupt nature.”—
Trusler.


Vers, 24-28. The spies report and ita
effect.

The beginning of any line of conduct
usually enables an attentive observer to
form a just anticipation of the manner
in which it will be pursued. If the
beginning is right, the end is right. If
the end is a failure, a something wrong
is implied in the beginning. The people
proposed to send spies. So artfully were
their guilty motives concealed, that
Moses failed to see them and was even
pleased with the proposal. The result,
however, revealsall. A voice of warning
is meant to reach our conscience from
the page of Jewish history (cf. 1 Cor. x.
11). The fact and its lessons may be
considered under three heads :—

I. The conduct of the unfaithful spies.

II. The conduct of Caleb and Joshua.

III. The conduct of the guilty nation.

I. The conduct of the unfaithful spies.

1. Men of position.

2. Their commission clearly defined
(Num. xiii. 18-20).

3. They accomplished
safely.

4, God showed Himself with them.
Thus far, well. But they were men ot
sight, not faith, All that God had
revealed went for nothing. They saw
only difficulties, They overlooked what
God had done for them, They dis-
couraged the people.

II. “As there is no society free from
some corruption, so it is hard, if in a com-
munity of men there be not some faith-
fulness.” Such fidelity was shown by
Joshua and Caleb, They form a con-
trast with the ten. But Israel would not
hear them. The world will ever hear
its own prophets; and stone those who
speak in the name of God.

IIL The conduct of the guilty nation.
If experience had been of any use to
Israel they would surely have listened to
Caleb and Joshua: but with such expe-
rience is thrown away.

1. The unfaithful spies and guilty
roultitude represent a class rat timed


their work


OmAF, I.


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY.





and desponding professors of religton who
need to be warned of their sIN.

2. “There are many, however, who
possess a portion of that flame which
glowed in the hearts of Caleb and
Joshua ; men gifted with courage for the
warfare of life, and zealous for their
God.” —Buddicom.


Ver. 28. “ Walled up to heaven.” An
hyperbole. Contrast hyperbole with
reality: reality with hyperbole. Hyper
bole, a figure in rhetoric by which any-
thing is increased or diminished beyond
exact truth, ¢g., “he runs faster than
lightning.”—Latham. Reality is op-
posed to shadows, types, pictures.—
Whately, What ts, not what merely
seems.— Latham.

“A bird carries the voice” (Eccl. x.
20); ‘““Amorites whose height was height
of cedars” (Amos iii. 9) are hyperboles.
“Length of bedstead of Og reality, no
hyperbole.” — Matmonides.

(See also “Quintilian Instit.,” book
viii. c. 6, and Patrick on this passage).

“Walled up to heaven.” This de-
scription of the cities as ‘high and
walled up to heaven,’ though a strong
hyperbole, answers the description of
most Eastern cities whose walls are
smooth, very lofty, and difficult to be
scaled. The walls were of mud or of
stone; and as the people were unac-
quainted with scaling ladders, whenever
they had surrounded their cities with
walls too high for man to climb over,
they considered their security established,
The same simple expedient is resorted
to by the Arabs who live in the very
wilderness in which Israel wandered,
and who are far more inured to warlike
enterprises than that people were. The
great monastery of St. Catherine at
Mount Sinai is built of freestone, with
high smooth walls. On the east side there
is a window by which those that are
within draw up pilgrims into the monas-
tery with a basket, which they let down
by a rope that runs through a pulley to
be seen above at the window, and the
pilgrims go into it one after another,
These walls are so high that they cannot
be scaled, and without cannon the piace
eannot be taken.” —Thevenot.

50


“ Whither shall we goup?” Agree.
ably to the nature of interrogative par-
ticles, whither sometimes including a
negative, may be resolved into nowhere.
—Fiérst. This suggests that we may
interpret the verse :—“‘ What is the use
of struggling and toiling? We have
nowhere to go, We may as well give
up at once.”


“Our brethren discouraged our hearts”
(of. “Crit. Notes”), The Bible is full of
human nature. Man is to-day as he was
3000 years ago. Godless men had no
courage for themselves, and, dog-in-the-
manger like, would not let others have
it. They took away what little the
people had. We have here old types
of a modern class, Two facts about
them—

I. They see the difficulty of life, but
no God to help them in it.

II. The difficulties seen, cause fear,
and then fears magnify the difficulties.


Ver. 29. “Dread not.” To deliver
them from fear Moses adds two power-
ful arguments. He gives reasons for
what he bids them do—

I. A promise of Divine assurance :—
“The Lord... He shall fight,” ver. 30.

II. The experience of past mercies :—
“God bare thee,” &e., ver. 31 (of. His
dealings with them in Egypt, wilder-
ness, dc.) ; (cf. Isa. xlix. 22 with Exod.
xix. 4),

Compare John xiv. 1, Luther’s trans.
Christ gives two reasons for disciples’
faith. Ye believe in God—ye believe
in Christ :—therefore no reason to fear,


Vers. 28, 29. Contrast by comparison
of these two verses the character of the
people and the character ot Moses,
Moses, strong: people, weak. In life of
Moses a firm, clear, strong purpose ; the
nation swayed by every wind that blew.
The character of Moses, as opposed to
that of the people, might aptly illustrate
the character of the Christian who has
truly laid his foundation on the Rock,
in contrast with that of a worldling whe |
is tossed as a straw upon the waters,
The true Christian is essentially and
bre-eminently a religious man. Has


made (Num. vi. 3).


HOMILETIOAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY,


CHAP. ZL





fixed principles and purpose in life.
Religion means harmony with God.

I. Religion is a reality.

Il. Religion is a reality in the soul.

IIL Religion is a vital reality in the
soul.

IV. Religion is a vital reality in the
soul, ever discernible, True religion is
known.

a.) In its essence.
b.) Manifestations,
ce.) By its fruits.


Vers. 28, 29. Contrast Moses and
the spies. Moses encouraged ; the spies
discouraged. Here, extremes of cha
racter ; courage, cowardice. Many such
antitheses of character in Scripture.
Hezekiah and Manasseh ; Jacob, Esau ;
Jesus, Judas; Judas, the residence of
Satan ; Jesus, the residence of all the
godhead bodily. But watch the influ-
ence of the bad ; it undoes all the good
accomplished. The people discouraged ;
the Son of God sold, &c. A few lessons
may be gathered from these facts :—

I. Too intimate connection between
the Church and world may prove inju-
rious to the Church. ‘ Man cannot
handle pitch,” &c. The people dis-
couraged though they had a Moses,

“Tt is better, safer I am sure it is, to
ride alone, than to have a thief’s com-
pany. And such is a wicked man, who
will rob thee of precious time, if he do
thee no more mischief. The Nazarites,
who might drink no wine, were also for-
bidden to eat grapes, whereof wine is
So we must not
only avoid sin itself, but also the causes
and occasions thereof, amongst which,
bad company—the lime-twigs of the
devil—is the chiefest, especially to catch
those natures which, like the good-
fellow-planet Mercury, are most swayed
by others.” —7. Fuller.

II. Hypocrites are more injurious to
the Church than non-professors. The
people had not been affected by foes
quite as terrible in the wilderness as
those in Canaan. Opinions of enemies
do not affect: it is the thought of a
friend that influences. These spies were
supposed to be friends: they were 1u
service of Israel; the hypocrite is often


in the service of the Church; the ao-
knowledged friend. The Church ia
identified with him.

(a.) The world depends upon him for
its opposition to religion.

(b.) Hypocrites become the leader
of the enemy after leaving Christ (cf.
Judas. He led the band, d&c.).

(c.) They know the failures of Chris-
tian brethren, because taken into con-
fidence as friends,

(Explain what a hypocrite is, brexgirg¢
=one who plays upon the stage. An
actor—feigner. Therefore a false pre-
tender to virtue or piety).

III. Feeble moral characters injurious
to the Church. But remember two facts
with regard to the Church—

(a.) It is an hospital for souls’ disease,
as well as (b.) the home of the strong in
Christ. Be tender to the weak, but
restrain them from the positions of the
tried and strong.

IV. The world’s joy and the Church’s
grief. If the heathen had known what
grief there was in Israel, their heart
doubtless rejoiced, Often what is death
to one is pleasure to another (cf. fable
of boys and frogs). Death of Christ,
the life of the world (cf. John xi, 50).
“ One man’s loss another’s gain.”


Ver. 29. “ Dread not,” dsc.
agement,

I, Every good work is sure to meet
with opposition. In every journey there
will necessarily be rough places.

II. Christians are not required to go
anywhere where their Captain has not
gone before.

III. The Christian is not to wait till
all difficulties are removed. His action
will sometimes remove difficulties. “Go
forward,” d&c. (cf. Josh. iii. 15).

Faithful discharge of duty in every-
day life is doing God’s work: the pro-
mise of the following verse applies to
the removal of difficulties, &c., and the
fighting for us in the warfare of daily
experience, business, family, dc.

Man’s need, God's opportunity. —
“ Pkilo, the Jew, being employed as an
ambassador or messenger to Caius Cali-
gula, the emperor of Rome, his enter-
tainment was but slight, for Ee had ne

B


Encour-


GHAP, 1.


sooner spoken cn the behalf of his
‘country, but he was commanded to de-
part the court; whereupon he told his
people that he was verily persuaded that
God would now do something for them,
because the emperor was so earnestly bent
against them.”— Pulpit Illustrations.


Vers. 29, 30. Dread not, é&c.

The despouding encouraged. Much
in life to depress, Opposition quickly
rises. Success dependent on courage,
Conquest wavers with the wavering
heart. Napoleon lost a battle through
a bilious fit. Strongest, coolest, bravest,
have seasons when they need encourage-
ment, Three ways in which Moses
encouraged—

I By appeal to the fact of God’s
presence. “The Lord God which goeth
before you.”

II. By appeal to the success of the
past (cf. ver. 31). “In the wilderness

. . where God bare thee,” é&c.

III. By appeal to future success, ver,
30. “He shall fight.”

Success in undertakings is not infre-
quently the result of very unlikely and
small beginnings. The following inci-
dent from the battle between Marcellus
the Roman, and Hannibal the Cartha-
ginian, cited from Plutarch, well illus-
trates the point :—

“Both armies then engaged, and
Hannibal, seeing no advantage gained
by either, ordered his elephants to be
brought forward into the first line, and
to be pushed against the Romans, The
shock caused great confusion at first in
the Roman front; but Flavius, a tribune,
snatching an ensign staff from one of the
companies, advanced, and with the point
of it wounded the foremost elephant,
The beast upon this turned back, and
ran upon the second, the second upon
the next that followed, and so on till
they were all put in great disorder,
Marcellus observing this, ordered his
horse to fall furiously upon the enemy,
and, taking advantage of the confusion
already made, to rout them entirely,
Accordingly, they charged with extra-
ordinary vigour, and drove the Cartha-
ginians to their entrenchments. The
slaughter was dreadful; and the fall

52


HOMILETIOAL COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY.





of the killed, and the plunging of the
wounded elephants, contributed greatly
to it. It is said that more than 8000
Carthaginians fell in this battle; of the
Romans not above 3000 were slain,”
All this success, in a measure, was owing
to @ man wounding an elephant with an
ensign staff.”

“‘Success may be delayed for a time.
Failure may seem to attend our work.
There may be no blossoms or fruit now;
but it wild come, Our judgment is often
rash and premature. The sailor predicts
storms ; there is a great calm: the mer-
chant a panic; there is a rich harvest:
the minister barrenness; there is an
abundant blessing.” The spies said the
land is full of big men: Moses said God
will help us. It matters not who is
against, if God is only for us,


Faith produces Confidence.—“In the
midst of a tumultuous sea the modes of
the compass remain immovable, because
they govern themselves, not according
to the winds, but according to the influ-
ence of the heavens. So the faith of the
faithful remaineth firm amongst the rude
agitations and distracted variations of
the world, because it governeth itself,
not according to the instability of the
affairs of this world, but according to
the promises of God, which are from all
eternity.” — Pulpit Illustrations.

Power of Fatth.—“ When Toxaris saw
his countryman Anacharsis in Athens,
he said unto him, I will show thee all
the wonders of Greece: in seeing Solon
thou seest all, even Athens itself, and
the whole glory of the Greeks. Tell me,
Christian, hast thou faith and assured
trust in the Lord? then thou hast more
than all the wonders of Greece, upon
the point all the wonderful gifts of grace;
for faith is the mother virtue from which
all others spring, and without faith all
the best of our actions are no better than
sin,”—Things New and Old.


Ver. 30. “The Lord your God...
goeth before you.” We need to read
side by side with these words those of
the apostle: “Because greater is He
that is in you than he that is in the
world” (1 John iv. 4). When a man ie


oi


BOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


CHAP, 1





tenanted by God, he has not much reason
to fear, for he becomes an inheritor of
the visions and experience of Elisha (ef.
3 Kings vi. 16-18).

L Show wherein God is with us.

(a.) God with a man by his faith.
Paradoxical though it sounds, yet true.
To believe in God is to realise the emo-
tions of the Divine presence. Such feel-
ings strengthen. Faith in the Almighty
calls forth enthusiasm and courage. For
so long as there is faith, hope burns.
The soldiers who had faith in Napoleon
had his courage in their heart. They
conquered.

(6.) God with a man by His word.
One way to communicate ourselves to
others is to speak to them. Sometimes
the written word suffices. A word from
a distant friend gives us the man even
more than his bodily presence would
without the word. So God sends His
word to men. There is the word spoken
by the prophet. There is the Living
Word, Jesus Christ; the expression of
the Father’s heart.

(c.) God is with a man by His Spirit.
Have ye received the Holy Ghost since
ye believed?” ‘ Know ye not that the
love of God is shed abroad in our heart
by the Holy Ghost given unto us?”

II. Show how the Divine Presence
bears upon the soul.

(a.) The power is in us by which to
gain fully the world of our hopes. ‘‘To
as many as received Him, to them gave
He éZovsiay” (not merely capability =
duvaus, Liicke,—still less privilege or
prerogative (Chrysostom and others),—
but power, De Wette; involving all the
actions and states needful to them so
becoming and removing all the obstacles
in their way, ¢.g., the wrath of God and
the guilt of sin, Alford) “to become the
children of God—to those which believe
in His name.”

(0.) By this power man is superior to
the world (cf. 1 John v. 4, 5).

(c.) This power gives moral and spiri-
tual advancement in life.

‘‘ Cherished with hope, and fed with joy, it


grows;
In cheerful buds their opening bloom dis-


close
And round the happy soil diffusive odours
flows.” —Pope.


Vers. 29, 30. “Be not afraid. ...
God fights for you.”

Here in all the light and shade of
historic life is a picture of the soul that
is in Christ Jesus—a spirit with God
fighting for it, on its side (cf. Rom. viii,
1-17). The natural man is apart from
God; he has to fight for himself. The
man who like ancient Israel has entered
into covenant with God, has passed
from Death—alienation, into Life—co-
operation with God, and he has God
fighting his battles for him, The past
becomes an earnest of the future. The
grace given a deposit of the whole
amount to be given in the Spirit’s sub-
sequent developments.

I. Man in Christ is freed from sin.
He has escaped from the slavery of him
or that which is opposed to the divine
will, He lives and works with God:
God with him.

IL By this man is advanced in moral
and spiritual excellence. He is no
longer a slave. He is Christ’s free
man. The true idea of Divine holiness
is realised. The man knows daily from
joy-filled triumph, and experience, that
God is on his side, overcoming evil
in his nature, harmonising discord, and
restoring him, the man, to the likeness
of a Son of God.

III. Man in Christ is destined for
future glorification, (Beniseh translate
ver, 30, “The ternal your God,” &e.)
What an Eternal Being does is worthy
of Eternity. The glory of man must
have a larger arena than the confined
amphitheatre of Time.

IV. He is destined to enjoy the glory
which belongs to Christ Himself (cf.
John xvii, 20-23).


Ver. 30. “He shall fight for you,”
&c. The Helper of His people. If
God were only an idea, then the utter-
ance of such a thought would be the
cruellest act that demon -spirit could
prompt, for hopes of the most sensitive
nature would be raised only to be dashed
down again. But because God is not
an idea but a living person—the Hearer
and Answerer of prayer—the sympa-
thetic Friend—the Giver of grace for
bearing sorrow — the eae of ao


CHAP. L





Helping God is one of the most en
couraging to which man is legatee,

I. God’s people often placed in eir-
cumstances of great difficulty. There
are foes in the flesh; weakness and
discord in the spirit; difficulties of
many kinds without. All these have
to be met. A man cannot at all times
fight them for himself.

II. Help is given far superior not
only to that of the strongest moments
of ® man’s own natural power, but
superior to that power which impedes
his course,

Ill. This help only recognised by
God’s own people. Their eyes alone
see the spiritual forms at hand to aid
(ff. Elisha and his servant). Having
eyes, they see.

IV. This sight requires the super-
natural agency of Christ. He alone
gives sight to the blind that they may
see. The world is filled with God’s
glory could man but look upon it,
Moses could see the power of God at
hand to help even though the people
were entirely ignorant of it.


Ver, 30. “The Lord your God shall
fight,” d&e.

Though this passage in its primary
and historical sense refers to Israel’s
conflict with the enemies who kept him
from the promised land, yet the Chris-
tian, with his spiritual age illumined
with the light of glory, may see beyond
the letter into the mysterious import of
the spirit; for he deals with the truth
which the word enshrines. The Chris-
tian has his battle to fight We might
notice-—

I. That the battle is for a dominion ;
Israel fought for a promised land, the
Christian for a promised crown of life,
Satan offered all the kingdoms of the
world to Christ, but His one crown was
more to Him than they all.

If. The battle in which the Chris-
tian is engaged is won by faith. Israel
lost because he did not believe God.
The Christian fails when his faith is
weak (cf. Peter on the water. The
disciples inthe storm. Victory of faith,
&e).

The Christian’s battle is sure to
54


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY.





result in victory (cf. John xvi 38),
(Cf. the whole of Christ’s promise of
help in His last great speech, John xiv,~
xviii.

Ver. 31. “As a man doth bear his
son” (cf. Num. xi, 12). “A simile
suggested by his sojourn in the desert
of Midian with Jethro."—Xeil and
Delitesh.

“Supplying you with water out of
the rock, sending bread from heaven,
defending you from the wild beasts and
fiercer enemies, and bearing with your
numerous provocations.”—Clapham.


“T, said (God), who was a father, »


became nurse, and My little one I My-
self carried in My arms, leat it should
be hurt in the wilderness, and lest it
should be frightened by the heat or
darkness ; in the day I was a cloud, by
night a pillar of fire.”—Jerome.

It is the realisation in one’s own
heart of this presence by day and night
that makes the true child of God cou-
rageous, While God is Father and nurse
man has not much to fear, There is a
story told of St. Basil that well illus
trates this. The emperor sent to him
to subscride to the Arian heresy. The
messenger at first used good language,
and promised great perferment if he
would turn Arian; to which Basil re
plied, “ Alas! their speeches are fit to
catch little ehildren who seek such
things, but we that are nourished and
taught by the Holy Scriptures are
readier to suffer a thousand deaths than
suffer one syllable a little of the Scrip-
tures to be altered.” The messenger
told him he was mad. He replied, “I
wish I were for ever thus mad.” It
matters not whether it be Apostle,
Father, or Reformer. All are alike,
Paul, Basil, Luther, each had the same
presence—each had the same courage.

We have this beautifully exemplified
in the life of one who perished by ship-
wreck only a few years ago, the Rev. J.
Mackenzie:—“In the brief interval,
which elapsed between the vessel’s
striking and her going down, an attempt
was made by some of the passengers to
lower the two quarter-boats; but both
were instantly swamped, and abont a
dozen lives were lost in them. Mr,


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY ; DEUTERONOMY.


Caan, &


ee


Mackenzie, meanwhile, had got on deck,
but though a good swimmer, he appears
to have made no effort to save himself.
When last seen by one of the few sur-
vivors, he was engaged in prayer on the
quarter-deck. ‘I heard,’ he says, ‘the
minister who was on board call to those
around him that, as there was no hope
of safety, they should engage in prayer.
He then began to pray, the rest of the
passengers kneeling around him. He
was as cool and as collected as I am
now, and the others were praying too;
but his voice was raised above the rest.’
And thus with the great Father's name
upon his lips, and the great Father’s love
warm in his dauntless heart, did this
noble Christian man go down into the
cold, bleak, midnight sea, to find his
Father’s bosom there.” — Pulpit Analyst.


Ver. 32. “ Ye did not believe.”

Unbelief is spiritual death, and the
desolation of manhood. In order to see
this more fully, it may be observed
that—

I. Unbelief imprisons or confines
manhood. The feelings and aspirations,
the longings and the hopes of man’s
higher nature, would go beyond the
present and the visible, and faith alone
can secure their fitting exercise; but
unbelief holds them back, limits them,
confines them to earth, and to things
that are seen and temporal. It cramps
the energies of being, and restrains the
healthy outgoings of the soul. Such
imprisonment of the spiritual powers
much tend to desolation and decay.

IL Unbelief starves manhood; man
needs truth to live upon as well as
bread ; but, as we have seen, he cannot
of himself know all the truth; there
must be faith as the means of the
highest knowledge. God has come
down to reveal Himself to us, and to
supply this knowledge as the true and
healthy aliment of our spiritual being.
Christ is the “bread of life,” the true
bread that came down from heaven;
but unbelief refuses it,—will not par-
take of it, so that the soul is starved:
and surely this tends to spiritual de
struction.

IIL Unbelief outrages manhood; #


does it injury and violence. We say
that man was formed for truth; hence
to indulge in falsehood violates his true
nature. Man was formed for reason,
and to act irrationally is a violation of
the true law of our being; so man was
formed for faith, and to refuse faith where
faith is due, where faith is essential, and
where God Himself comes down to woo,
it and to gain it, is an outrage upon
manhood. Such moral violence must
tend to desolation and abiding darkness,
—Rev. James Spence, Af..A.


Ver. 32. “Ye did not believe the
Lord your God.” The truth wrapped
up here is as important to the Chris-
tian as to the Jew—to-day, as when
Moses uttered it. Here is implied, even
if not definitely taught, the power of
faith, By comparison with the context
is discerned the fact that fath on the
part of the people would have enabled
God to have conquered their enemies
(cf. Binney’s book: “ Practical Nature
of Faith).”


Ver. 32. “Yet in this ye did not
believe.” Not a small portion of the
chapter is taken up with reminding the
people of God’s special intervention
in their behalf. Though their whole
history is full of divine action for them,
God’s mercies are quickly forgotten,
They are ever ready to disobey His law,
or to give allegiance to idols, Chastise-
ments intended for repentance were not
heeded. Such being ineffectual, God
becomes angry and casts them off.
There are three matters for considera-
tion suggested by these words—

L The possibility of dishonouring the
great memories of life, “In thts they
did not believe God,” even though they
had bid so many reasons why they
should. Who could forget Egyptian
bonda; e—the passage of the sea—the
manna —cloud—fire, &c.¢ Who could
forget the joy of deliverance — the
rapture of ecstacy when God had re-
vealed Himself, and had worked for
them? Yet this people did! Though
God had done so much, they did not
believe His promise. Memories of life
cam be = meme abs hs


Gaey. L


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


IL The possibility of underestimating
the interposition of God. Look at the
case suggested by the chapter (ef. Jer.
ii 6, 6). They had come through a
terrible wilderness—land of desert and
pits—of drought—a land where no man
passed—no man dwelt—the shadow of
death. Viewed prospectively, men shrink
from such difficulties ; viewed retrospec-
’ tively, many of the terrors are forgotten.
Though God had led through all this,
all is forgotten, That such could have
been forgotten is a revolting illustration
of the soul’s depravity. But human
nature is such that the highest offices
rendered by God and man can be lightly
esteemed by it, and even the blood of
the Covenant be trodden under foot,

Til. The possibility of the leading
minds of the Church being darkened
and perverted. It seems that the
whole nation, chiefs and people, were
alike unmindful of the heavenly calling
(ef. Jer. ii, 8). History of Israel at the
time of Elijah. Epochs in the life of
the Church, ¢.g., the Reformation.

The Hebrew proverb said, “ As priest
as people.” The saying may be reversed,
As people so leaders ; for the leader is
often but the adroit follower. When
he should stand up with a protest, too
frequently such an one truckles to the
popular cry. He worships the crowd,
and leaves Truth and Right to take care
of themselves, It behoves, therefore—

1, That such men should watch
themselves with constant jealousy.

2. Such should never be forgotten
by those who pray.


Ver. 32. “Yet in this ye did not
believe,” d&e,

A charge of infidelity, This is
quickly followed with the chastisement
of infidelity, The wise learn by the
woes of others, If the unfaithful be
punished, it is not unreasonable to ex-
pect that the faithful are rewarded.
From other Scripture we know that it
ts so (cf, Rev. ii. 10). Let us apply
this in its Christian bearings,

I. Christ’s religion requires faithful-
ness,

(4.) The Christian should make use
vf all " powers on behalf of religion.

6


(6.) The Christian should make use
of all his powers for the religious cirele
wherein he lives.

(c.) The Christian should make use
of all his powers according to the will of
God.


IL. Christ’s religion requires personal
fidelity. It mattered not that “ Moses
was faithful in all his house.” God
judged the people for what they were,

(a.) Every Christian has a personal
work to accomplish,

(5.) Every Christian is endowed with
power to accomplish his own work,

(c.) Every Christian is under a per
sonal obligation to be faithful.

IIL. Christ’s religion requires con-
tinual faithfulness, It must not be
fitful. ‘ Watch” was Christ’s com-
mand,

(a.) Because the work is great,

(6.) Because the time is short.

. Christ’s religion rewards faithful.
ness,

{*) Religious reward is precious,

6.) Religious reward is glorious,

x Religious reward is durable.
3} Religious reward is personal.


Folly of Infidelity.—“ And is it pos.
sible that you (Paine) should think so
highly of your performance, as to be-
lieve that you have thereby demolished
the authority of a book, which Newton
himself esteemed the most authentic of
all histories? Which by its celestial
light illumines the darkest ages of
antiquity; which is the touchstone
whereby we are enabled to distinguish
between true and fabulous theology;
between the God of Israel, holy, just,
and good, and the impious rabble of
heathen Balaam; which has been
thought by competent judges to have
afforded matter for the laws of Solon,
and a foundation for the philosophy of
Piato; which has been illustrated by
the labour of learning in all ages and
in all countries, and been admired and
venerated for its piety, its sublimity,
and its veracity, by all who were able
to read and understand it, Nor have
you gone, indeed, through the word with
the best intention in the world to cut it
down; but you have busied yourself


_—>


ee


HOMILETIOAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





merely in exposing to vulgar contempt
a few unsightly shrubs, which good
men had wisely concealed from public
view. You have entangled yourself in
thickets of thorn and briar; you have
lost your way on the mountains of
Lebanon,t he goodly cedar trees whereof,
lamenting the madness, and pitying the
blindness of your rage against them,
have scorned the blunt edge and the
base temper of your axe, and laughed
unhurt at the feebleness of your stroke.
The Bible has withstood the learning of
Porphyry, and the power of Julian, to
say nothing of the Manichean Faustus,
It has resisted the genius of Bolingbroke,
and the wit of Voltaire, to say nothing
of a numerous herd of inferior assailants ;
and it will not fall by your force. You
have barbed anew the blunted arrows of
former adversaries; you have feathered
them with blasphemy and ridicule;
dipped them in your deadliest poison ;
aimed them with your utmost skill;
shot them against the shield of truth
with your utmost vigour; but, like the
feeble javelin of the aged Priam, they
will scarcely reach the mark—vwill fall
to the ground without a stroke,”—
Watson.


Infidelity barren of virtue.

“This system is a soil as barren of
great and sublime virtue as it is prolific
in crimes.”.,. ‘As well might you
expect exalted sentiments of justice
from a professed gamester as look for
noble principles in the man whose hopes
and fears are all suspended on the pre-
sent moment, and who stakes the whole
happiness of his being on the events
of this vain and fleeting life.”... “In
affirming that infidelity is unfavourable
to the higher class of virtues, we are
supported as well by facts as by reason-
ing. We should be sorry to load our
adversaries with unmerited reproach ;
but to what history, to what record,
will they appeal, for any traits of moral
greatness, any sacrifice of interest or
life, any instances of daring heroie
virtues exhibited by their disciples #
Where shall we look for the trophies of
infidel magnanimity or atheistical virtue
Not that we mean to accuse them ef


OHaP. L





inactivity : they have recently filled the
world with the fame of their exploits ;
exploits of a very different kind indeed,
but of imperishable memory and disas-
trous lustre.”—R. Hall,


God's goodness, man’s ingratitude.

“Tt is storied of a certain king that,
fighting a desperate battle for the re-
covery of his daughter stolen from him,
he found but ill success, and the day
utterly against him, till by the valour of
a strange prince, disguised in the habit
of a mean soldier (that pitied his loss and
bore love to his daughter), he recovered
both her and victory. Not long after,
this prince received a wrong, which he
brought to the king, that he might
receive justice. The king handed him
over to a judge. The prince replied,
‘Know this, O king, when thou wast
lost, J stood betwixt thee and danger,
and did not bid another save thee, but
saved thee myself; behold the scars of
those wounds I bore to free thee and
thy state from ruin inevitable, and now
my suit is before thee dost thou shuffle
me off to another?’ Such was our case ;
Satan had stolen our dear daughter the
soul,—in vain we laboured a recovery ;
principalities and powers were against
us,——weakness and wretchedness on our
side. Christ the Son of God took pity
on us Clad as a menial He stood
between us and death. Yet, how fre-
quently we bid Him stand by when He
comes !”—(Cf. Pulpit Illustrations.)


Onbelief unmans a man,

‘“‘ Take a dog, and mark what a gene-
rosity and courage he will put on when
he is maintained by a man who is to
him instead of a God, or at least melior
natura; whereby it is manifest that the
poor creature, without the confidence
of a better nature than his own, could
never be so courageous, Thus it is with
man, when he rolleth himself upon God,
and resteth on His divine perfection,
then he gathers a force and ability which
human nature itself could never attain ;
but when, with the fool, he says, there
is ‘no God” [in other words, whew he
has lost all faith in God], then he
destroys the nobility of man io man

é


GWaP, i


ls akin to the beasts by his body; and if
he is not akin to God by his soul, he is
a base and ignoble creature. Atheism
will unman any man, and deject any-
thing that is the advantagement of
human nature.” — Gabriel Inchinus,
quoted in Things New and Old.


Vers. 32-34. “ He did not believe.”
... “God was angry.”... “ Without
faith it is impossible to please God.”

“Of all the virgins presented to
Ahasuerus none was so pleasing as
Esther. “Let the maiden that pleaseth
the king be queen instead of Vashti.”
When that decree was published, what
strife, what emulation (may we think),
was among the Persian damsels, that
either were or thought themselves fair,
every one hoped to be queen! But so
incomparable was the beauty of that
Jewess that she was not only taken into
the Persian Court as one of the selected
virgins, but had the most honourable
place in all the seraglio allotted unto
her. The other virgins pass their pro-
bation unregarded. When Esther’s turn
came, though she brought the same face
and demeanour that nature had cast
upon her, no eye saw her without ad-
miration. The king was so delighted
with her beauty, that, contemning all
the other vulgar forms, his choice was
fully fixed upon her, Thus Sfatth ia that
Esther to which God holds out His
golden sceptre, He is pleased with all
poe hot zeal and eool patience please

im ; cheerful thankfulness and weeping
repentance please Him ; charity in the
height, and humility in the dust, please
Him ; but none of them are welcome
to Him without faith in Christ Jesus,”


Power of faith in the heart,

“The philosopher, when he would
persuade the king to settle his court and
place of residence in the heart of his
dominion, laid before him a bull’s hide,
ready tanned, upon which when he stood
upon any one side of it, and so kept that
down, the other side would rise up ;
when he removed to this side, that rose
up and kept that down, then the side he
came from would rise up ; but when he
stood in the middle he kept down all

58


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY, DEUTERONOMY.
aan nnEREnpRereeeee ce





alike,” Faith is this king. When faith
sits in the heart, then it keeps in check
every passion—swamps every emotion—
strengthens will—reins lust—in fine,
cleaneth, invigorates, and rightens the
whole man,


Ver. 33. We are told by a writer of
world-wide fame, that a truly great man
does not ask of another, is he great in
some particular, but is he great? True
self- greatness is a goal worthy of all.
“Greater is he that ruleth himself than
he that taketh a city.” Ancient and
modern concur, But a man is only
great as he has divinity in his nature.
Greatness of character is divinity hu-
manised, And the man who is any-
thing is what he is by the help of God.
‘* By the grace of God I am what I am”
He ia the man who has God ever before
him, and round about him, and behind,
to open, prepare, and close the way.
He has God as a light by night—a
cloud by day. Eminently does the
principle in the text work itself out in
the Christian life. For—

L The Christian is one pressing for-
ward to the truest greatness man can
know—the perfect man in Christ.

1. He is possessed of the faith that
energises and supplies the weakest man
with the grace that eventuates in success.

2. He shows the reality of his faith
in his life by the manifestations of Chris-
tian character and disposition.

3. Such a life sheds so much light
upon the path he has to travel, that in
his heart is a perennial spring of hope.

II. Moses, as well as the apostle,
recognises God as the source of all real
strength and power in life,

_ 1. By God’s help they had overcome
their foes.

2. God is with them in cloud and fire,

3. God would ultimately bring them
into the promised land.

4. The result of life is not simply
the product of natural causes, It is
Christ that Mves within; God who works
through us.

III. The consciousness of this fact
becomes an abiding help.

1. Natural energy is not abiding.
We are liable to lose it any moment.


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


O@AR L





A fever robs the brain of knowledge.
Heat impairs strength. The jlesh has ever
been felt to be an enemy of the spirit
2. The grace of God is present in
all changes. Paul felt it when the
thorn pierced him ; it was abundant in
the prison, and burst forth as music in
his heart ; it nerved him in the presence
of foes, judges, and even Cesar. To
individual Christians it is powerful to
hold back from sin when tempted—re-
strains fear—-aids in pressing forward.


“ Wes before us in the way.” (Com-
pare vers, 30-33 with Ps. xlvi. 1-3.)
Vers- 1 of Ps. xlvi. might well be
used as strophe, and verse 2 as ante-
sttuphe, of Moses’ song of his faith and
triumph. Deal with the spiritual bear-
ings of the text.

I. The circumambient God is to the
Christian a refuge—strength—help,

1. God a refuge.

i} Refuge in the Mediator—Christ.

b.) Refuge in the gospel of His love,

(c.) Refuge for eternity.

2. God as strength.

(a.) By His Spirit.

(6.) By promise and encouragement.

(¢e.) By means of grace,

3. God a help.

a.) A Father to provide,

6.) A searcher of life’s way.

II. The confidence of the believer im
God as his Preparer and Provider.

1. God prepares the way.

2. God provides what is necessary.

8. Past supplies an earnest of future.

4, The sense of Providence streng-
thena.


Ver. 33. “ Night.”
nection with night.

Night a revealer of God.

(a.) The day with its earthy light
reveals the world.

(0.) The darkness of night shuts out
the world.

¢.) The mind in its restlessness seeks
other fields of knowledge.

(d.) In its reachings away from the
world the heart has at times found its
God.


The joys of night.


Subjects in con-


@.) It brings sleep.

% Sleep shuts out care,

¢.) Sorrow once removed by sleep
has had a fang extracted.


Terrors of night. Songs of night.
Night lost in day. (Cf. G. Gilfillan’s
poem, “‘ Night.”)

Night. “Night appears to be a time
peculiarly favourable to devotion, Ita
solemn stillness helps to free the mind
from that perpetual din which the cares
of the world will bring around it; and
the stars, looking down from heaven
upon us, shine as if they would attract
us up to God. I know not how you
may be affected by the solemnities of
midnight, but when I have sat alone
musing on the great God and the mighty
universe, I have felt that indeed I could
worship Him; for night seemed to be
spread abroad as a very temple for ado-
ration, while the moon walked as high
priest amid the stars, the worshippers
and I myself joined in that silent song
which they sang unto God: ‘Great art
Thou, O God! great in Thy works.
When I consider Thy heavens the work
of Thy fingers, the moon and the
stars which Thou hast ordained ; what
is man that Thou art mindful of him!
and the son of man that Thou visitest
him?’ I find that this sense of the
power of midnight not only acts upon
religious men, but there is a certain
poet, whose character, perhaps, I could
scarcely too much reprobate: a man
very far from understanding true reli-
gion; one whom I may, I suppose,
justly style an infidel, a libertine of the
worst order, and yet he says concerning
night in one of his poems:—


‘Tis midnight on the mountains brown,
The cold round moon shines deeply down ;
Blue rolls the waters, blue the sky
Spreads like an ocean hung on high,
Bespengled with those isles of light,

So wildly, spiritually bright ;

Who ever gazed upon them shining,
And turned to earth without repining,
Nor wished for wings to flee away,
And mix with their eternal ray.’


“Even with the most irreligious per-
son, aman farthest from spiritual thought,
it seems that there is some power in the

59


GHAP, I.





grandeur and stillness of night to draw
him up to God. I trust many of us can
say, like David, ‘I have thought upon
Thee continually ; I have mused upon
Thy name in the night watches, and with
desire have I desired Thee in the night.’”
— Spurgeon.


Vers. 34-39, The good among the
evil.

I. True goodness can exist amid cir-
cumstances most corrupt (cf. the case of
the son of Jeroboam, 1 Kings xiv. 13),
Sardis was one of the most dissolute
cities of antiquity ; but here were Chris-
tians (Rev. iii, 4).

“They say that lilies, or roses, or such
like pleasant flowers, if they be planted
by garlic or onions, or such like unsa-
voury things, they do not lose but rather
increase in their former sweetness. So
it is with good and godly men when
they are planted, and as it were hemmed
in with wicked men, the vileness and
odiousness of their wickedness makes
them to loathe wickedness so much the
more, and to love godliness, and to bless
God that hath kept them, that they have
not run to the same excess of riot.”—
Things New and Old.

II. True goodness will ultimately be
distinguished by a glorious reward.
Caleb and Joshua were true to the good
spirit within. They wrought righteous-
ness. ‘he reward came, Caleb entered
the promised land ; Joshua became the
people’s leader.

(a.) It has its reward here in its in-
fluence over others. Justin Martyr con-
fesses that he left philosophy and became
a Christian, through the admiration that
he had for the innocent and holy lives
of Christians,

(6.) It has a reward in the blessed-
ness it brings to the man himself,


Ver. 34. “The Lord heard . . . was
wroth,”

God hears. He judges, Judgment
comes quick and sure at times. Some
indifferent to it. Some disbelieve. God
hears and is angry.

I. The anger of the Lord is moved
by the wickedness of man, He is not
indifferent to it,

60


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY.





II. That the Day of Judgment will
come to all,

III. Let men prepare for this Day of
Judgment, lest it be a day of wrath.


Ver. 34. “The Lord heard ... was
angry.”

Three homiletic points—

I. The principle of discernment is
ever operative in the Divine economy.
God heard the voice of murmur and
was angry.

II. Escape from this principle im-
possible. God is omniscient. He sees
all ; hears all; knows all.

IIL Those who comply with the will
of God have nothing to fear from this
principle. There is rather a cause of
joy. God knows your toils—sorrows—
difficulties. He watches with pleasure
every conquest.


“The Lord heard.” The omniscience
of God ; but God is omniscient because
omnipresent. “We feel conscious that
there is no place in heaven above, or on
earth beneath, from whence God is ex-
cluded: we feel conscious that in the
deepest vale, as well as on the mountain
top; in subterranean caverns, as well as
open plains; when surrounded by the
darkness of midnight, as well as the
splendour of noon-day, He is around us
and knows us: we feel conscious that
if we could transport ourselves with the
rapidity of lightning from our present
local habitation to the extreme verge of
the habitable globe, that we should not
be able to light on asingle spot, and take
our stand and say, ‘ Here, His eye shall
not see us; here, His ear shall not hear
us ; here, His justice cannot overtake us;
here, His grace cannot save us.”—


“In every part and place of the uni-
verse we perceive the exertions of a
power which we believe to proceed from
the Deity. In what part or point of
space that has ever been explored do
we not discover attractions} In what
region do we not find light? What
kingdom is there of nature, what corner
of space, in which there is anything that
can be examined by us, while we do not
fall upon contrivance or design} An


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY,


OmaP, I.





agency so general as that we cannot
discover its absence, or assign the place
in some effects of its continued energy
is not found, must be ascribed to a
being who is omnipresent. He who
upholds all things by His power, may be
said to be everywhere present.”—Paley,

“Is there no necessity of control over
the powers of the atmosphere, or of the
ocean}? What would be the situation
of the inhabitants of our world, if
exposed to their resistless force, in the
entire absence of the control of a presid-
ing mind—a guardian Deity? Think
of the innumerable processes which are
incessantly going forward in the life
and growth of animals and of vegetables,
and can you imagine these to proceed
with undeviating uniformity, without
infinite knowledge to direct infinite
power? Conceive, then, of the Divine
omniscience as necessarily commensurate
with the exertions of omnipotence, and
the extent of omnipresence.”—Burder.


Vers. 34-41. Sin and its recompense,

“The tale of the Goblet, which the
genius of a heathen fashioned, was true,
and taughta moral of which manya death-
bed furnishes the melancholy illustration.
Having made the model of aserpent, he
fixed it in the bottom of thecup. Coiled
for a spring, a pair of gleaming eyes in
its head, and in its open mouth fangs
raised to strike, it lay beneath ruby
wine. Nor did he who raised that
golden cup to quench his thirst and
quaff the delicious draught suspect what
lay below, till, as he reached the dregs,
that dreadful head arose and glistened
before his eyes. So, when life’s cup is
nearly emptied, and sin’s last pleasure
quafied, and unwilling lips are draining
the bitter dregs, shall rise ghastly terrors
of remorse, and death, and judgment
upon the despairing soul.” —Guthree,


Ver. 36. “Save Caleb the son of
Jephunneh.” Subject: The reward of
righteousness,

Caleb, in conjunction with the other
eleven spies, had important work en-
trusted to him. He and Joshua alone
were brave and righteous in the conduct
of their services, God was angry with


the wrong-doers, and punished them :
with Caleb and Joshua He was pleased,
and them He rewarded. Caleb was
allowed to enter the promised land,
where he subsequently obtained good
possessions,

L The reward of the righteous in the
case of all is inexpressibly great. ‘Be
ye strong, therefore, and let not your
hands be weak, for your work shall be
rewarded ” (2 Chron. xv. 7). ‘‘ There-
fore hath the Lord recompensed me
according to my righteousness, accord-
ing to the cleanness of my hands in His
eyesight (Ps. xviii, 24). ‘‘ Every one
that hath forsaken houses or brethren,
&c.,. . . shall receive an hundredfold,
and inherit everlasting life” (Matt. xix.
29; of. Mark x. 29, 30, and note
variations),

Il. The reward of righteousness is
invariably obtained in connection with
labour. (Cf. “ Why stand ye here all
the day idle?” Matt. xx. 6, with
“ Call the labourers, and give them their
hire,” xx. 8). Work is God’s condition
of prosperity. Labour enhances the en-
joyment of life. Indolence brings ruin
to individuals and states; to the body,
intellect, spirit. The men who will be
rewarded on the Day of Judgment will
not be those whose religion consisted in
hearing sermons, seeking comfort, utter-
ing sentimental sympathies and offering
prayers; but those who make all “ means
of grace” to be channels for carrying
into reality and life the purposes God
has inspired in the heart,


Ver. 37. “Lord angry with me,” &.
“So aggravated was your guilt that it
not only brought ruin on yourselves, but
displeasure on your leader.”—Clapham,

Cf. Achan’s sin (Josh, vii. 15, 24, 25).
His family was involved with him in
his punishment. ‘Sins of fathers
visited on the children,” &c.

“The Lord angry with me.” Some
thing very pathetic and touching in
these words. The old lawgiver, we
could imagine, would look back over
his long life—that life so full of vicissi-
tude; which, though so long and event-
ful, was yet incomplete ; for the people
were still in the desert. aa al must

6


OwAP, i.





lead them into the promised land. But
amid the clouds of sadness three gleams
of light may be discerned—

L Life is ending in the midst of
labour.

II. Life is ending in the midst of
prospect.

IIL Life is ending in the midst of
strength,

“ For your sakes.” ‘“ Here we see, as
it were, the other side of the event nar-
rated in Num. xx. 10. There the un-
belief of Moses and Aaron bears the
blame; yet the unbelief was called
forth by the invincibie perverseness of
the people. Moses, therefore, was
punished because he had not kept him-
self entirely free from the infection of
the sin of the people, but the people
had reason to reckon their sin on the
part of Moses as occasioned by their
fault.” —Gerlach.


Ver. 37. “The Lord was angry with
‘me for your sakes.” This, read in con-
junction with Isaiah liii. 5, brings be-
fore our notice one of the most startling
facts in the whole universe of being ;—
the fact and principle of vicarious suf-
fering (cf. John xi. 49-52). Men may
think the idea of vicarious sacrifice
inconsistent with Divine perfection, but
there is the fact. In standing on the
platform which accepts this idea, we
are not compelled to satisfy all the
scruples of those standing on a platform
advocating a theory in opposition as to
the righteousness or unrighteousness of
any act of God. Sufficient for man, if
God do it. “Shall not the Judge of
all the earth do right?” Man is a
fraction of a whole, as well as an unit,
Shall the head complain because when
one with the hand it suffers? It is one
with it in joy! True wisdom is to
know that this principle works in human
life, and to make the best of the know-
ledge.

I. The vicarious principle is a law of
physical life,

1, The mineral kingdom is food for
the vegetable.

2. The vegetable supports the animal.

3. The herbivorous food for the caz-

62


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





nivorous, This not an effect of sin,
(Cf. the teachings of geology.)

4, All fall before the rule of man.
These each provide nourishments for
his body whereon his mind and soul
live.

IL The vicarious principle a law of
intellectual life—

1. The enjoyment and instruction of
the reader is only attained at the price
of the author's suffering and experience,

2. The congregation’s repast on the
Sabbath is at the cost of the preacher's
brain and life and suffering.

3. The civilisation of to-day is ob
tained by the labour and peril of the
past.

4. The position, gain, education, &.,
of the child is at the price of the parents’
toil or self-denial.

III. This vicarious principle also a
law of spiritual life—

1. By sympathy we take some of the
sorrow out of another heart into our
own, and thereby afford relief.

2. Seeing that the principle is both
in the regions of the material and the
mental, the gospel makes no greater claim
upon our faith when it asks us to believe
that such a principle is active in the
region of the spiritual also,


God can be provoked to anger.—“ The
gods of the Gentiles were senseless stocks
and stones, not able to apprehend, much
less to revenge an injury done unto
them. Well, therefore, might the phi-
losopher be bold with Hercules, to put
him to his thirteenth labour, in seething
of his dinner ; and Martial with Priapua,
in threatening to throw him into the fire,
if he looked not well to his trees A
child may play at the hole of a dead
asp, and a silly woman may strike a
dead lion; but who dare play with a
living serpent? Who dare take a roar-
ing lion by the beard? Let Christians
take heed how they provoke the living
God, for He is a consuming fire, and
with the breath of His mouth He is
able to throw down the whole frame of
nature, and destroy all creatures from
the face of the earth.” —Things New and
Old,


——


HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY ; DEUTERONOMY,


=


A good prince no advantage to a bad
people.—‘‘ We see that, though the sun
be above the horizon, and so apt to make
a glorious day, yet many fogs and mists
arising from the earth, overcast the sky,
and intercept the comfortable influence
of the light. Even so, though God
vouchsafe never so good a prince, a
prince under whom the people enjoy
abundance of peace, and the free passage
of the gospel, such may be their grace-
lessness that they may be the better for
aaa of them.”—TZhings New and

ld.





Ver. 38. “ But Joshua, &. ... he
shall cause Israel to inherit,”

Joshua had done one thing well that
God had given him; work of a higher
order is therefore intrusted to him.
His conduct in spying the land was
good: he is to complete his first duty,
spying, by leading the people into pos-
sessing the land. The five talents faith-
fully used prepares the way for the rule
of five céties,

Here we have an illustration of service
for God being rewarded. Two conside-
rations—

I. The reasonableness of service for
God.

IL The reward of such service.

I. The reasonableness of service for
God.
1. In every state of life the condition
of true honour is faithful service. True
honour is not a matter of birth or place,
It is had only by becoming honourable,
by submitting to service, toil, self-sacri-
fice. The man ambitious to be erudite
must toil through the drudgery of the
preliminary work: the chemist in the
laboratory ; the soldier in drill-room and
battle-field ; statesman in cabinet, Men
will not sutter others to label themselves
gold if only brass.

2. In proportion to the greatness of
the honour is the rigidness of the con-
dition.

3. If we seek honour of God, it is but
reasonable that we should be prepared
with service of some kind; and the higher
the honour we crave from Christ, the
more devoted must we be to Him and
to His service, To sit on His right hand


OHAP, 1.





and on His left is only for those worthy
of it (of. Matt. xx. 23),

II. The reward of such service,

1, The reward will be proportionate,
not only to the worth of the servant,
but to the greatness of the giver. Kings
bestow royal gifts (cf. Ahasuerus and
Mordecai), ‘ What shall be done unto
the man whom the king delighteth to
honour ¢”

2. The reward will be somewhat of
the nature of the receiver's worth,
Joshua’s service was fidelity to his na-
tion ; his reward was a national honour:
he was made a chief. The Christian’s
service is fidelity to Christ ; his reward,
therefore, will be the honour of the
crowned Christ in the Day of Triumph.

Ver, 38. “Thou shalt not go in
thither.” In other words, “Thou shalt
die in the desert.” These words must
have fallen on Moses as one of those
thunder-claps of unexpectedness that are
made the more powerful by their rarity ;
but which no one is anxious to make
more familiar by repetition. The pecple
were soon to enter the promised land ;
therefore Moses knew that he was soon
to die. The subject pressed on our
attention is the imminence of death
Death may be impending physically,
morally, socially, influentially.

Physically: Breath is in the nostrils,
but we know not the hair-breadth
escapes from death. A needle point
might destroy the life of the body.

Morally : Character may be ruined
ina moment. One sin broke up human
history into ruin, sorrow, &c.

Socially: When character is ruined
society is closed against a man.

Influentially : A man’s influence should
be the measure of his moral standing,
By one false step influence may be im-
paired or even destroyed. Since death
is 80 near, and in so many ways immi-
nent, the following considerations may
not be ill-timed :—

I. High significance and value should
be given to time. “ Whatsoever thy
hand findeth to do, do it with thy might.
What is life? A brief day, a solemn
destiny. Eternity turns upon the pre
sent, Direction is now given for all the
future.

€s


AHOMILETICAL COMMENTARY ; DEUTERONOMY.


IL. The most anxious vigilance should
be aroused. When death is near, it is
only a step (1 Sam. xx. 3), and might be
the next / ‘Be sober, be vigilant.”

III. The thought of death should
stimulate to preparedness for the future.
The most careless make some preparation
for the immediate wants of the present
and the future. The appetites and body
are provided for. Death thunders out,
“The spirit must be provided for.” The
soul’s preparation is made by our sus-
taining each day a right relation to Him,
into whose presence death ushers us,

IV. It should inspire a tender in-
terest into life and all its relationships.
We hold our blessings for but a moment,
then they are gone. Home, friendship,
Christian service—they are soon enfolded


in a pall. Life is too short for man to
be hard on man. Those with us are
soon gone. An eternity of tears will


not wash out one act of cruelty,

V. The prospect of death should lead
toa right use of temporal possessions.
There is only one world in which we
have money. We touch it only once.
We can hoard it for selfish uses: we
can spend it in the service of Christ.


“Ah! in what perils is vain life engaged |
What slight neglecta, what trivial faults
destroy
The hardiest frame! Of indolence, of toil
We die; of want, of superfluity,
The all-surrounding heaven, the vital air,
Is big with death.”


“ Death.—Death is, in itself, a most
serious and distressing event. It* is
nature’s supreme evil, the abhorrence of
God’s creation—a monster, from whose
touch every living thing recoils ; so that
to shrink from its ravages upon our-
selves, or upon those whom we love, is
not an argument of weakness, but an
act of obedience to the first law of being
—a tribute to the value of that life
which is our Maker’s gift. The disregard
which some of old affected to whatever
goes by the name of evil; the insensi-
bility of others, who yielded up their
souls to the power of fatalism ; and the
artificial gaiety, which has occasionally
played the comedian about the dyin
bed of ‘philosophy, falsely so called,
are petri upon decency and nature,

£


OHAP, I,





Death destroys both action and enjoy-
ment—mocks at wisdom, strength, and
beauty—disarranges our plans—robs us
of our treasure—desolates our bosoms—
breaks our heartstrings — blasts our
hopes. Death extinguishes the glow of
kindness — abolishes the most tender
relations, of man—severs him from all
that he knows and loves—subjects him
to an ordeal which thousands of millions
have passed, but none can explain ; and
what will be as new to the last, who
gives up the ghost, as it was to murdered
Abel,—flings him, in fine, without any
avail from the experience of others, into
a state of untried being. No wonder
that nature trembles before it; reason
justifies the fear; religion never makes
light of it ; and he who does, instead of
ranking with heroes, can hardly deserve
to rank with a brute.”— Mason,


Ver. 39. “ Morsover your little ones
.. . they shall go in thither,” c&c.

A beautiful example of the children
bringing honour to the parent, The
fathers by their sin brought disgrace
upon their name. They die in the desert,
The children enter the promised land.

A very striking illustration of this is
found in the reward of the oaken crown
among the ancient Romans. The civic
crown was the foundation of many
privileges. He who had once obtained
it, had a right to wear it always. When
he appeared at the public spectacles, the
senators rose up to do him honour. He
was placed near their bench; and Ass
Sather, and his grandfather by the father’s
side, were entitled to the same privilege,


Ver. $8. Joshua beeame heir to the
title and position of Moses, in preference
even to his own children, if he had any
now living. (Cf. this with what Plutarch
tells us. “It was customary with the
Romans of that age (the time of Corio-
lanus), when they were drawn up in
order of battle, and ready to take up
their shields and gird their garments
about them, to make a nuncupative will,
naming each his heir, in the presence of
three or four witnesses,”)


Ver. 41. “We have sinned.”
2 conscience conqueror,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. CHAP. I.





(We supplement the Hints of the preceding Writer on CuAP. 1, 1-88)





Review or tHe Past.— Verses 1-5.


“ Live on the past,” said Napoleon; but the past of his life afforded littl
help to him. Moses here reviews the past history of Israel in its remarkable
places and conflicts—repeats, explains, and enforces the commands of God, and
reminds them of God’s mercy to prompt them to duty,


I. It is helpful to review the past. ‘The lessons of the past are gathered
not into oblivion, but to be fruitful in the present and the future, The histories
and events of former times confirm our faith, and encourage us to hope and
trust in God. 1. /n remarkable places. In the wilderness, amid dearth, distress,
and poverty. In ¢he plain, well watered and cultivated spots of encampment.
Against the Red Sea, amid wonders of God’s presence and power which should
never be forgotten. Life’s journey not all a barren desert ;—there are many
beautiful scenes and fruitful seasons, many deliverances from enemies, and many
displays of Divine favour. 2. In remarkable times. (a) After long delays.
“In the fortieth year, in the eleventh month,” after deliverance from Evypt.
The delay through sin, which brings trouble and unfitness for duty. (6) After
conflicts and trials, Sihon slain in opposing their onward march (Num. xxi. 24;
Deut. ii. 32). Og, king of Bashan, without provocation rushed to attack, and
was defeated. By the destruction of these kings God pledges to help his people,
puts them under deep obligation to obey, and encourages them to further effort.


II. It is needful to review the past. From the past we must get our examples,
precedents, and principles. The past alone will interpret the present, and we
cannot get rid of its influences and results. 1. Owr mental condition makes it
needful. The generation that came out of Egypt had died. There were many
children in Israel who only knew a little of God’s law and dealings with them.
Hence the need of repetition. We are children mentally and morally. God
teaches by past history. ‘‘ Precept upon precept, precept upon precept,” ets,
(Isaiah xxviii. 10). 2. Our present surroundings make vt needful. Israel was
surrounded by idolatrous nations, and would be exposed to seductive influences
in the land of Canaan. We have need to be warned against worldly customs
and sin’s devices—to have the law of God written in our hearts (Ps. cxlvii. 19, 20).
3. Our immediate future makes t¢ needful, Israel was about to go into new
frcumstauces of life; to become soldiers, and to cease to be pilgrims. Their
strength was to rely upon God and follow him. What He had done in the past
He could do in the future. He will pardon sin, deliver from danger, and give
rest and rewards,


Taz ENFORCEMENT oF Duty.— Verses 5-8.


Long enough had the Israelites remained at Horeb. Tho end was accom-
lished for which they were led thither. ‘Their work was not yet finished; the
ead was not possessed, hence the commaad, “ take your journey and go.” Duty
should be the end and aim of the highest life. 'l'he greatest pleasure is derived
from a consciousness of its fuliilment. It has sustaining power in life, and at
life’s end, says George Herbert, it “ gives music at midnight.”
a


CHAP. & HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.,





I. Duty explained. Moses began to declare, ¢.¢., to explain. We must know
before we can act. God has not left us to grope or guess our way in the dark.
In the Bible we have a full revelation of God’s will and the path of duty opened
so plainly that “ wayfaring men though fools shall not err therein.” Nature and
Philosophy are dim lights. Here we have the light of life, the true light which
shineth unto every man coming into the world.


II. Duty enforced. When we know, we are reluctant to do the right. We
all know more than we practice, and have need of the enforcement of duty by
every possible motive. 1. By present needs. Long enough at rest, now rouse
yourselves to work. We have not to serve God in retirement, but in publicity,
Peter was not permitted to dwell on the mount, but sent to confess and serve
Christ among men, Israel had now received the Covenant, been trained for a
new social position, and they must go to their lawful sphere to adorn their
privileges. 2. By removing hindrances to its performance. The land before
you, lit., before your faces. It is accessible; you can see it, and there is no
difficulty in the way, but which you may easily overcome. The promise and
the kindness of God should be enough tostirusup. 3. By the express command
of God. The land was given to their fathers by promise. They were now trained
for it, and should no longer delay in taking it, “Go in and possess the land.”


Tur Cuorcs oF Orricers.— Verses 9-18.


Israe] had now greatly increased, and Moses felt the affairs too heavy for him
to bear alone. He appeals to them as if in a dying wish to select men to help
him to judge and act as public officers. The rules for the choice, and the
instructions as to method, are worthy of the most enlightened ages of Christendom.


I, The qualifications which they are to possess. ‘Chis is most important,
every man is not fit to be a magistrate. Jethro knew this and gave a four-fold
qualification, ‘‘ Thou shalt provide out of all the people able men, such as fear
God, men of truth, hating covetousness” (Ex. xviii. 21). ‘These officers were to
be—1. Men of intelligence. “Wise men and understanding”—men of skill
and tact. Administration without wisdom will not be successful, Unskilful
men holding the reigns of government may be like Pheton, the son of Sol,
who insisted on driving the fiery steeds and sent horses and chariot spinning
through boundless space, 2. J/en of good repute. “ Known among your tribes,”
—men who had gained a reputation for honesty and straight-forwardnesg in
daily life. 3. Men who fear God. Those who act for God should not only
have the confidence of the people, but the Spirit of God in them. “Look ye
out among you seven men of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost and wisdom,
whom we may appoint over this business,”


II. The Spirit in which they are to act. The rules applicable at first to
the law of Moses, are in spirit and letter fitted to guide all human judgments.
1. 70 hear patiently. ‘ Hear the causes.” How. many hasty, impulsive judg-
ments are given without a patient candid hearing? “ Judge not according to
appearance, but righteous judgment.” 2. To judge impartially. No respect
of persons in judgment. The great and the small, the orphan and friendless,
the weak and the powerful, were to be treated in justice and equity. 3. Zoact
fearlessly. “Ye shall not be afraid of the face of man.” Lack of courage leads
to perversion of justice, “There lies one who never feared the face of man ” was
the eulogy on Knox, the reformer. 4. Zo act under a sense of responsibility to
God, “'l'he judgment is God’s.” Judges were holy persons, sitting in the place
of God and exalted to dispense the power of God. “Take heed what ye do:
for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment”
(2 Chron, xix. 6),

66


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONONY.


OHAP, I.


Sn ee ree rent Sg


III. The method in which they are installed.


The people approved


of the suggestion, and acted upon it. “The thing which thou hast spoken is


ood for us to do.”


1. They were chosen by the people. “Take you” (ver. 18).


any say that it is dangerous to extend the sufferage—to invest power into the


hands of the people. But neither the Jewish


teaches us to ignore them.


were not only respected by the people,


: (ef. Acts vi. 1-4.
Moses, “1 will make them rulers over you.”
chiefs were instituted by him. Moses ratified the people’s choice.
were confirmed by the Spirit of God. The judyment was God's.
but aided by the Spirit of God.


olity nor the Christian Church
‘ 2. They were appointed by
All scribes, superiatendents, and
3. They
The judges
“T will


take of the spirit which is apa thee, and will put it upon them ; and they shall
A ;


bear the burden of the peop


with thee.” (Num. xi. 17.)


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIUNS


Vers, 3, 4. Remarkable times and
places.

1, Reminding of past transgressions.
2. Indicating noble achievements
Sihon and Og slain. Great cities
taken (Num. xxi. 33). ‘Who smote
great nations, and slew mighty kings”
(Ps. exxxv. 10, 11). 3, Stimulating
to noble efforts. Og, a giant, friend,
and ally to Sihon. Edrei, the second
capital of Og, strongly fortified, yet not-
withstanding artificial defence, natural
advantage, and military prowess, taken


by Israel (Deut. iii. 1 “Through
God we shall do valiantly.”
Ver. 6. Long enough. Needless


delay. 1. In the world away from
God, The place of sin, Satan’s service
and misery. Why remain here? God
invites, urges you to come to Him.
2. In spiritual bondage and perplexity.
Many distressed in mind, in terror and
bondage, under the mount, like Bun-
yan’s pilgrim. Christ gives liberty.
3. In present position and attainments.


Many children in knowledge, when
they ought to be advanced, mature
and fit to teach. Long enough in
idleness and present position. (io on.


Vers. 10, AS Te atid od increase ee
osperity. 1. Spiritual prosperity the
rift of God. God hath multiplied you—
therefore fulfilled His promise, dis-
played His power and grace. 2. Spiri-
tual prosperity promised by God. “As
He hath promised you.” 3. Spiritual
rosperity should be sought. “The
rd make you a thousand times more.”


Vers. 9-13. Ministerial and lay
agency tn the Christian Church. of.
Jethro’s advice to Moses (Ex. xviii.
19-23). 1. Lay agency needful.
Ministers “not able” to overtake the
work. 2. Lay agency advantageous.
It relieves from “burden,” “cum-
brance ;” facilitates business and pro-
motes order. “Judges and officers
shalt thou make thee in all thy gates,”
etc. (Deut. xvi. 18).


Tur Heaventy Proposa.— Verse 21.


We may transfer what is here said to the Jews to ourselves, Canaan was
typical of a better country—a deme

Observe the Exhibition. “Behold the Lord thy God hath set the land before
thee.” Where? In the Scriptures: not in full developement, for it is a glory
to be revealed, but in its general nature, and in a way adapted to our present
apprehensions, and likely to take hold of our mind, Hence many figures are
employed, all of which aid our conceptions, while they fall short of the subject.

But does God place it before our eyes to tantalize us by awakening notice,
drawing forth admiration, and exciting desire when the boon is not within our

€7


OWAP, 1, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; DEUTERONOMY.


Observe the command. “Go up and possess it as the Lord God of thy fathers
said unto thee.” This supposes it to be attainable: yea it makes the attainment
our duty. Missing it is not only misery, but crime. We shall be punished for
neglecting so great salvation. It is our guilt—the guilt of the vilest disobedience
to the most gracious authority ; for he not only allows, but enjoins us to seek
first his kingdom and righteousness—and commands us to believe on the name
of his son Jesus Christ. Are we doing tis? For He is the way, and we come
unto God by Him.

Observe the encouragement: “Fear not, neither be discouraged.” ‘To this
we are liable on two accounts. First, by a sense of our unworthiness, The
greatness of the blessedness, combined with a sense of our desert, astonishes the
mind, and makes hope seem like presumption. But everything is free, and
designed to show the exceeding riches of His grace. We are as welcome as we
are unworthy, why, then, refuse to be comforted? Secondly, by a sense of our
weakness. Who is sufficient for the distance, the difficulties, and the dangers?
The Jews were dismayed at the report of the spies. ‘I'he towns were walled up
to heaven. Before the Anakims we are but as grasshoppers. The people were
disheartened, but said Caleb, “Let us go up at once and possess it, for we are
able.” How did he mean? Without God? No. But with Him as their
leader and keeper—and this He had promised, Has He not said to you, “Fear
not, for | am with thee ; be not dismayed, for I am thy God: I will strengthen
thee, yea, I will keep thee.” We cannot be too sensible of our weakness; but
let us remember that His grace is sufficient for us. It has been sufficient for all
gone before us, Jordan rolled between the Jews. It was overflowing its bank
at the time. But the ark divided the waters. They went through dry shod,
and their enemies were still as a stone till they were clean passed over.—
From Jay.


Tae Narorg or Unsetier.— Verses 22-40,


It was through obedience to God that Canaan was to be inherited. But
many times in their journey did Israel rebel. Moses recapitulates, but specially
mentions the open rebellion at Kadesh-barnea, for which they were doomed to
wander and die in the wilderness. When they had come to the very borders
they hesitated in unbelief—proposed that men should survey the land and
report. Moses approved and God permitted a step which shows the sinful
nature and the terrible consequences of unbelief. The nature of unbelief is
seen.


I. In contriving what is unneedful. Why send spies when the b
; y were about
to enter the land? Why rely upon their own devices when God had helped
them all through their journey ? Why glance too much into the future, instead
of acting in present duty? “If you constantly make the best use of the present


hour, you are sure to be prepared for those which follow,” says Fenelon.


II. In relying more upon numbers than upon evidence. All brought the
fruit of the land. But the people believed the report of the ten and aS the
two, and cried in outrageous rebellion “Let us make a captain, and return
into Egypt (Neh. ix. 17). “Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil.”


III, In misinterpreting the Providence of God. “ Because the Lord hated
as, he hath brought us forth out of the land of Egypt.” O, what perversion of
God’s dealings! Had God forgotten His word? Did He wish to “destroy” and
not to bless them? But when we measure God according to our narrow views,


and read His ways with an unbelieving heart, we are sure to err and make
wvidious reflections upon his love,
68


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY, OHAP. I





IV. In blinding against the help of God. Moses exhorted them not to be
afraid, for God was with them and would fight for them. All was in vain
(vers. 29, 30). Rebellion blinds the mind, and we can neither discern God in
the past nor present. Let us not blame the Jews. We are weak in faith, and
full of prudent inventions in personal and social affairs, We “ trust God when
we mn eee him”—take one-sided views, and reproach God with ungrateful
conduc


Taz Consequences or UnbeLier.— Verses 26-40,


God had sustained and guarded His people in the greatest difficulties, He
was continually with them, but unbelief was followed by open rebellion, and the
Israelites were, in the righteous judgment of God, doomed to die in the wilder-
ness. ‘I'he consequences of unbelief may be seen in its different steps of
development.

I. It creates positive disobedience to God. “In this thing ye did not believe
the Lord your God.” Alienation of heart from God, leads to doubt and distrust
and if we have no love, no faith in God, how can we obey Him? We have;
within us a sinful, faithless heart, “an evil heart of unbelief in departing from
the living God.”

II. It leads to open rebellion against God. Unbelief broke forth into mur-
muring and open disorder. They cast reproach and dishonor upon God. Un-
belief perverts the truth of God, defies the authority of God and despises the
threatening of God. ‘They were disobedient, and rebelled against Thee, and
cast Thy law behind their backs.”

III. It rouses the anger of God. “The Lord was angry.” Notwithstanding
His great love, God displayed His righteous retribution. Our fellow creatures
will defend their honour, human government will uphold their authority, so
God must punish sin. ‘How oft did they provoke Him in the wilderness
and grieve Him in the desert ?”

IV. It excludes from the inheritance of God. That unbelieving generation
with two exceptions, were excluded from Canaan. God sware in his wrath, and
the decision could not be overturned. “They shall not enter into My rest.”
Those who disobey and persist in their folly will be excluded from heaven.
“Let us therefore fear” (Heb, iv. 1).


EncouRaGEMENT.— Verse 38,


Joshua was appointed to succeed Moses, and lead Israel into Canaan (¢f. Num.
xxvii, 15-23). His work was difficult, and he would need help and encourage-
ment. The people are exhorted to strengthen and obey him.

I. The text supposes that difficulties will be encountered. In the Christian
life there are many obstacles. 1. Difficulties made by ourselves. How numerous
these are. 2. Difficulties arising from the conduct of others. 8. Difficulties
expressly sent by God to test His servants,

II. The text gives a command to surmount these difficulties. ‘“ Encourage
him.” We should encourage our fellow Christians. 1. To meet their trials
with patience. 2. Steadily to fight till they conquer them. 8. To profit by them.

III. The text contains a lesson for every Christian preacher and teacher.
“Encourage ”"—1. The penitent sinner. 2. The young believer. 3, The well-
tried saint.— Adapted J. W. Macdonald, a


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


a


OuAP. 1.





Comina Neapw Yer Farina SHort.— Verses 41-46.


Israel had left Egypt, endured toil and privation in the wilderness, and wera
now on the threshold of the inheritance, but failed in duty, and were driven
back into the desert to weep in vain. Their opportunity was lost, and their
daring presumption ended in sad disgrace. We have here—


I. Confession without true penitence. ‘We have sinned against the Lord.”
Their sorrow was not sincere. It arose not from a sense of guilt, but from the
difficulties and dangers into which they were involved. The grief of Judas not
of Peter. ‘There may be confession of folly without true penitence ; resolution
to amend without renewal of heart. Repentance often comes too late, and avails
nothing in the sight of God.


II. Presumption in the garb of zeal. Grieved at the prospect before them,
yet still rebellious and self-willed, they determine to “ go up and fight, according
to all that the Lord our God commanded us.” What professed regard to God,
when all the time they acted with levity. ‘They presumed to go up” (Num,
xiv. 44}. Their zeal sprang from a wrong feeling, was based on a wrong principle,
and led to disastrous results. “They have a zeal of God, but not according to
knowledge.”


III. Effort without Divine help. In spite of warning, and in direct opposition
to God’s command they went up, but were driven before the enemy, who chased
and slew them with the ferocity of furious bees disturbed in the hive. Rashness
is not reliance upon God. All undertakings in defiance of God’s will—all efforts
without God’s help will fail. Every godless endeavour, every opposition to His
authority, will bring displeasure upon those who persist. Those who run without
being sent, those who fight without Divine commission will meet with awful
defeat. Beware, “lest haply ye be found even to fight against God.”


HOMILETIOC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 19-21. The way to rest. 1. xvii. 26). 2. To appoint a place of
Through the wilderness, in trial, afflic- usefulness, “I have chosen you and
tion, and discipline, reminding of God’s ordained you” (dit. put you, set you in
goodness and human ingratitude. (a). your sphere) John xv. 16. 3. To
Courageously travelled. (6). Under arrange events in life. “Hath deter-
Divine guidance. 2. By Divine com- mined the times before appointed (ar-
mand. God teaches, leads, and helps, ranged beforehand).” Acts xvii. 26.


“God commanded us,”

Vers. 34-38. The faithful two. 1.
Distinguished in their conduct. Faith-
ful, fearless, and Godlike. Caleb “‘fol-
lowed the Lord wholly” (¢f Num. xiv,
24), Joshua firm and true amid general
defection. ‘We must, in a course of
obedience to God’s will, and of service
to His honour,” says Matthew Henry,
“follow Him universally, without divi-
ding ; wprightly, without dissembling ;


Vers, 29-31, The confidence of faith.
1, Based on past experience. (a). Of
God’s help. “ According to all that
He did for you in Egypt.” (6). Of
God’s goodness, “The Lord thy God
bare thee.” 2. Assured of safety for
the future. ‘“ Dread not, neither be
afraid.”


Vers. 32, 33. God a Pioneer, going
before us in life. 1. To appoint a
locality for residence. As he searched
out the land of Canaan, so now He
fixes “the bounds of habitation ” “Acts

70


cheerfully, without disputing ; an

constantly, without declining ; and this
is following the Lord fully.” 2. Dis-
tinguished in their rewards, Caleb in
the ranks of the people was spared to


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


OHAP. L





enter the land which his seed possessed
(ef Num. xiv. 2). Joshua, a servant
of Moses, was chosen to succeed him
and lead Israel into Canaan. “ Many
are called, but few chosen.”


Ver, 39. Little ones cared for. 1.
Delivered from anticipated _ evils.
“Which ye said should be a prey.”
2. Rewarded with unexpected good.
“They shall go in thither.”


Vers. 40-42. The batile ts the Lord's


1. Then do not fight without his
presence. “If thy presence go not
with me, carry us not up hence.” 2.
Do not enlist without his call. “Lo,
we be here and will go up;” but God
had not called them there. God had
said, “go not up, neither fight, for I
am not among you.” 3. To rush into
any undertaking without God will end
in defeat. Presumption is not faith,
resistance to God is open defiance of
His providence and will. ‘ Woe unto
him that striveth with his maker.”


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER f,


Ver. 41. We have sinned. See how
the works of darkness must needs come
to light. God will have sinners to be
their own detectors. The inward evi-
dence of guilty conscience shall not
suffice ; their tongue shall tell it out,
and, ez ore tus, their own mouths shall
sentence them. (Dr. HKichard Clerke.)
Presumption.— We will go up. Fora
creature to oppose is for briars and
thorns to do battle against fire. Pha-
raoh never appeared nearer his object
than when he met with destruction.
— Lobinson.


Ver. 43 Rebelled. Sin against God,


as He is Almighty, is the excess of
madness and folly ; but as He is most
kind and merciful, it is the basest in-
gratitude. The greater His goodness,
the greater is our guilt if we be un-
dutiful servants, and the greater will
be our punishment.—Jortin.


Ver. 46. Abode many days. All
attempts to urge men forward, even in
the right path, beyond the measure
of their light, are impracticable, and
unlawful if they were practicable ;
augment their light, conciliate their
affections, and they will follow of their
own accord.—obert Hall





CHAPTER I.


Onrricat Norzs.—l. The story continued. After the unsuccessful attack, Israel broke up
emcampment at Kadesh. Many days. i.e, many years in a nomadic life, wandering in various
directions from place to place, according to pasturage and water. Details are not mentioned,
because not required.


2. This command relates to the journey from Kadesh to Mount Hor (Num. xx. 22; xxxiii. 37),
and directs their march round the south extremity of Mount Seir, so as to “compass the land of
Edom” (Jud. xi. 18; Num. xxi. 4), and so northwards towards the Arnon, fc, “by the way
of the wilderness of Moab (ver. 8). This circuitous path was followed because of the refusal
of the Edomites to allow the people to pass through their territory” (Speak. Com. ).


4, Afraid, They repelled approach from western frontier ; now they fear Israel coming round
on the weak side (Ex. xv. 15). ;

5, Meddle not, Uit., excite not yourselves against them. They were not to war, nor injure
them in property nor persons, Originally the relation between the two people was fraternal,
and God had granted Mount Seir to Esau.

6. Buy water, lit, dig water ; perhaps purchased permiasion to dig wells for water.


7. Blessed thee. Iaracl had means to buy provisions, and should not therefore be guilty of
fraud of violence, n


eHApP. It. HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





8. Elath (tress.), of, 1 Kings ix. 26, now called Akaba, on the route of annual pilgrimage
from Cairo to Mecca. Ez-gaber, ef. Num. xxxiii. 85 (backbone of a man; so called, probably,
from rugged rocks in its vicinity). A seaport near Elath, ¢f. 1 Kings ix. 26 ; 2 Chron. xx. 36.


9. Moabites and Ammonites (ver. 19) descended from Lot, and like Edomites, kinsmen of
Israelites.

10-12, Ethnographical notices concerning earlier inhabitants of these lands. Emim, te,
frightful, terrible to the Moabites. Anakim, cf, Num. xiii. 32. Horims, Gen. xiv. 5.

18, Connected with ver. 9. Zered, the boundary line between Edom and Moab, crossed
thirty-eight years after the doom pronounced upon them at Kadesh.

4, Sware, Num. xiv. 28, 29.

15, Destroy not by natural causes, but by terrors (Ex. xiv. 24) and judgments (Num. xvi. 853
xvii. 14).

16-19, Advance into the country of Moabites, but Israel not to meddle with them, for God
would give them nothing of their land.

20-22, For confirmation, ethnographical notices introduced again. Zam, from zamam, to hum,
a humming or roaring people ; probably the Zuzim (Gen, xiv. 5).

28, Avims, the Avites (Josh. xiii. 8), possibly connected with Ava, 2 Kings xvii. 24
(Speak. Com.)

24, Command to possess the land of Sihon,

25, Boe in anguish, /it., writhe in pain (Is. xiii. 8),

26-29, Moses sent ® peaceful messenger, to prove to the Amorites that they brought puzaish-
ment upon themselves.


30, Hardened, Jit, sharpened his heart by keen resolution. No direct influence from
God imparted. Sihon was permitted like Pharaoh to pursue his own course.


82-37. of. Num. xxi. 23-26. “A war of extermination, in which all towns were laid under
the ban (see Lev. xxvii. 29), 4.¢., the whole of the population of men, women, and children, were
put to death, and only the flocks and herds and material possessions were taken by the
conquerors as prey.” —Keil,


TurneD Back anv Detarev.— Verses 1-8,


In this chapter Moses reviews the history of Israel, and narrates the Journey
from Kadesh to the frontier of the Amorites. He is silent about many things
but glances at God’s goodness to the end of their wandering. Israel had been
turned back, and entrance into Canaan delayed.


I. God’s purpose is sometimes delayed in its fulfilment. God had purposed
and promised that the land should be given to Israel, but they had come short
of it. Their unbelief and rebellion had delayed the fulfilment of this design.
Thus by our sins we may be driven away from our destiny, and hinder the work
of God. “Ye shall know my breach (Uit., removal, withholding) of promise.”
(Num. xiv. 34.)


II. Human discipline is secured by this delay. We cannot always see
what ends God has in view, but he brings good out of evil, and light from
darkness, ‘I'wo things we learn from this delay. 1. Israel was prepared for
the inheritance. Men are often unfit for duty and destiny. Hasty preparation
will be a curse and not a blessing. In the wilderness Israel was organised into
a nation, received laws and learned obedience. Solitude, delay, and affliction
are salutary, and discipline for life’s end and reward, ‘“ How unsearchable are
His judgments, and His ways past finding out.” 9. The Oanaanites had
forferted the inheritance. ‘Their opportunities were almost gone, and their day
of grace over. ‘They had ripened themselves for their doom. No overtures of
peace were offered them. ‘Their land was taken from them, and as an absolute
sovereign gift bestowed upon Israel. Solemn thought, men may ain away their
day of salvation. (Lev. xix. 42.)

72


HOMILETIO COMMENTAR Y¥: DEUTERONOMY, CHAP. Ii,
SS SSS


III. When men are prepared by discipline, God’s purpose is realised
through them. God’s design is not forgotten nor frustrated, though often
delayed. If some do not, others are taught to accomplish it. David may not,
but Solomon builds a house for God. God’s purposes comprehend all agencies
and all events. Change of method does not indicate change of design. “ For
a Ss stn the thing that is appointed for me, and many such things are
with Him.


Isnart’s Cuarce Concernina Esav aND Moan.— Verses 4-9,


It appears from Num. xx. 18-20 that the Edomites were prepared to resist
srael’s passage through their land. But the country was not invaded, and the
Edomites did not attack nor hinder them in their journey. The Israelites are
forbidden to meddle with these nations, for their lands were given them; to
remember their blood relationship, and to deal kindly and justly with them.
From this charge learn—


I. Natural advantage is no ground for strife. The Israclites were now
strong in number and wealth. God was with them, and terror fell upon their
enemies. “‘T'hey shall be afraid of you.” But they were not to take advantage
of prevalent fear and weak opponents. The strong must help and not oppress
the weak. Right and not might must rule. We are not to despise others
because we are stronger than they in body and mind, Great nations should not
invade and destroy small ones. Aggressive war may defeat its end, and ruin
those who engage in it. “Scatter thou the people that delight in war.”


II. Natural brotherhood is a ground for social intercourse, Israel, Edom,
and Moab, were kinspeople. ‘Our brethren the children of Esau.” All nations
are made of one blood, bound by natural affinity, and mutually dependent,
Trade, commerce, and international treaties, promote the good feeling and
develop the resources of nations. Israel must not war, but trade. ‘heir
social intercourse must be straight-forward and honourable—not in jealousy,
but in love—not as strangers, but as brethren. ‘Honour all men, love the
brotherhood.”

III. God’s gifts to. others are no reason for dissatisfaction with our own.
“TI will not give thee of their land,” ver. 8, “ because I have given Mount Seir
unto Esau for a possession,” ver 4. God has apportioned to men and nations
their position. ‘They are to be grateful and content, and not to touch possessions
which do not belong to them. Covet no man’s houses or land, envy no person’s
influence and position. Be content with your own lot—it might have been
worse—improve your own gifts. The desire of something unpossessed is a greater
source of misery than positive pain or actual destitution. Solon asked by
Croesus, ‘‘ Who was the happiest man?” referred to a poor cottager of Greece,
who never desired greater wealth or a better condition than he possessed,

IV. God’s goodness in the past is an encouragement for future blessings,
“The Lord thy God hath been with thee, thou hast lacked nothing.” God had
blessed Israel with abundance and they had no need to beg nor steal. His
continued presence should prevent us from resorting to fraud or violence to
supply our wants. We have God’s all sufficient providence to depend upon,
and should therefore live by faith and constant ohedience. Our wants are
known and our supplies are promised (¢f Deut. viii. 2, 3, 15,16). Carking
anxiety preys upon temper, spirits, and health ; leads to envy, selfishness, and
unbelief ; and acts like the vulture feeding upon the vitals of Prometheus while
chained to the rock. “Take no thought for the morrow.” is


+ mee


CHAP, Wi. HOMILET1C COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY.





Gop’s CarE ror Human Lire.—Verse ?.


He knoweth thy walking. God is omniscient and knows all things. But this
knowledge is not mere notice, but intimate acquaintance with every step and
circumstance of life; a fatherly care and regard for men. We learn therefore
from this verse—


I. Human life is under divine control. This knowing comprehends purpose,
presence, and providential guidance. 1. In preventing wrong. Israel were
prevented from entering Canaan when determined to go in defiance of God’s
command. A rebellious self-will leads men to misery and destruction, but a
merciful providence checks their folly. 2. /n disposing to right. Israel’s proud
will was conquered, and they were led back into the wilderness. ‘They were
humbled and taught to obey and depend upon God. We are prevented from
sin “‘and made willing” to serve in “the day of God’s power.”


II. Human life is measured by Divine purpose. The journey in the desert
is a type of our life in the world. God fixed the time—“these forty years.”
So human life is measured in its length. It is not a matter of chance or inflexible
law, but an object of Divine purpose. So many days, months, years, and no
more. “The measure of my days.” ‘ Man’s life,” says Mt. Henry, “is no
more governed by the stoic’s blind fate, than by the Epicurzen’s blind fortune.”
“ His days are determined, the number of his months are with thee.”


ITI, Human life is an object of Divine care. Whatever God makes He
sustains. Human life, Christian life, is especially dear to Him. 1. Jn our
journeys. “Thy walking.” Temporally and spiritually the steps of a good
man are ordered (formed, prepared) by the Lord (Ps. xxxvii. 23). God keeps an
exact account, and notes every incident of our life. ‘Thou tellest (takest note
of) my wanderings” (Ps. lvi. 8). 2. Jn our works. “In all the works of thy
hand.” Flocks and herds had increased (Num. xxxii. 1). Israel had gained
wealth in trafficking with the tribes, and in cultivating the soil of the desert,
There can be no prosperity or increase in labour without God’s blessing. “The
blessing of the Lord it maketh rich.” 3. Jn our wants. “Thou hast lacked
nothing.” God had been their leader and protector, chosen places of rest and
supplied their varied wants. Their clothes decayed not, and their shoes wore
not away (Deut. xxix. 5). He knows our wants and wishes, temporal and
spiritual, and can sustain us through life. ‘Yea, forty years didst thou sustain
them in the wilderness, so that they lacked nothing.” If God knows, measures
and controls our pilgrimage on earth. 1, Learn dependence on Him, 2. Submit
to Him, 8. Seek His guidance and presence,


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 1-4. God the Leader of His the presence of those who fear us.


people. Resting where they encamp,
going with them in their journey, com-
manding and directing in their march
and social intercourse.


Ver. 4. Take ye good heed to your-
selves. Self-control needed. 1. Jn
prosperity. Israel wonderfully blessed
In strength and numbers, but must not
become selfish and tyrannical, 3 Jp

74


When men are an easy prey to us we
are ready to take advantage. But we
must be cautious, and keep strict con-
trol over our spirit and actions.


Ver. 7%. God’s continued mercies te
us. ‘That we may see that God’s care
was not exclusively confined to Israel,
we will show—I. What mercies have
been vouchsafed to us during the


. re


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY, DEUTERONOMY.


te a


whole period of our sojourning in this
wilderness. In relation to—1. Tem-
oral concerns: the necessities and
uxuries of life; 2. The concerns of


OHAP. I.





us, If we look at Israel they will serve
to show us. 1. How great our provo-
cations towards God have been. 2.
How entirely we have been under the


the soul. II. Under what circum-


influence of unbelief. —C. Simeon, M1, A.
stances they have been continued to


Tus Vicisstrupes or Nations.— Verses 10-12 ; 20-23,


The mention of the Moabites gives occasion for the interpolation of remarks
concerns the earliest inhabitants of these countries. From what we read of
these nations in this and other places, we trace the providence and purpose of
God in history.


I, God has made Nations to differ in their character and habits of life.
The names of these people are instructive. The Hnims were considered by the
Moabites to be terrible ; men of gigantic stature and fierce manners. Zhe Horim
appear to be dwellers in caves, which abound in the Edomite range. heir
origin is not known (¢f. Gen. xiv. 6 ; xxxvi. 20). The Zamzummims, verse 20,
a bullying presumptuous band of Rephaim; Gen. xiv. 5, were another giant
tribe. Zhe Avim dwelt in villages (farms) south-west of Canaan, and were a
pastoral people. Zhe Captorims sprang from Caphtor (Gen. x. 14), and were
immigrants, like the Israelites. ‘Thus some nations are physically strong and
numerous, and others few and weak ; some blessed with natural and others with
spiritual advantages. ‘I'he climate and products, the language and diversities
of nations display the wisdom and goodness of God.


II. God displaces some nations to fix others. God permitted the children
of Esau to drive out the Horims; Moab to subdue the Ewins ; and the Caphto-
rims to dislodge the Avims. ars of conquests, changes of dynasties, and
revolutions of history are under Divine control, and work out Divine purposes.
The same law appears in the formation and government of the earth, and in
the progress of Christianity. ‘This is so often repeated, to possess the minds
of the Israelites with a sense of God’s providence, which rules everywhere ;
displacing one people and settling another in their stead, and fixing their bounds
also, which they shall not pass without leave” (Patrick). “ He putteth down
one, and setteth up another.”


IlI. Godin the history of nations teaches many lessons. If the providence
of God is seen in the settlement of nations, it is not by chance or accident that
they are what and where they are. Learn—1l. T'hat all our possessions are the
gifts of God. Whatever be the skill and valour by which they were gained, in
some mysterious manner they come from Him. The lands of Edom, Moab, and
Ammon are said to be given by God. Canaan was not acquired by the valour
of Israel, but by the will of God. 2. That all our possessions are uncertain in
their tenure. If nations can be deprived of their territories, kings of their thrones,
and families of their inheritance: What hold have we of earthly fortunes ?
Why may we not be deprived of our place and power? Let us take heed lest
we forfeit our blessings, lest God “ take us away and pluck us out of our dwel-
ling place,”

® What exhibitions various hath the world
Witnese’d of mutability in all
That we account most durable below !
Change is the diet on which all subsist 5
Created changeable, and change at last
Destroys them.” —Oowper. _


CHAP. I HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





Mew or War Consumep.— Verses 14, 15.


The outbreak at Kadesh at the false report of the spies was only the filling up
of the measure of Israel’s iniquity. That generation was not wholly given up to
idolatry, but they had displayed a fearful amount of rebellion in the desert, only
hinted at iu this history, but truly described in other places. (Ezek. 20, 25, 26 ;
Amos v. 25, 27; Acts vii, 42.) For this great wickedness “the men of war,”
those able to war, the responsible transgressors were doomed to perish in the
desert by special judgments of God.

I. The cause of this consumption. By their long and open revolt, Israel had
provoked the wrath of God. In his displeasure they were punished and buried
in the wilderness. Wickedness of any kind is most unprofitable, often brings
down the judgments of God and shortens human life. ‘“ With whom was He
grieved forty years? was it not with them that had sinned, whose carcases fell
in the wilderness?”

II, The method of thie consumption. Their unbelief made this “a day of
provocation in the wilderness” and their punishment was most exemplary.
1. It was a terrible consumption. “I will smite them with the pestilence and
disinherit them.” 2. It was a complete destruction. With two exceptions the
whole generation were blotted out of existence. 3. This was designedly carried
out. “ When all the men of war were consumed and dead,” then and not before
were they permitted to invade the land and conquer its inhabitants. God can
do without the greatest warriors. In his cause faith is more needful than
numbers, This gives courage and make children heroes. God designs to give
success, by removing the wise and the mighty and causing us to look to Him
alone. “‘T'o whom sware he that they should not enter into His rest, but to
them that believed not.”


IsRAEL’S CHARGE CONCERNING THE AmMMONITES.— Verses 16-19.


After the death of the generation that had sinned the people were to cross
the border of Moab and advance into Canaan. To the east of Moab was the
country of the Ammonites, but Israel was not to touch them, for God had
peouee upon them possessions which must be held sacred. From this charge
we learn—

I, The honour God puts upon His word. “TI have given it unto the children
of Lot for a possession.” God never breaks His word, nor changes His purpose.
Ammon did not belong to the chosen people, but God guaranteed them certain
temporal advantages. He is faithful in His dealings with them, and others
must be taught to recognise this faithfulness, “Iam the Lord; I will speak,
and the word that I shall speak shall come to pass.”

II, The sacredness of human rights. “The Most High divided to the
nations their inheritance,” and what is assigned to them by right belongs to
them. It is our duty to respect national rights and national territories, and
ever wrong men by force or fraud. They may insult and seek to do us
mischief, as Moab sought to ruin Israel (Num. xxii. 6), but we are not to
retaliate, nor meddle with their possessions. ‘He that studieth revenge
keepeth his wounds open.”— Bacon.

III, The blessings derived by children from their ancestors. Tho
Ammonites are called “the children of Lot,” a righteous ancestor. We have
power to be of service to our offspring, and put succeeding generations under
obligation. “Children often fare the better in this world for the piety of their
ancestors;” says Math. Henry, “The seed of the upright, though they
degenerate, yet are blessed with temporal good things.”

76


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OHAP, 1.








Tas First Wan.— Verses 24, 25.


Israel ceased to meddle with some nations and thus practised self-denial and
obedience. Now God gives them commission to begin the war, and promises
them success over Sihon, king of Heshbon. If we wrong not others, dod will
ever right us.


_I. Israel must co-operate with God to attain the victory. God purposed to
give Sihon into their hands, but they must “ contend with him in battle.” God’s
promise does not exclude human effort. It should stimulate and encourage it.
To secure the fulfilment of the pledge, we must “rise up” from idleness and
doubt. God has promised to give us daily bread, a regular harvest, and spiritual
conquest in His service ; but we have to pray and fight. -


II. God will help and encourage Israel when they begin the contest. No
longer must they wait or hesitate. They must take the journey, pass over the
river, begin the war. 1. The enemy ts dispirited. They trembled in fear,
were bereft of strength, and were ready to melt away before the victorious nation.
“Their heart melted, neither was there spirit in them any more, because of the
children of Israel” Jos, v.1. 2. God begins the work, and they have only to
carry tt on. “‘ Begin to possess it,” for “this day will I begin.” God's people
must follow their Commander in courage and confidence. Fear, inactivity, and
cowardliness may lose the day. Success often depends upon the vigour of the
onset. “ The first stroke is half the battle.” This was seen at the battle of
Cressy, in King Alfred’s attack upon the Danes, and in Israel’s conflict with
Sihon. “Only be thou valiant for me, and fight the Lord’s battles.”


Tue Destrucrion or Smmon.— Verses 26-37,


The kingdom of Sihon formed no part of the land promised to the seed of
Abraham. Moses desired to pass through peaceably, and sent messengers to
request this, but the king rejected the proposal, met Israel with hostility, and
brought ruin upon his people and country.


I, An example of human folly. A respectful and pacific message was
rejected (¢f. Num. xxi. 21, 22). Israel was not permitted to pass through the
“high way” quietly, and pay for what provisions they wanted, but Sihon made
a bold and unprovoked attack, and was utterly defeated. What folly to be
obstinate in wrong doing, to oppose might against right, and bring on self-
destruction! How often are men found self-willed, casting off all restraint,
forgetting their opportunities, and ripening themselves for judgment by abusing
their mereies !


II. An illustration of spiritual law. ‘God hardened his spirit, and made
nis heart obstinate.” Not by evil infiuence, but by permitting him to carry out
his own will, and to remain in circumstances fitted to soften rather than to
harden. ‘This effect results from a law which we see in operation every day in
our moral nature. Sin blinds the mind, and alienates the affections. Indul-
gence in self-will corrupts and hardens the heart. When men resist the truth,
and ward off appeals of conscience—when they are obstinate and invincible in
sin—then a process of hardening goes on. They have less struggle, less com-

unction, and less feeling. And as the same sun melts one substance and
eens another, so the gospel subdues one heart and indirectly hardens arother
—becomes the savour of life to one and the savour of death to another.
Pharaoh grew more stubborn, and rushed madly to his ruin. Ahab despised
reproof until “the bow” received its commission, “He that be often


OMAP. It HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





reproved (a man of reproof, marg.) hardeneth his neck, shall suddenly be
destroyed, and that without remedy” (Prov. xxix. 1).


III. An evidence of a retributive Providence. This law is a mysterious
operation of God in the moral government of the world. God hardened Sihon
“that He might deliver him” up. The guilt of the Amorites was great, ready
for judicial punishment. If they gained their territory by violence and
bloodshed—if they forced their way into Gilead and Bashan, then they were
repaid ; for as they measured to others it was measured to them. But a
natural course of sin against spiritual laws and unseen forces will bring
retributive justice. In this world we have awful examples, predictions, and
precursors of the judgment to come.


“Oh ! blind to truth and God’s whole scheme below,
Who fancy bliss to vice, to virtue woe.”— Pope,


THe Victory or Janaz.— Verses 32-35.


Jahasz was a memorable place—a city of Moab, afterwards assigned to the
tribe of Reuben and given to the priests (Jos. xiii. 18; 1 Chron. vi. 33;
Is. xv. 4). Here Israel fought a battle and gained the victory.


I. The victory was gained in self-defence. Israel could only reach Canaan
through the lands of Sihon. All reasonable demands had been rejected. They
were hindered in seeking their natural rights, and provoked to war by a needless
attack. A righteous cause gives courage, and inspires hope of victory in
the conflict.


II, The victory was secured by Divine help. ‘‘ The Lord our God delivered
him before us.” With God with us we shall always win, but without Him
numbers and skill will not avail. In all spiritual conflicts victory belongs
to Him, “ for the battle is not your’s, but God’s.”


III, The victory was decisive in its results. The battle had not to be
fought again. Its advantages were not worthless, It was complete and
overwhelming. The people were exterminated ; ‘ We smote him, and his sons,
and all his people”—a warning to all who fight against God. ‘The cities were
“utterly destroyed” and the land desolated.

IV. The victory was limited in its operations. Only cattle and material
goods were booty for the conquerors. The lands of the Ammonites were not
touched. They left undone “ whatsoever the Lord our God forbad us” to do,
Ambition must be checked, and victors must learn self-control and dependence
upon the Divine will. “ Next to gaining a great victory is knowing how to
use it,” said Wellington.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 24. Rise up. Activity, dili-
gence, progress and Divine direction in
Christian pilgrimage, Neither be idle,
hor remain stationary,


Vers. 24, 25. I have given, rise up.
Attainment of Divine gifts, 1. They
a ready to be tee 2. God will

elp us to get them. (a) By givin
strength. “ Contend ane Him.”
(6) By disposing us to follow Him,
<5 tare You begin.”

7


Vers, 24, 25. The fame of Israel as
@ conquering people. I. How, at this
time, that fame was increased, viz., by
the oo of the mightiest nations
east of Jordan. II. The moral effects
of this conquest. 1. Israel prepared
for future conquest. 2. Canaan awed
before she had received a blow.—
Biblical Museum.


Ver. 80. Made his heart obstinate.
Learn—1, God’s power over men,


' HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


OHAP. IL


eens enes—s


2. God’s method of dealing with men
as moral governor and judge. He
suffers them to be hardened in con-
sequence of obstinate wickedness, yet
not as an arbitrary, capricious, or
tyrannical being. He wills nothing
but good, and therefore His will is the
proper rule of judgment. But men
obstinately pervert and resist His will.
Hence learn—3. Man’s fearful power
in opposing God and destroying him-
self. ‘Who hath hardened himself
against Him and hath prospered?”


Ver. 81. Israel victorious. We may
apply thus to the spiritual Israel, the
Christian Church. 1. We havea war-
fare. Contest with ignorance and sin,
Satan and the world. 2 In this
warfare God prepares the world for the
conquests of the Church. By toning
society, removing difficulties, and strik-
ing terror into the enemies, ‘The world
was never riper than at present for
courageous, determined effort. ‘Great
fear came on all them that heard those
things,” 8. In this warfare the Church
can only conquer by God’s presence.
“Providence is with the strongest
battalions,” said Napoleon. But in
this war neither might nor numbers
will avail, “Not by might, nor by
power.” 4 The more victorious is


the Church the stronger is she for
warfare. Victory gives experience,
courage, and confidence in the com-
mander, One success may be the
forerunner of many. Israel’s prowess
flew on the winds, and widespread fear
made further achievements easy. Good
deeds reproduce themselves. he con-
ee of grace in the heart, and of
the gospel in the world, inspire the
Church with hope and enthusiasm.
She becomes stronger, more ready to
obey and fight, and appears “ terrible
as an army with banners.”


Vers. 31-88. Sihon’s defeat. 1.
Self-inflicted, ‘“ He came out.”
2. Unexpected. Just the reverse of
anticipation. “I have them,” cried
Napoleon, concerning the English at
Waterloo. What disappointment !
8. Very sudden. Only one pitched
battle. 4. Divinely accomplished.
“And the Lord God of Israel de-


‘ livered Sihon and all his people into


the hand of Israel, and they smote
them.”


Vers. 88 and 87. The secret of
successful undertaking. 1. When
directed by God. 2. When accom-
panied by God’s help. 3. When
made subservient to God’s will


ILLUSTRATIONS TO OHAPTER II.


Ver. 1. Turned. Thus God orders
our will without infringing our liberty.
We observe this supremacy, in directing
not only an important end, but every
step towards it. Often has the way
of our own devising been blocked up
and an opposite way marked out, with
the ultimate ackuowledgement.—“ He
led me forth in the right way.— Bridge.


Ver. 3. Long enough. Delays,
whether in the business of God or our
own, are hateful and prejudicial ; many
lose the land of promise by lingering. —
Nicholls,


Ver. 4. 5. Meddle not. How many


unholy hearts would be restrained by
the practice of these rules of wisdom
and love! A generous self-forgetting
warmth of kindness puts down the
first evil ; denying ourselves the pleas-
ure of justifying our cause, or trium-
phing over our opponent ; instead of
standing upon punctilious reforms, or
waiting for an acknowledgement from
the offender.— Bridge,


Ver. 6. Water. The value attached
to water in the East is here brought
strikingly before us; also the justice
which characterised the policy of the
Jewish law giver. The Edomites were
in possession of the wells, and ihe fluid


OHaP, IL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


ee


of life must be paid for, if money
would be accepted.— Temperance Com-
mentary.


Ver. 7. Knoweth. Have you not
much reason for thankfulness in your
retrospect? And when things you
undertook have not prospered in your
sense of prosperity, have you not found
that in some way you never expected
they did you good? Have you not
often been thankful that you did not
succeed where your heart was calcula-
ting on unbounded success? Where
your work has not enriched you, has it
not often humbled you? and are you
not constrained to say now, after an
impartial retrospect of thirty, forty or
sixty years, that “the Lord hath
blessed me in all the works of my
hands.”—Dr. Cumming.


Vers. 10-12; 20-23. National
changes. The succession of tribes or
nations indicated in the chapter is a
very remarkable feature ; showing that
not only individuals pass away like a
shadow, but nations also. There is not
a nation at this moment inhabited by
the people that dwelt in it fifteen, or
sixteen hundred years ago. The people
in Rome are less like the ancient
Romans than we are ; the inhabitants
of Athens are not the lineal descend-
ants of the ancient Greeks. And who
knows not that our own country has
successively been invaded by Saxon,
Norman, and Dane; and that Britain
which we look upon as our home has
been successively peopled by different


nations. Asif God would teach the
nations of the earth, as well as the
units that compose them, that here we
have no continuing city, no fixed place
of abode; that we are nationally. and
individually pilgrims and strangers and
should be looking for a better country.
— Dr. Cumming.


Ver. 14. 16. Wasted.


Like leaves on trees the race of man {fs found,
Now green in youth, now withering on the


ground :
Another race the following spring supplies
They fall successive, and successive rise.


—Pope’s Homer,


Ver. 24,23. Fear of thee. As in
the natural world in times of ripeness
there is change in the appearance of
things ; so there are evident signs of
ripeness in the spiritual world. ‘There
is a preparedness with individuais,
neighbourhoods, and nations. Let the
Church awake and work, and her
victories will be large and immediate.


Ver. 38-37. God delivered. The
person who has a firm trust in the
Supreme Being, is powerful in his

wer, wise by his wisdom, happy by

is happiness. He reaps the benefit of
every Divine attribute, and loses his
own insufficiency in the fulness of
Infinite Perfection.—A ddison.

Give me the eye which can see God
in all, and the hand which can serve
Him with all, and the heart which cap
bless him for al. —Adbp, Secker.





CHAPTER IIL.


Crrrica Norrs.—Conquest of Og. Israel were able to advance to the Jordan after the defeat
of Sihon and the conquest of his land. But Og, the Amonitish King, still kept the northern
half of Gilead and all Bashan, a rugged mountainous country, valuable for rich and luxuriant


pastures.


1, Came out. Without provocation, disliking the f the
revenge the overthrow of his friends ay allies, Og : aabed cea tC) Israelites, or secking to


3 Of. Num. xxi. 31, ete.


4. Argob (stony). A region including the sixty towns which formed the ki f
Bashan, 7.¢., all the towns of the land of Bashan, we ieeconding to ee 5) all Sn ciee


80


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. II,





‘





besides the unfortified and open country towns of Bashan. (¢f. Porter’s “ Giant Cities of Bashan,”
and “ Historico-Geographical sketch of Bashan;” Camb. Essays, Art, “ Ancient Bashan and
the Cities of Og,” by Cyril Graham and Speak. Com. in loco),


8-11. Moses takes a retrospective view of the whole of the land taken on the other side of the
Jordan ; first of all (ver. 9) ir its whole extent from the Arnon to Hermon, then (ver. 10) in ita
separate parts, to bring out in all its grandeur what the Lord had done for Israel. The notices
of the different names of Hermon (ver. 9), and of the bed of king Og (ver. 11), are also subser-
vient to this end.—Keil.


11. Giant’s Rephaim (Gen. xiv. 5; xv. 20) bedstead of fron for strength, durability, and a
prevention against insects which infest wood in warm climates, The ordinary cubit was eighteen
inches. Now a bed is always larger than the man who sleeps in it. Probably Og had his bed
made so large, partly for ostentation, partly ‘as a memorial of his superhuman greatness, on the
occasion of some expedition of his against the Ammonites ; and this bed may have been pre-
served in their capital as a proof of the greatness of their foe,”—Keil.


Vers. 12-20. A review of the conquered land. “ The land taken from the two kings was
given by Moses to the two tribes and a half for a possession. The southern portion from Aroer
in the Arnon valley (cf Num, xxxii. 34), and half Gilead (as far as the Jablak, ver. 10) with its
towns (which are enumerated, Josh. xiii. 15-20 and 24-28) to the Reubenites and Gadites ; and
the northern half of Gilead, with the whole of Bashan (te. all the region of Argob, ver. 4, and
Num. xxxii. 83.) to the half tribe of Manasseh.”— Keil.

15. Cf. Num. xxxii., xxxix., xl. ; 1 Chron. ii. 22.

16-17, Tho possession of Reuben and Gad is more exactly described according to its boundaries,

18-20. The two tribes and a half are reminded of the condition on which their possessions
were given to them (cf. Num. xxxii. 20-32), Meet for war, lit., sons of power or might; net
all men of war, or of age to war; but man specially powerful and fit for the enterprise.

22. He emphatic, if God Himself would fight, no need for feav.

25. Goodly mountain, the whole range of the mountains of Canaan, culminating in distant
Lebanon—goodly, when contrasted with the arid desert. Moses longed to enter the land;
naturally thought the Divine threatening was conditional and reversible, but his request
not granted.


26. Wroth. Addressing the people, Moses mentions the punishment of their leaders as a
most impressive warning to them (Speak. Com.). Their conduct was the occasion of his sin.
Suffice. lit., enough for thee, be satisfied with what I have given and done for thee.


27. Pisgah, the northern portion of the mountains of Abarim. Top of Pisgah, se, Mount
Nebo (chap. xxiv. 1).


28, Cf. chap. i. 88; iii. 215 xxx. 73 Num. xxvii. 2% A precise indication of the locality iz
which the address was given to Israel.


Divive EncovnaGeMent.— Verses 1, 2.


Before crossing Jordan, Israel turned and went northwards, “up the way to
Bashan.” Og, a mighty king, ruled in that country. God purposed to give the
Israelites all his lands, but they, perhaps, hesitated, or were afraid ; hence the
injunction, “ Fear him not.”

I. The need of encouragement. In ordinary conflicts we have need of heart
and courage. But special circumstances demand special help. 1. They were
surrounded with dangers. In a rocky country (Argob), well suited to harass
and entangle the invaders. With a powerful and warlike foe in front, well
posted and defended in impregnable fortresses, they might well fear. Man,
sinful man, is timid in spiritual conflict, and fear often leads to flight. 2. They
were about to engage with a giant race. Og, the redoubtable leader, was the
remnant of the Rephaim (Gen. xiv. 5, xv. 20). The people were numerous and
courageous, They “came out against us.” But giants are only pigmies before
God.


II. The ground of encouragement. There is always reason for doing what God
commands. 1. The Promise of God. “I will deliver him.” God's promise ia
eonnected with His p»~pose, and what He has purposed He will do for na ; Hence

P


OHAaP. It HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.
ET


fear not, trust and obey. 2. Their own past experience. “ Thou shalt do unte
him as thou did’st unto Sihon.” One conquest gives joy and help for another.
Every evil course forsaken, and every sinful habit sub ued by God’s grace, give
consciousness of God’s presence and qualify us for other contests. In our moral
warfare let us have courage to do right, to resist temptation, and to serve God.
'o be undetermined when the work is so urgent, and the command to do it so
authoritative, is disobedience and death.


Tar Conquest or Oa.— Verses 1-7.


“ The last of his race in this region, he was still the ruler of his country ; and
the whole Amorite inhabitants from Hermon to the Jabbok, and from the Jordan
to the desert, acknowledged the supremacy of this giant warrior. Og resolved
to defend his country. It was a splendid inheritance, and he would not resign
it without a struggle. Collecting his forces he marshalled them on the broad
plain before Edrei. We have no details of the battle; but doubtless the
Amorites and their leader fought ae for country and for life. It was in
vain ; a stronger than human arm warred for Israel Og’s army was defeated,
and he himself was slain.” —Porter. Learn—


I. The power of right over might. God had given the land to Israel, and
they were fighting for their possessions, Og was a mighty king. His people
confided in his strength and their own prowess. They believed in worldly
power, in physical force. In modern as well as in rude ages might is exalted
and trusted, But “ the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong.”
“The fortunes of war” change, and one incautious step may end in ruin, ‘Truth
and right, God and His cause are mightiest and will prevail.


II. The impotence of hostile preparations against God. Og was confident
in his attack. His cities were impregnable, and it was impossible for Israel to
overcome them or escape. But how impotent to defend themselves. The
sixty cities, walled to heaven and stoutly defended, were levelled to the dust.
The rout was most wonderful and complete. So will it be with all power and
hostility against the cause of God. “ Voltaire boasted that it took twelve men
to set up Christianity, but he would show that one man was sufficient to over-
throw it,” says a writer. he giant power of this world may assault. Paganism,
infidelity, and modern science may oppose, but God will defend His people and


advance His kingdom.


III. The mysterious providence of God on behalf of His people. “Humanly
speaking, Israel could never have conquered Og had he remained in the cities.
They could not have invested the country, or endured long sieges. It would
require no small amount of skill to entice these people from behind walls; and
it 1s more improbable that such a people should, of their own free will, risk a
battle in the open plain. ‘There must have been some almost miraculous
interference in favour of the Israelites. And from a casual notice in another
place (Josh. xxiv. 12), we find that God sent a special scourge among these
Repbaim in the shape of swarms of hornets, which we may suppose harassed
them so much in their stone houses that they were driven out of their towns,
and preferred the alternative of meeting the Israelites to perishing from the
stings of these creatures.” —(Cyril Graham.) Thus by strange providences God
helps His peovle.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. Onar. 1





Tur Conquest or Two Krnas.— Verses 8-12.


Sihon, king of Heshbon, and Og, king of Bashan, were two famous kings;
conspicuous for bravery, high, and distinguished from all others, such was the
dread they inspired that God gave Israel special encouragement in attacking
them. These giants were conquered. ‘“ We utterly destroyed them.”


I. Conquest of enemies strong and numerous. These giants were strong ia
themselves, and in their cities and armies. They were strong in their feeling
of security, and in their hope of victory. God never destroys His enemies in
their weakness, but in their might, that the glory may be to His name. “I
will break the chief (choice or highest) of their strength.” (Jer. xlix. 35.)


II. Conquest to give place to others. Nations have their time, pass away,
and give way to others, They are great one day and conquered the next. Their
glory departs, and their inheritance is bestowed upon successors. Power, fame,
and wealth are transferred from one to another ; populations are destroyed and
lands possessed to fulfil the purpose of God. Spiritually giant evils are over-
come, and “rulers of the darkness of this world” are dislodged to secure and
advance the interests of His people. In this we may learn—1. God’s hatred to
sin. 2. God's severity against evil doers, 8. God's kindness to His people.


III. Conquest most memorable. “This signal victory and its circumstances
evidently impressed the people deeply at this time, and its memory, as the
Psalms attest, lingered for ages after in the national mind.” (Speak Cem.)
Proverbs and inspired songs (¢f Num. xxi. 27-30; Ps. cxxxv. 11, 12, oxxxvi.
19-21) commemorated the triumphs of Israel.


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers, 1,2. Came out. 1. Thebold- prepared for the conquest of Og. The


ness and self-confidence of the enemy.
Men often infatuated by those very
measures which they think are most
wisely adopted. 2. The readiness of
God to help. (a) In timidity. “ Fear
not.” (6) In danger. “1 will de-
liver.” (c) In contest. “Thou shalt
do unto him as thou didst unto Sihon.”


Vers. 1-7. A famous victory. I.
Victory promised before the battle.
An evidence of God’s condescension
and an encouragement to Israel. II.
Victory gained by the strength of past
saperience, The conquest of Sibon


joy of victory spurs to further contest,
and begets courageous faith. III.
Victory most complete. 1. The cities
destroyed. 2. The people exterminated.
8. The cattle taken; and 4. The land
possessed and parcelled out to others,


Ver. 11. King Og’s bedstead. 1.
A monument of human folly. ‘Trying
to frighten by size. 2. A trophy of
conquest. It might be seized as a prize,
purchased from Tealing as acuriosity,
or Og, being wounded, might have fled
to ta and died on his own bed-
stea


Review or Conqverep Trrnirorims.— Verses 12-21,


After the conquest of Sihon and Og, the remaining countries on the east
side of Jordan were brought into subjection by the energy of Jair. ‘This chief,
according to the pastoral habits of his people, called the “ Bashan Pe


euAP. TI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.
mh ren tome = — se ign a mse m8 8 a ee


(Num. xxxii. 41) by a name after his own, Bashan-havoth-jair. These conquered
territories are reviewed in their extent and in their separate parts.


I. The method in which they were conquered. Whatever reason led the
Israelites northwards, it was a matter of necessity as well as policy to secure a
base of operations. 1. The lands were given by God, but acquired by human
effort. God promised the land, but they had to fight and possess it. God’s
purposes never interfere with our_use of means, and the only way to secure
possessions is to co-operate with Him. 2. The lands were finally subdued by
chosen men. Jair occupied the pastoral parts, and Nobah (¢f Num. xxxii. 42),
of the family of Machir, took Kenath, the capital, and gave his name to it.
Pioneers have been found in all departments. In all warfare and enterprise a
few heroic men have set examples, and stimulated others to follow them. They
live among us in the records of history, and in the deeds of their lives.
They bequeath to posterity a name to study, admire, and imitate.


II, The reasons for which they were held. Each tribe had its own conquests
secured to them, and the boundaries so arranged as to prevent dispute. But
wives and little ones were to be left in captured cities. Men of war were to go
forward and drive out all the enemies before them, and then “return and be
guiltless before the Lord” (¢f. Num. xxxii, 20-23. The land was held on con-
dition that they helped others. They fought for homes and inheritance for their
brethren. Our wealth, position, and influence, are not given for selfish purposes,
but to interest and help our fellow-men. We should be disinterested, for we can
never be exempted in any service. This is the secret of personal enjoyment and
successful work for Christ. ‘Then ye shall return unto the land of your posession
and enjoy it.” Josh. i. 13-15.


Josoua Nominatep.— Verses 21, 22.


This reminiscence recalls God’s goodness in the appointment of Joshua
(Num. xxvii. 12) which took place “ at that time,” that is, after the conquest of
the land on the east of Jordan. Joshua was honoured and qualified to succeed
Moses, in an eminent degree, through the special service of the high priest, and
the endowments of the Spirit of God. Yet the people needed encouragement
in such a leader as Joshua, “ Fear not,” etc. In these words, notice—


I, Past experience reminds of God’s goodness. ‘Thine eyes have seen,” etc.
The testimony of sense and experience should be convincing enough. God’s
goodness is not a mere declaration or display, but a matter of feeling and
enjoyment. ‘‘O ¢aste and see that the Lord is good.”


II. Past success a pledge of future help. ‘So shall the Lord do unto all the
kingdoms whither thou passest.” What God had done to Sihon and Og, He
could do unto all mighty men. His hand is never tired, never shortened, that
it cannot save. What He begins for His people He will finish, and the victories
of the past typify the future conquests of the gospel.


III. Present help should prompt to future courage. “The Lord your God
shall fight for you,” therefore “fear not them.” When God is with us, our
cause must be victorious. We reproach our leader, dishearten our comrades,
and weaken ourselves, when we follow in fear and trembling. “Be strong, and

uit yourselves like men,” that ye be not servants unto (your enemies).
1 Sam. iv. 9.)
“Our doubts are traitors 3
And make us lose the good we oft might wis,
ei By fearing to attempt it.”—Shakapeare,


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY., OHAP. Tit.


ee SSSR


Tos Prayer or Mosrs.— Verses 23~28,


Moses knew that he would not be permitted to enter Canaan, yet he desired
to cross the Jordan and see the Hae His request was not granted. In the
answer we “ behold the goodness and severity of God ”’—severity in the punish-
ment of his sin and goodness in its mitigation.


I. The request of Moses. The entreatyismost fervent and affecting, containing
an appeal to God’s greatness and power by which he was distinguished from
heathen deities and known to his people. 1. To enjoy further manifestations of
Divine goodness. “Thou hast begun to show.” The past was only a beginning,
a foretaste. ‘I'he more we see of Divine power and taste of Divine love, tiie more
we desire tosee. 2. Zoenter theland. “ Let me go over and see the good land.”
For this object had he lived, and when about to be realised he was disappointed.
How often do we come near to success and never gain it! The hopes of a life-
time may be frustrated when apparently about to be realised. 3. Lo finish his
work. It was natural for Moses to wish to retain the leadership to the end
instead of resigning it into other hands, He had brought the people out of
Egypt, why not lead them into Canaan and settle them in it? It is possible
through sin to leave our work undone, or be made to resign it to others. But we
must seek the honour of God, not our own, and be ready to encourage others
whom God puts in our place.


II. The answer of God to this request. The prayer of Moses was not
answered, God, in His infinite wisdom, refused, and besought him to urge the
request no further. It was good for Israel, and good for Moses himself to be
denied. ‘ God,” says Cecil, “ denies a Christian nothing, but with a design to
give him something better.” 1. God demands submission to His will. “ Let it
suffice thee.” Be satisfied with past favours and present arrangements, and
submit. Grace given, will be grace all sufficient. When we know God’s will,
we must acquiesce at once without murmuring and disputing. “I besought the
. Lord thrice; and He said unto me, my grace is sufficient for thee.” 2. God
refused entrance, but permits him to see the land, “Lift up thine eyes.”
This view has been memorable in history, impressed our theology, and become
a proverb in Christian life. Perhaps Moses was specially prepared for this
vision, for “ his eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated.” Prayer is not
always unsuccessful. God may refuse one thing and bestow another. 3. God
assures him that his work shall be finished by the appointment of a successor.
“Charge Joshua, for he shall go over before this people.” Workmen may be
taken away, but the work shall go on. Moses may bring out of Egypt—Joshua
must lead into Canaan. God finds the men; we are to train and charge them,
to finish what we begin. Earnest workers, youthful vigour, shall never be
wanting in the Christian Church. Hence, let us take encouragement, and fear
to sin, lest we die before our special work is done. If Moses was excluded from
Uanaan, how can the sinner enter heaven? “ ‘hey angered him also at the
vaters of strife, so that it went ill with Moses for their sakes,”


Wisuina to Go oven JorDAN.— Verse 25.


This desire seemed improper. For God had expressly said unto Moses and
Aaron, “ Ye shall not bring this congregation into the land.” Did Moses, then,
through infirmity, think that God was changeable? No, but he thought
whether the threatening was absolute, especially as it was not Bey oath,


OmAP. IL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





as the exclusion of the people was. For many of God’s denunciations, in the
sentence against Nineveh, for instance, have a condition implied, though not
expressed, #.¢., they will be executed wnless repentance intervene ; upon this
principle it was possible for Moses to hope for retraction of the interdict. But
the desire was a natural one. Natural to wish to enter Canaan as an object of
curiosity, of which he had heard so much ; still more as an object of hope, which
had been promised so long with every enhancement. This animated the people
to leave Egypt, and encouraged them in the desert. his was the end, the
recompense of their toils for forty years, and now they had nearly reached it.
How painful to miss the prize when the hand was seizing it—to have the cup
dashed even from the lip! Yet the desire was refused. God sometimes refuses
the desires of His servants, even the most eminent. He does this in two ways.
Sometimes He does it in dove. What is desired might prove dangerous and in-
jurious. We should think badly of a father who gave a stone for bread, or a
scorpion for a fish. But if the son were to ask for a scorpion instead of
a fish, or cry for a sharp instrument, then would he not hate his child
unless he rejected his wish? In many cases must a wise and good parent
distinguish between wishes and wants! A child may wish for liberty, and want
restraint; for a holiday, and want schooling; for dainties, and want medicine,
Here the parent must act, not according to the wish, but the welfare of the
child. How much better for the Jews had God turned a deaf ear to their im-
portunity ? Who knows what is good for a man in this life? No one but God
—the good God. He sometimes refuses in anger. Wrath is incompatible with
love ; but anger is not: anger may even flow from it. ‘I'hough Christians can-
net be condemned, they may be chastened : and the law of the house is, that if
the children obey not, He will visit with the rod. Hence those saved eternally
may fall under present rebuke, and be refused many things on which they set
their heart. By such conduct Providence teaches submission to His people, and
the evil of sin to others. Yet His desire was partially indulged. he com-
mand to get on the top of Pisgah was not to tantalize him, but to be a mitiga-
tion of the severe sentence. ‘I'he preservation of his sight fitted him for the
gaze—the prospect showed him how worthy the country was of all that had been
said about it; and would give him high views of the truth and goodness of God
in His covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. With this also was the in-
fluence of Divine grace which satisfied him and made him content with his
condition, While his mind also raised to things above, in type and emblem, to
a better country, into which he was ‘immediately to enter—and there would be
no want of Canaan. ‘Thus in Judgment God remembers mercy, and though he
cause grief, yet will he have compassion. ‘Like as a father pitieth his
children,” etc. (Condensed from Jay.)


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS,


Vers. 18-20. Your brethren. Armed
before them to help them in warfare,
1. One party should not retire from
active service or conflict until the
rights of others are gained. 2. The
welfare of one part of the community
should be the concern of all. 38. There
should be no schism nor separation in
the body. This might easily have
taken place with a geographical division
so complete,

%6


Vers, 21 and 28, Appointment of
Joshua. 1. God’s care for His people,
2. God’s provision made for them—
(a) In selecting suitable persons. (6)
Securing them sympathy and co-
operation, (c) In promising all need-
ful help.


Ver. 28. 1. The duties of Joshua
(a) to lead into Canaan, “go over,”
etc.; (b) divide the land and settle


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


OHAP, IT,





the tribes. ‘He shall cause them to
inherit the land.” 2. The require-
ments of Joshua—(a) charge, (6) en-
courage, and (c) strengthen him.


Ver. 25. Good land. Canaan pro-


mised—fruitful—the chosen home of
God’s people and a type of heaven.
“ All o’er those wide extended plains
Shines one eternal day ;
There God, the Sun, for ever reins,
And scatters night away.”—Stennett,


ILLUSTRATIONS TO OHAPTER III.


Vers. 1-8. Og came out. Man pro-
poses but God disposes. How many
plans are rendered abortive by death.
On the tomb of Mohammed II is the
inscription, “I proposed to myself the
conquest of Rhodes and proud Italy.”
Og thought to destroy
different the result!


Ver. 4-10. These cities. The con-
quest of Bashan, began under the
leadership of Moses in person, was
completed by Jair, one of the most
distinguished chiefs of the tribe of Man-
asseh. In narrating his achievements,
the sacred historian brings out another
remarkable fact connected with this
kingdom of Bashan. In Argob, one
of its little provinces, Jair took no less
than sixty great cities, “fenced with
high walls, gates and bars; besides
unwalled towns a great many.” Such
a statement seems all but incredible.
It would not stand the arithmetic of
Bishop Colenso for a moment. Often,
when reading the passage, I used to
think that some strange statistical
mystery hung over it; for how could
@ province measuring not more than
thirty miles by twenty support such a
number of fortified cities, especially
when the greater part of it was a
wilderness of rocks? But mysterious,
incredible as this seemed, on the spot
with my own eyes, £ have seen that it
1s literally true. The cities are there
to this day. Some of them retain the
ancient names recorded in the Bible.
Porter’s Giant Cities of Bashan.


Ver. 11. Og. King of the district
which under the name of Bashan,
extended from the Jabbok up to the
base of Hermon, There is no direct
Botice 48 in the case of Sihon, of his


ael. How


having invaded the country, and this
Omission, combined with the mention
of his gigantic stature, warrants the
conjecture that he was one of the
leaders of the aboriginal race, for
which Bashan had always been re-
nowned.—Stanley.


Ver. 18-20. Patriotism. Rest unto
your brethren. He who loathes war
and will do everything in his power to
avert it, but who will in the last
extremity, encounter its perils, from love
of country and of home—who is willing
to sacrifice himself and all that is deat
to him in life, to promote the well-
being of his fellow-man, will everzeceive
a worthy homage,—A bbott.


Ver. 21-28. Never in the history of
the chosen people, could there have been
such a blank as that when they became
conscious that “‘ Moses, the servant of
the Lord was dead.” He who had been
their leader, their law-giver, their
oracle, as far back as their memory
could reach, was taken from them at
the very moment when they seemed
most to need him. It was to fill up
this blank that Joshua was called. ‘I'he
narrative labours to impress upon us
the sense that the continuity of the
nation and of its high purpose was not
broken by the change of person and
situation. ‘As I was with Moses, so
will I be with thee” (Josh. i. 5).
There was indeed, as yet, no hereditary
or fixed succession. But the germ of
that succession is better represented
by the very contrast between Moses
and Joshua than in any other passage
in the sacred history.—Stanley.


Ver. 25. Let me go over. We wish
to live; who can biame us? Lite iw
87


OHAP. III,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





sweet ; but if our Maker have ordained
that nothing but death can render us
glorious, what madness is it to stick
at the condition! Oh, our gross infi-
delity, if we do not believe that Great


Arbitrer of the world infinitely wise,
to know what is best for us; infinitely
merciful, to will what He knows best ;
infinitely powerful, to do what He will!
—Bp. Hall,





CHAPTER IV.


,Crrricat Norgs.—From the mention of what God had done for Israel, Moses passes to the
*bedience of the law. They were under deep obligation to keep it, and in doing so, consisted


sir wisdom, greatness, and destiny.


1, Statutes—rules concerning religion and Divine worship. Judgments—civil enactments,
public and private. The two denote the whole law in its leading features (Lev. xix, 37).
2. This law must not be altered ; but kept as God's unchangeable word.


Vers, 8,4. The results of obedience or disobedience had just been seen at Baal-Peor (Num.
xxv., 3, 93 idolators were destroyed, faithful men remained alive. Followed—a common
expression for religious walk and life, ¢f, Jer. viii. 2; ix.14. Cleave—hold fast to one; intimate


communion and attachment.


Vers. 5,6. Observance would be their life, enjoyment, and influence upon other nations,
Their wisdom would attract as in the case of the Queen of Sheba, the enquiring earnest heathens,


Vers, 7,8. This attractive force consisted in


possessing superior privileges and serving God,


“ True right has its roots in God, and with the obscuration of the knowledge of God, law, and


right, with their divinely established foundations, are also shaken and obscured.”


26-32).—Keil,


9. Heed. Forget not what has been seen.
injury (Prov. xiii. 8; xix. 16).


of. Rom. i,


Keep thy soul, ¢.¢., defend thy life from danger or


10. The day, the delivery of the law, an era most memorable and never to be forgotten. The


leading facts are given.


11, Burned unto the midst, lit. “to the heart of heaven, 4¢., quite into the sky, @ rhetorical
description of the awful majesty of the pillar of fire, in which the glory of the Lord appeared


upon Sinai” (Keil),


Moses seeks to renew the impressions then produced.


12, Voice, utterance of words, but no shape or form was seen.
15, Since no figure of God was seen, beware of making one and acting corruptly,


16. Graven, carved or sculptured in wood, metal, or stone. Similitude, form, idol (2 Chron,
xxxiii, 7,15), Likeness, pattern, model (Ex. xxv. 9, 40).


17, 18, Beast. A warning against animal worship of Egypt, of which they had seen so much.


19. Worship of heavenly bodies was not to beguile them. Driven, constrained or urged (cf.
xiii. 18). Divided, not allotted the heathen, or permitted them to worship ; but “whose light
God has distributed to the nations for their use and benefit, and, which therefore, being creatures
winistering to man’s conscience, must not be worshipped as man’s lords.” —-Speak. Com.

20, Iron furnace, an image of the bondage and intense affliction in Egypt.


Vers, 21-24. Moses again refers to his exclusion from Canaan, and renews the warning not


to forget the Covenant, or make graven images.


God is a jealous God, and consuming fire,


applied with special reference to manifestations in His glory (Ex. xxiv. 17).


Vers. 25-28, Warnings against idolatry enforced by distinct predictions of punishment,
Future generations who had not known what they knew would utterly perish. Prolong, (26),


to have long life;


here to occupy the land long severed from God they would lose their


inheritance, They would be scattered, become few in number compared with those around
them (27), and be compelled to serve idols which could neither see nor smell (28).


29. Seek. Israel would then be sensible of sin, would seek and find God (Luke xv. 17).
80. These threatenings and sufferings. Latter, lit. at the end of the days; the end of


saptivity, or far distant future,


81, Not forsake, /it., not withdraw his hand (Jos, x. 6) or let loose; nor cast off (Rom. xi. 1)
88


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. CHAP. IV,





Vers. 82-40, Tw secure obedience, Moses again reminds them of their choice, instruction,
deliverance, and guidance,


82, For a reason given, because merciful, Jehovah delivered them, Days past, from earliest
times, from the revords of all places we read not of such an event. :


$4, A reference to miracles of deliverance. Assayed, attempted. Temptations, testings,
trials, to Pharaoh especially. Signs and wonders, plagues of Eyypt (Exod. vii. 3), extraordinary
events with a moral design. War, conflict at Red Sea (Exod. xiv. 14; xv. 3.) Terrors, effects
on Egyptians, cf. 1's. cv. 27, 88 ; evi. 21.

36. Supernatural revelations and method in which they were given emphasized, Instruct,
ee or, De a bullock (Jer. xxxi. 18), then to discipline ; generally to chastise, correct, instruct

rov. ix. 7).


Vers. 37, All this from love to their fathers. Seed. Ab) aham’s sight, lit., by his face, his
presence with them. ‘ My presence (/it., my face) shall go with thee ” Exod. xxxiii. 14),


Vers. 41-43, Many regard these verses as an interpolation. ‘“ There is, however, no reason
to depart from the view suggested alike by their contents anil context, The vv. preceding are
clearly the conclusion, as those succeeding are the exordium, uf a distinct and complete disc urse.
These vy. then are inserted between the two simply for the reason to which they themselves
call attention (“ Tien Moses severed three cities, etc.”), ae. the fact narrated took place
historically after Moses spoke the one discourse and before he delivered the other. In tius
severing the three cities of refuge, Moses carried out a previous command of God (Num. xxxv.
14), and so followed up his exhortations to obedience, by setting a punctual example of it as far
as opportunity was ziven him.” (Speak. Com.)

44, This the law, a preface to the following rehearsal and sxplanations of the law—“ including
in fact the central part and substance of the beok, which now follows in twenty-two chapters "—
with a notice of time and place.


Hearina anp OsserRvine THE Law.— Verses 1-4


Moses now proceeds to urge practical obedience. The events in their recent
history were motives and encouragements to keep the law. These events were
related to quickea attention, remind them of their duty, and the benetits of
performing it. ‘ Now therefore hearken,” ete.


I. The law in its nature. “The statutes and judgments” represent the law
in its leading features. 1. Jé¢ is Divine in tts authority. “The commandments
of the Lord your God which I command you.” The voice of God is heard in the
words, A revelation of God’s will is needful. Man may discover natural laws
and reach perfection in science, but God alone can reveal moral duty and teach
us to perform it. “ Which I teach you.” 2. /¢ is unchangeable in tts demands.
It is Jaw, that which is laid down as a permanent rule of life. Human systems
are set up and pulled down, altered and violated, but God’s commandments
remain the same for all ages and for all nations, firm as the everlasting hills,
right as the mind of God, and perfect in thei) requirements. “ Ye shall not add
unto, nor diminish.” 3. J¢ is adapted to man’s moral condition, In perplexity
and restlessness these statutes bind in their authority and purpose. ‘l'hese
judgments teach what is right—what is due to God and our fellow-men. In all
circumstauces, in all relationships, we have « Divine unerring rule of life,


II. The law in its design. ‘“Hearken, O Israel, unto the statutes for to do
them, that ye may live.” 1. Zo give lif. “That ye may live.” Life and
prosperity depended upon their obedience. Not merely natural life in its
measure and enjoyment (chap. v. 33; vi. 2), but spiritual life, that higher life
“by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord.” When our
conduct accords with the law of God, we find “the highest good, on the largest
scale, for the longest period.” But life spiritual and eternal are not secured by
the law which we have broken. Jesus Christ only gives life and salvation,
3. To confirm the inhevitance. Obedience was the condition of possessing and
continually enjoying the inheritance. Not in numbers and valour, We in the


OHAP, IV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY,





wisdem of their priests nor the wealth of their princes, but in observing the law
of God did their security and prosperity consist. ‘“ All the commandments
which | command thee this day shall ye observe to do, that ye may live and
ae eh and go in and possess the land which the Lord sware unto yout
fathers,”


III, The law in its observance. To give life and secure their possessions the
law must be observed in its completeness. ‘Ye shall not add unto the word,
neither shall ye diminish ought.” We add by superstition and tradition, we
diminish by ritual and creed at our peril. “Add thou not unto his words, lest
he reprove thee and thou be found a liar.” God’s law is perfect, and must be
It in its entirety, ‘Nothing can be put to it, nor anything taken from it”
(Ecc, iii. 14), :

IV. The law enforced by examples. In their history they had experience of
the danger of disobedience and the blessings of obedience. Baal-peor witnessed
to the truth and authority of the law and ought to be a warning agrinst apostasy.
1. Jdolators were destroyed. ‘“ All the men who followed Baal-peor, the Lord
thy God hath destroyed” (¢f Numb, xxv. 3-9). 2. Haithful followers were
preserved alive. ‘“ Ye that did cleave unto the Lord your God are alive, every
one of you this day.” ‘Thus Divine law is attested by human experience and
history. “‘ Your eyes have seen” these things. ‘Take warning and do not
provoke God to anger.


NationaL PRE-EMINENCE.— Verses 5-8,


Israel’s relation to God and possession of his laws exalted them above other
nations. Loyalty to God would not only give them life, but reputation for wis-
dom and understanding. Only through God’s teaching and blessing had they
become a great nation. If they lost a sense of duty and dependence upon Him
they would lose their pre-eminence. ‘“ Keep, therefore, and do them.” We
learn how national pre-eminence is attained—


i, A nation is pre-eminent by enlightening the people through the word of
God. Unto Israel were committed “the oracles of God” and this gave them
advantage (Rom. iii. 1, 2). Their national glory and attraction rested on
obedience to the “statutes and judgments” which they possessed. If they medi-
tated upon these, practised and taught these, they would be wise, retain their
greatness, and exercise moral influence upon surrounding nations. The possession
of the Bible and the means of grace ; the erection of schools and religious in-
stitutions, will not make a nation great. Just laws, true science, and noble
Institutions to speed them are a great responsibility and privilege. But in
reverence for God and His word, in the earnest endeavour to practice its com-
mands, in domestic, social, and political life will be our eminence and prosperity.
“ For this is your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the nations,”


: II. A nation is pre-eminent by valuing and improving its religious privileges,

What nation so great, who hath God so nigh unto them” (ver. 7). Moses
reminds them of their privileges. But present greatness must not lead them to
forget God and their duty. Future prosperity depends upon right use of what
they now enjoy. God's nearness should prompt them to worship and obedience,
God’s righteous judgments should be the ground of their stability and the secret
of success. If England disregards the Sabbath, neglects her duty and improves
not her religious advantages, no science or legislation can preserve her superiority.
Her glory will decay, and it may be more tolerable for rude nations, for Sodom
and ec at the day of judgment than for her.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. CHAP. IV.





III. A nation is pre-eminent by cherishing a spirit of obedience to God,
from whom religious privileges come. We must not trust to the splendour of
our fleet and the valour of our soldiers, nor to the extent of our commerce and
the greatness of our empire. Infidelity denies God, and false science ignores
Him, but no nation can succeed without God. Robespierre declared “the
world cannot be worked without God; and rather than try to work it without
God we had better invent a god.” God comes near us to be trusted and loved—
reveals His spirituality and power to satisfy our need and restrain idolatry, and
exalts a nation to dignity and power, that He may be obeyed and honoured.
“ Righteousness exalteth a nation; but sin is a reproach to any people.”


. HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 1,2. The dignity of moral law.
1. Divine in its origin, “ which I teach
you.” 2. Complete in its nature, “ not
add to, nor diminish from.” 3. Practical
in its design, nothing speculative or
temporary, “for todo them.” “There
is no greater evidence that Israel had
@ communication from heaven than
this fact—that their morality is so
pure, their apprehension of God so
sublime, their definition of His nature
so august, their whole intercourse with
heaven so pure, so holy, so different
from anything before or around them,
that it seems scarcely possible to escape
the conclusion that the Greeks were
taught by themselves, that the Jews
were the pupils of God.” —Cumming.


Ver. 2. Divine guardianship of the
Bible. God defends it from alteration
accurding to the tastes and systems of
men. lLearn—1. ‘The need of preser-
ving its purity and integrity. 2. The
danger of tampering with it. “If any
man shall add unto these things, God
shall add unto him the plagues that are
written in this book; and if any man
sball take away from the words of the
book of this prophecy, God shall take
away his part out of the book of life.”


Ver. 8. Baal-peor. The facts of
history according with human ex-
perience in vindicating God's law.
“ Your eyes have seen what the Lord
did.” Wearn—1. The anger of God
in its cause, manifestations, and results.
2. The mercy of God an encouragement
to His people. ‘The allusion to that
recent and appalling judgment was


ful dis-


seasopably made as a power:


suasive against idolatry; and the fact
mentioned was calculated to make a
deep impression on the people who
knew and felt the truth of it.”


Ver. 4. Cleave unto Jehovah. 1.
Personal attachment. “ Ruth clave
(adhered to, to be close behind),
Ruth i, 14. 2. Constant fellowship,
8. Faithful service.


Vers. 5, 8. The Bible the wisdom of a
nation. Consider—I. That the Bible
brings greatness to a nation; because—
1. When received and obeyed, it brings
God’s blessing with it. 2. It elevates
the national character. II. That it is
the duty of all to have a personal
acquaintance with the Scriptures, and
to instruct the young in them.—
Rev. S. Hayman, B.A.


Vers. 7, 8. Here he represents their
privileges and their duty in such signi-
ficant and comprehensive terms as were
peculiarly calculated to arrest their
attention and engage their interest.
he former—their national advantages
—are described, and they are two-
fold :—1. God’s readiness to hear and
aid them at all times; and 2.° The
excellence of that religion in which
they were instructed, set forth in the
“ statutes and judgments so righteous”
which the law of Moses contained.
Their duty corresponding to these
pre-eminent advantages as a people
was also twofold:—1. ‘I'heir own faith-
ful obedience to that law, and 2. ‘Their
obligation to imbue the minds of the
young and rising generation with
similar sentiments of reverence and
respect for spdapiomeie td in loco,


CHAP. IV. HOMILETIC COUMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





ForcErruLyess or Gop’s Law.— Verses 9-14


God’s judgments would benefit Israel only when remembered and reverently
obeyed. ‘To aid their obedience they must beware of forgetting the method and
the circumstances in which the law was received. ‘They must give personal heed
to it and teach it to their children, that generations to come might fear the Lord.


I. The law of God is given to impress-the mind and lead to obedience. ‘‘ Ha
commanded you tc perform” (ver. 13). God is not indifferent, and we should
not be, to the observance of his law. It demands attention, reverence and love.
It should be supreme in our thoughts and life. Obedience should not be acci-
dental, superficial work, but an intelligent, constant, direction of the heart and
life. If the heart be gained, the whole man is governed—the affections, desires,
and powers given up—but if God is forgotten, departs from the heart, he will
soon be forsaken and disobeyed. ‘“ My son, forget not the law; but let thine
heart keep my commandments.”


II, There is a tendency in man to forget and disobey thislaw. We should
oot blame infirmity of memory—a special help is provided for that (John xiv. 26)—
ut wilful forgetfulness of heart. “ The greatest difficulty in conversion is to
rin the heart to God, and after conversion to keep it with Him,” says Flavel.
‘ What is there that will not entice and allure so fickle a thing as the heart
from God?” asks Mede. 1. Zo forget, notwithstanding the evidence of the
senses. ‘Thine eyes have seen” (ver. 9). No length of time should efface
such events from the memory. 2. 70 forget in the immediate presence of God.
‘Thou stoodest before the Lord thy (tod in Horeb” (ver. 10). ‘This presence
should check from sin, and prompt to obedience. “ That his fear may be before
your faces, that ye sin not” (Ex. xx. 20). 38. Zo forget amid most terrible
displays of God's majesty. 1. Fire. “The mountain burned with fire.”
2. Darkness. ‘ Darkness, clouds, and thick darkness.” 3. J4vine voice.
“The Lord spake unto you, ye heard the voice,” ver. 12 (ef. Ex. xix. 16-18;
xx. 18, 22). Such manifestations were intended to impress and benefit the
people. ‘This special favour, this awful display, should help them ever to
remember and obey.


III. Ihe means of helping memory and prompting obedience given. God
gives direction, and provides against the dangers of His people. 1. Personal
attention. “Take heed to thyself, and keep thy soul diligently” (ver. 9).
Religion requires caution, circumspection (Ep. v. 15), and personal care. ‘Those
cannot walk safely who walk carelessly. Such are the assaults without and the
evils within, that we have to take care lest personal obedience should be
forgotten. “Keep thy heart with all diligence, Uit., above ail keeping
(Prov. iv. 23). 2. Teaching the children. “That they may teach their
children” (ver. 10). Parents are depositors of the knowledge and law of God,
and must teach and transmit them to their sous, The truth of God must
mouli the hearts of the rising generations, and be handed down to future ages,
“That the generation to come might know thei, even the children which
should be born ; who should arise and declare them to their children, that they
might set their hope in God, and not forget the works of God, but keep His
commandments.”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. CHAP, IV.





THe Danarns or Ipotatry.— Verses 15-19.


Israel were to take heed, and neither to forget the covenant of God, nor offend
Him by image worship. He had not been manifested to them in any form or
representation. They were therefore to worship Him without any graven image
or likeness, in a method corresponding to His spiritual nature.


I. Idolatry in its forms. Man has always felt his separation from, and
craved for friendship with God. Failing to discover Him, human nature in its
distress has made a desperate effort to realise God in gold and silver, in forms
and ideas. But God has revealed Himself to man in His word and in His Son.
Yet, strange to say, such is the perversity of our hearts, that we carve our own
images, set up our own idols and cry, “'These be thy gods,” 'I'hree forms of idolatry
are given, 1. Man worship. “The likeness of male or female.” Ancestors and
national leaders have been deified. Men have practised, and do now practice hero-
worship, and set up their household gods (Penates). All superstitious reverence for
any of our race is here forbidden. Worship God and not man. 2. Animal worship.
This was common in Egypt. Birds, like the ibis and hawk; four-/ooted beasts,
like the ox, dog, and cat ; and creeping things, like the serpent, crocodile, and
beetle (cf Rom. i. 23), were prevalent forms of idolatry. 3. Nature worship.
The light of sun and moon was distributed to the nations for their benetit,
ministered to their convenience, and were therefore not to be reverenced. The
heavenly bodies were regarded as symbols of deities, and Israel was in danger of
being seduced by their worship. “Ina word,” says Dean Goulborn, “ idolatry
(or the surrounding the creature with the attributes of the Creator) is the original
fundamental sin of man—the point of departure from which man started ou the
downward course, until he reached the lowest depths of wickedness’-—Who
changed (exchanged) the truth of (¢.6., concerning) God into a lie (an idol, or
falsehood) and worshipped (adored) and served (in rites and ceremonies) the
creature (in various forms) more than (often along with, and without) the Creator,
who is blessed for ever.” Rom, i. 25.


II. Idolatry in its consequences. Men ever possessed a knowledge of the
existence and attributes of God, but the affections have prevented the mind from
discerning and preserving the truth taught by nature and “manifest in them ”
(Rom. i. 20). God was not recognised and glorified. Darkness and idolatry
followed the rejection of light, and terrible were the consequences. 1. Jdolairy
degrades the Divine nature. God is invisible, and cannot be represented by
images ; spiritual, and should not be materialised ; omnipresent, and must not
be localised. An infinite spiritual and Divine nature can never become finite,
material and human. ‘To make any image of God is to lower and degrade
Him. “ We ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver,
or stone, graven by art and man’s device (sculptured by art and ingenuity of
man), Acts xvii. 29. 2. ldolatry corrupts human nature. “ Lest ye corrupt
yourselves” (ver. 16). We are children of God, and our filial relation protests
against idolatry. What is spiritual in us can never be pencilled or carved.
Spirituality is lost by representing it in sense ; and since man is corrupt, cannot
make a god superior to himself, and ever becomes like the object he worships ;
how foolish, how degrading is idolatry! ‘‘'They that make them are like unto
them ; so is everyone that trusteth in them” (Psa. cxv. 8). 3. Idolatry perils
human life. This truth is confirmed in the life of Moses (ver. 21), the history
of Israel and heathen nations. God is the source of natural life, but if forsaken,
this life is cut off from its source and centre and shortened by vice. oe


GHAP. IV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





life can never be sustained in power and beauty away from God. “ Take ye,
therefore, good heed unto yourselves” (ver. 15).
“ Such dupes are men ts custom, and so prone

To rev’rence what is ancient, and can plead

A course of long observance for its use,

That even servitude, the worst of ills,

Because deliver’d down from sire to son,

Is kept and guarded as a sacred thing.” —Cowper.


Tur Iron Furnace.— Verse 20.


A farnace for smelting iron was round in shape, often thirty feet deep, re
quiring heat most intense. In this figure we have a tpye of—


I. Intense Affliction. Israel in Egypt were grievously afflicted, had to serve
in bondage and under cruel taskmasters. “ ‘They made their lives bitter,”
and all “their service, wherein they made them serve, was with vigour”
(Ex. i. 11-14). God often sends affliction deep and most severe. Deliverance is
like rescue from the fire. “I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, from
the iron furnace” (Jer. xi. 4).


{I. Benevolent Design. This furnace is kindled and tempered for some
merciful purpose. 1. /eal discipline. “What need,” asks Philip Henry,
“have the people of God of afflictions? The same that our bodies have of
physic ; that trees have of pruning; that gold and silver have of the furnace.”
God thus purifies our character and fits us for his service. 9. Preparation Jor
usefulness. “To be unto Him a people of inheritance.” A people holy,
honcurable, and useful. ‘Suppose, Christian, the furnace to be seven times
hotter, it is but to make you seven times better; fiery trials make golden
Christians.” —Dyer.

Eminent usefulness on earth, and heaven with its glory, are gained through
chastened sufferings. Richard Boyle, earl of Cork, rose from the hemblest
station to the highest rank in life, After passing through strange and most
trying circumstances he adopted as his motto, and had engraved upon his tomb
the words, “ God’s providence is my inheritance.” ‘ We went through fire and
through water (greatest trials) ; but thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place
(lit., well-watered place ; abundance of blessings)” (Ps, lxvi. 12).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 15. Take heed. ‘These many
cautions note our proneness to this
evil above others. This appeareth
somewhat in children so delighted
with pictures, and in that tdolomania
of these Jews, of the eastern churches,
and of the synagogue of Rome.—
Trapp.


Ver. 19. Sun, moon, and stars. Note

1. The use and design in the heavenly

bodies, given for the benefit of all

mankind (Gen. i. 14-18; Psa. civ. 19).

Hence cannot be appropriated to one

people, and absurd to worship as God's
94


what are intended to be servants to
man, 2, I'he proneness of man to
put the creature in the place of the
Creator. ‘‘ Lest thou shouldest be
driven,” ¢.e., drawn or constrained 5
by sense, “ when thou seest the sun ;’
by customs of other nations, and by
natural tendency. Objects of natura
should be viewed with admiration,
gratitude, and love, Nature should
lead up to Nature’s God. But what
proneness in man to abuse these gifts ;
to ignore God and degrade ourselves |}


‘The landscape has His praise, but not its
author,”





. folly and shameless ingratitude.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY
eee ee ee ee A el I


Ver. 20. A people of inheritance.
This special relationship is—1. A pro-
test against idolatry. 2. An argument
for gratitude and obedience. To
abandon God’s worship for gross and
Aebasing idolatry would be greatest
3. A
reason for purity and spirituality of
worship. People of inheritance. 1.
Purchased or acquired by God. Israel
is viewed as God’s own by a long series
of mighty deeds performed for their de-
liverance. Hence said to be “redeemed”


(Ex. vi. 6) or “ purchased)” (Ex. xv. 16).
2. Owned by God. A possession which
God has gained specially for Himseif.
3. Should therefore be devoted to God
alone. “ Now therefore, if ye will obey
my voice indeed, and keep my covenant,
then ye shall be a peculiar treasure
(segullah—valuable property—1 Chr.
xxix. 3; Ecc. ii. 8) unto me above all
people; for all the earth is mine,”
Ex. xix. 5; (qf Mal. iii 17; 1 Pet.
ii. 9).


Wakninas in PersonaL History.— Verses 21, 22.


Deliverance from Egypt reminds Moses that God did not permit him to enter
Canaan. His punishment ought to be a warning to them. “The Lord was
angry with me for your sakes.” Learn—


I. Impressive events occur in Personal History. Every life is filled with
such events. Our sins, overruled by God’s sovereign mercy or displeasure,
deprive us of gaining honours and possessions. ‘Times and seasons are fixed,
made impressive by special displays from God. With sorrow we “remember the
ah of darkness,” and looking back exclaim in submission “I must die in this.

nd.”


II, These impressive events in Personal History a warning to others. Our
personal sufferings are not only profitable to ourelves but may be to others, “I
have sinned and have been punished” says Moses “ for your sake.” ‘“ You are
privileged to enter Canaan and I am not. Beware, therefore, and provoke not
God as I did through unbelief,” “Take heed unto yourselves, lest ye forget
the covenant,”


Waarninas against Ipotatry.— Verses 23, 24


The people are warned anew against forsaking God, who is jealous for his
glory, and making and worshipping graven images, “ Take heed,” etc.—


I. Idolatry shows base ingratitude to God. God had done wonderful things
for Israel. ‘They had resolved not to forget Him, yet how ungrateful and prone
to go astray! No miraculous displays without can eradicate evils within, How
great has God’s goodness been to us, yet how thoughtless and ungrateful have
we been! Forgetful of His presence, precepts, and providence! ‘‘ How unsuit-
able is it for us who live only by kindness (Tit. iii. 4-7) to be unthankful,” says
“dwards,


II. Idolatry violates God’s commands. “Which the Lord thy God hath
forbidden thee.” God’s law demands our love, dethrones our lusts, and requires
constant and unswerving obedience. ‘T'o forget is to ignore God, and to live as
if He did not exist. Thus men refuse submission, throw off allegiance to God,
and choose idols, ‘“ How oft did they rebel against Him.”


TIL. Idolatry rouses God’s anger. “The Lord thy God is a onan


owaP, Iv, HOMIL“LTIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





fire,” ete. Anger is not the natural feeling of God towards man. ‘God is
love.” What then causes the wrath of God? It is God’s righteous opposition
to sin. He is jealous for His honour, and will not spare those guilty of idolatry.
“For the wrath of God is revealed (in the moral government of the world) from
heaven against all ungodliness (sin against God), and unrighteousness (sin against
man) of men, who hold (keep down) the truth in unrighteousness ” (Rom. i. 18)


PunisHMENTS oF Apostacy.— Verses 25-28,


Warnings against idolatry are enforced by predicted punishments upon future
generations who should turn from Jehovah and corrupt themselves by idolatry.
Canaan was granted on condition of constant obedience. If they forsook God
their title to the land would be forfeited. 'They would be diminished in number,
dispersed among the heathen and compelled to serve dumb idols, so that their
choice would become their punishment,


I. Evils would be entailed upon fature generations, Nature, like a Nemesis,
follows transgressors afar. The sources of life cannot be poisoned without the
stream being affected. ‘Children’s children” might remain long in the land,
but they would inherit the tendencies and suffer for the sins of their progenitors.
The family of Saul suffered for his great malice against David. Achan perished
not alone in his iniquity (Josh. xxii. 20). Thus God visits “ the iniquity of the
fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation.”


II. National life would be destroyed. Severed from God they would lose
their inheritance, and cease to be a chosen people. 1. They would be reduced
in number. “Ye shall be left few in number.” 2. They would be scattered
among other nations. ‘The Lord shall scatter you among the nations ”—as in the
captivity of Babylon. The author had in view, says Keil, “all the dispersions
which would come upon the rebellious nation in future times, even down to the
dispersion under the Romans, which continues still ; so that Moses contemplated
the punishment in its fullest extent.” 3. They would be rejected asa p le.
“Ye shall not prolong your days upon it, but shall utterly be destroyed.’ “this
has been fulfilled in the uprooting of all the tribes of Israel, in their dispersion
through all nations, and in the miseries they have endured. What a solemn
warning to those who forsake God.


III. Retributive consequences would follow. They would become pertect
slaves to other peoples, and forced to render homage to senseless idols, As
their sin, so their punishment. ‘They had dishonoured God by graven images,
s0 they would be degraded by service to abominable idols. Evils which we
esteem pleasures at first, often become our tyrants, and drag us down to misery.
If we make indulgences our gods, they will become our degradation. “They
that make them are like unto them; so is everyone that trusteth in them,”


“Oh, blind to trath, and God’s whole scheme below,
Who fancy bliss to vice; to virtue, woe.”—Pope


Tue Buiessinas oF TRIBULATION.— Verses 27-30,


If Israel in their dispersion and trouble turn with all their hearts to God he
will deliver them and not utterly cast them off. He is merciful as well as
jealous, and mindful of the covenant which he sware unto their fathers
(qf Lev. xxvi. 40-42; Neh. ix. 31),


L. Afflictions are corrective in the:r design. “ Whither the Lord shall lead
96


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DEUTERUNOMY. CHAP. IV.





ou.” God not only permitted Israel to be carried off, but lead them into other

nds, gently and kindly led them with special design (ver. 27). It is a mercy to
be corrected when we might have been destroyed. Afilictions, exile and dis-
appointment are intended to check our sins and preserve our souls, ‘“ None is
more unhappy,” says Seneca, “ than he who never felt adversity.”


II. Afflictions are temperea with mercy in their character. Fallen angela
were left to their eternal doom; but sinful man is kept from destruction,
corrected, and brought back to God. Backsliders may be punished, but God
will forgive. ‘“ Mercy rejoiceth (glorieth, triumphs over) against judgments ”
(Jas. ii. 13).

III. Afflictions are blessed in their results. “If from thence thou shalt
seek the Lord thy God, thou shalt find Him.” They often lead to repentance,
removal of sin, and return to God. From the deepest distress and the most
distant apostacy God brings His children. David went astray before he was
afflicted. Manasseh long forsook God, but sought His face when put in sore
distress, and the prodigal returned to his father’s house when he felt his helpless,
lost condition. King Alfred prayed that God would often send him sickness to
keep him obedient and devout. ‘“ Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest,
O Lord, and teachest him out of thy law.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 24. God a consuming fire. Vers. 25,28. Remained long in the
There are stern aspects of God as well Jland. 1. The condition of possessing
as mild. The figure of fire sets forth it. 2. The danver of forgetting this
the anger of God against sin. 1. How condition. Carnally secure and for-
kindled. 2. Material to keep it alive. saking God, and growing old in the
8. The difficulty of extinguishing it; land. 3. The punishment that would
and 4, The fearful consumption it follow from this forgetfulness. (a)
makes—swift and overwhelming des- Forewarned. Heaven and earth wit-
truction. It isa fearful thing to fall mess, (5) Severe dispersion and degra-
a the hands of ta wrt me a as dation.

od is a consuming fire ” (Heb. xii. 29).

God a jealous raed: Jealousy ap- me: ae G pte : and ae
plied to God does not mean suspicion, 1" 1Nes8 tor God's exis Tostif ? lis
but readiness to vindicate His glory 8 against sin, 3. Lestily to His
and law. “ Not in the sense in whic righteousness in punishing transgres-
He was regarded as ‘jealous’ by some %0"-
of the Greeks, who supposed that § Vers, 29-31. Israel’s sin, misery
success or eminence of any kind pro- repentance, and restoration.
voked Him (Herod iii. 40, 125), but j
jealous of His own honour,” one who Ver. 29. I. Seeking God. 1.
will not see “His glory given to Earnestly; with all thy heart. 2. In-
another (Is. xlii. 8; xlviii 11), or telligently; with all thy soul. II.
allow rivals to dispute His sole and Jnducements to seek God. 1. Merciful
absolute sovereignty” (¢f Ex. xxiv.14; in Himself. 2. Mindful of His pro-
Deut. v. 9; vi. 15; Josh. xxiv. 19), mise; and 3. Able to help in tribu-
Hence jealous. 1. For His glory. lation. ‘Sweet and sour make the
2. For the purity of His worship; and best sauce. Promises and menaccs
3. For His people. Jealous. And mixed soonest operate upon the heart.
should therefore be served truly, that ‘The sun of righteousness loves not to
there be no halting ; and totally that be set in a cloud, nor the God of con-
there be no halving (Heb. xii. 28,29). solation to have his children comfort-
—Zrapp. less,” —Zrapp.

a


OwaP. IV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: D&UTERONOMY.
a


Days THAT aRE Past.— Verses 32-34.


Moses reminds Israel of God’s goodness and miraculous dealings in their choice,


deliverance, and instruction. Remembrance of days past should prompt them —


to obedience and love.

I. Days past reveal the special goodness of God. God has not left the world
to chance and inflexible laws. Nothing can surprise or thwart Him. He rules all
creatures and events, showing mercy to those that love Him, and punishing those
who <ebel against Him. 1. /n creating them. Our natural birth and receneration
are the acts of Divine mercy. “'The Lord that created thee, 0 Jacob, and He
that formed thee (fashioned into shape) O Israel ” (Is. xliii, 1). 2. Jn delivering
them from danger. As Israel were rescued from Egypt, God’s people now are
redeemed from enemies by wonderful and extraordinary ways, “ with an out-
stretched arm, and with great judgment” (Ex. vi. 6). 3. Jn teaching them by
various ways. Each age has its own special revelations. In the Bible we have
a record “of days that are past” in patriarchal, prophetical, and apostolic truth,
God’s faithfulness and mercy are written unmistakably and should be read most
devoutly in those wondrous days.


Il, Days past are filled with warnings and examples. “ History is philosophy
teaching by examples.” Jewish history is full of instructive lessons. They
enjoyed mercies never given to any other nation, or grace never heard of since
the creation of the world. These deeds brighten days of old and make them
powerful now. They are the gifts of God to the present age, and the lives of
good men and bad men are for all time.


“There is a history in all men’s lives
Figuring the nature of the times deceased.”—Shakespeare,


III. Days past should be remembered for future instruction. Human experi-
ence should not be forgotten. We should be more virtuous and obedient as
days roll on. Every age should be an advance upon the past, and should be
more powerful for good. It is sad when in the life of a nation, or the life of a
man, God is forsaken, and former days lamented for as better than the present,
In former days men lived long, were specially trained, and have handed down
their treasures to posterity. “Enquire I pray thee, of the former age, and
prepare thyself to the search of (the records) their fathers, For (the reason
given) we are but of yesterday and know nothing, (compared to them) because
our days upon earth area shadow. Shall not they teach thee and tell thee (how
God deals with men in this world) and utter words out of their heart ae
sayings result of careful observation) Job. viii. 8.


There is something very solemn in the thought of “ days that are past "—
past, never to return ; while their moral results remain for ever as subjects of
future responsibility. We have to reckon on days past; for time, like tide,
stays for no man.

“Tis greatly wise to talk with our past hours,
And ask them what report they bore to heaven 3
And how they might have borne more welcome news,”

Let us then summon our past days, and ask what they have to say. First,

concerning the world. Mrs. Savage remarks, “I never knew any of the people


of the world praise it at parting.” No wonder at this. They have been too .


mucl) in it, seen too much of it, and been too much deceived by it to recommend
to others. Solomon’s verdict is, “ Vanity of vanities ?—* vanity” if


they pacoead, and “vexation of spirit” if disappointed. What a miserable


ae ey ee ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DL&UTERONOMY. OHAP. IV.





painted cheat is the world! Enough to induce us to forsake it, and comply with
the admonition. ‘‘Forsake the foolish and live, and go in the way of under-
standing.” Secondly, ask what they have to say concerning ourselves. Have
they not shown us many things with which we were formerly unacquainted, and
filled us with surprise and regret. How many convictions violated, how many
resolutions broken! Life has been very unlike the picture our early imagination
drew—our dependences often proved broken reeds, not only unable to sustain
hopes, but have “pierced us through with many sorrows.” Will days not tell
us that life has been a chequered scene? Review them again under a sense of
unworthiness of the least mercy, and of all the truth which God has shown us.
If we have been in the wilderness, have we not found grace in the sanctuary ?
Have we not had the fiery cloudy pillar to guide us, manna to sustain us, and
waters to refresh us? Can we refuse to say, “ Goodness and mercy have followed
me all the days of my life?” —Jay.


Inpucements To Osepience.— Verses 32-38.


If God has performed such wonderful things for His people, they were put
under obligations of gratitude and love. They should ever obey Him for mercies
and privileges unknown to other people.


I, They were remarkable in their history. Their calling, deliverance, and
whole history was full of the supernatural. 1. They had been delivered from
bondage most terrible. Egypt is a type of sin in its misery and power. But
God’s power is greater than Satan and sin. When God “assayed to go,”
deliverance was sure. 2. Delivered in a way most striking. By temptations—
judgments inflicted upon Pharaoh and his people to test or try them; by
signs—tokens of the supernatural in their nature and design; by wonders—
the objective side of miracle, the extraordinary and marvellous ; by war—conflict
at the Red Sea (ef. Ex. xiv. 14; xv. 3); by a mighty hand aud stretched out
arm (Ex. vi. 6; xiv. 8; Deut. xxvi. 8); and by great terrors in the minds of
Egyptians through Divine operations (Ps. cv. 27, 28; cvi. 21). 3. Hence
deliverance unsurpassed. Such had never been heard of from the besinning of
the world (ver. 32). It was unexampled in method and purpose. All to prove
the sovereign love and grace of God. ‘Ihe experience and history of God’s
people outstrip the discipline of ancient Israel. ‘“ Come and hear, all ye that
fear God, and I will declare what He hath done for my soul.”


II. They were wonderful in their training. They were inspired with salu-
tary fear, impressed with the awful signs of God’s presence which shadow forth
the majesty of His nature. 1. Zraized supernaturally. They heard a voice
direct from heaven in condescension to their moral condition and mental capacity.
2. Trained with awful symbols. God spoke to His children by sensible signs to
impress their minds, What more terrible than thunder and lightning, smoke
and flames of fire! Surely we should love Him “ whose terror should not make
us afraid.” 3. Z'rained with a special design. “ Unto thee it was shewed, that
thou mightest know that the Lord He is God” (ver. 35).


III, They were providential in their settlement. They were dearer to God
than any other people. Nations were driven out from their lands ; Egyptians
and Canaanites were given tor their ransom, and people “ greater and mighitier
than they were, had to prepare them a settlement. — God locates his people,
prepares their possessions, and Israel’s foes must contribute to Israel’s welfare,


“hou didst drive out the heathen with thy hand, and plantedst yi ; thou


OHA. IV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





didst afflict the people, and cast them out. For they got not the land in
possession by their own sword, neither did their own arm save them,” etc,
(Pea. xliv. 2, 8).


JrnovaH Gop ALonz.— Verses 89, 40,


Because God had loved their fathers, and had chosen, redeemed, and settled
them in Canaan, Israel were to “ consider,” never to forget this, and acknowledge
that Jehovah alone is God and that there is no other in the universe beside
Him,

I, Jehovah alone is the self-existant personal God. This great truth was
revealed to the Jews by the destruction of heathen deities, the punishment of
their worshippers, and the wonderful events in their history. God is one supreme
intelligent being. 1. Alone in His supremacy in heaven and earth. “God in
heaven above, and upon the earth beneath.” When the might of worldly power
was strongest, and idolatry as a system was prevalent, “all the gods of the
nations” were declared “idols” (lit., vanities or nullities) Ps. xcvi. 5. They
were denied superiority and even existence. ‘For the Lord is a great God, and
a great King above all gods” (Ps. xcv. 3). 2. Alone in His government of the
world, Not a petty God inferior to heathen gods; but without rival and com-
panion. His government is supreme, not divided among “ gods many and lords
many ;” universal, over all agenciés and all spheres; and sole in its authority
and design. 3. Alone in His claims upon men. He demands and deserves
universal obedience, We are to love Him with all our hearts. But how could
we love God if He were not a person? He is not a set of principles nor code of
laws; but the true and living God, infinitely distant from finite creatures, yet
definitely related to us as law-giver and father. Hence spring His claims upon
us, and our duty towards Him. We should render to Him gratitude, praise,
and loyal obedience, “for the Lord is great, and greatly to be praised.”


II. The practical recognition of this truth. “ Know therefore this day.”
Know not simply intellectually or theoretically, but practically. ‘ Consider it
in thine heart.” Speculation abounds, science puts forth its “laws” and
“natural forces,” and men talk about Abstract principles as “infinite wisdom ”
and “almighty power.” Take away a personal God, a loving father ; then we
are left like children in the orphan asylum—clothed, fed, and governed, perhaps,
but objects of pity rather than of love and mercy. We have no resting-place
for our affections, no object of worship, and no hope of purity and peace. How
needful then, in “ this day” of infidelity and irreligion to receive and defend
this truth. 1. In tts influence upon the heart. “In thine heart,” the centre
and regulative power of life. 2. Jn its influence upon the life. “Thou shalt
keep His statutes” (ver. 40). Our obedience must spring from love, and be
voluntary, absolute, and universal. The preacher sums up the whole of man;
not duty only, but happiness and all that concerns him “in fearing God and
keeping His commandments” (Ecc. xii. 13).


Tue Cirres or Rerucr.— Verses 41-43.


Israel were yet on the east side of Jordan, and after the conclusion of one
discourse (iv. 1-40) Moses inserts these verses before the other (ver. 1, etc.) “In
thus severing the three cities of refuge he carried out a previous command of
God (Num. xxxv. 14), and so followed up his exhortations to obedience by setting
@ pees example of it, as far as opportunity was given him.” Consider—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. IV
Se


_1 The design of these cities. ‘That the slayer might flee thither, who should
kill his neighbour unawares.” They were not to shelter the guilty from punish-
ment, but to secure a fair trial and respite from death. The accidental homicide
was protected from the avenger of blood. They set forth—1. God’s regard for
human life. Life was not to be cut down at random. Private revenye was to
be checked, and feelings of humanity were to be cultivated. 2. God’s legislative
wisdom. In the rude unsettled state of the nation, rights were restricted to
certain persons, opportunities were given of establishing innocence, and grievances
were removed by the vindication of law. Men were taught to discriminate
between one crime and another, and justice was administered with mercy.
3. They typify refuge in Jesus Christ. In these sanctuaries fugitives were safe ; ‘
certain decrees confirmed their security. ‘To these cities manslayers were
directed to run. Often they had to flee for life with not.a moment to spare.
Men are guilty, exposed to justice, and can find no safety from the terrors of
broken law, except in Christ Jesus. Here is safety and perfect redemption for
all “ who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us.”


II. The influence of these cities. They would consecrate the land, and
prevent its stain from innocent blood. They would confirm and strengthen the
possessions taken from the Canaanites, and lay the foundation for just
government. ‘I'hey proved the goodness of God, and helped to cultivate a mild
and forgiving spirit towards man.


Tue Repetition or Divine Law.— Verse 44-47.


These verses begin an address which embraces “ the central part and substance
of the book, which now follows in twenty-two chapters.” ‘I'hey contain a fuller
description of the law, with a notice of time and place in which the address
was given.


I Law clearly explained. “In ver. 45, this ‘law’ (thdrah) is summarily
described as consisting of ‘ testimonies, statutes, and judgments;’ 7.¢., command-
ments considered first as manifestations or attestations (eyddth) of the will of
God ; next, as duties of moral obligation (khikim), and thirdly, as precepta
securing the mutual rights of men (mishpdtim).’—Sp. Com. ‘The law is
repeated and explained that we may know what is due to God and our fellow.
creatures, and that obedience tends to happiness and life,


II. Law enforced by reasonable claims. In urging the people to obey the
statutes of God, Moses had powerful motives. 1. Zhey were in better circwm-
stances.—Not at the foot of Sinai, amidst thunder, fire, and smoke, but on the
borders of the promised land, 2. God’s goodness had been displayed to them.
(a) Their enemies had been slain. Og, king of Bashan, and Sihon, king of the
Amorites “ whom Moses and the children of Israel smote.” (6) “'l'hey had
already received the first fruits of those promises, the full fruition of which was
to be consequent on their fulfilment of that covenant now again about to be
rehearsed to them in its leading features.” (c) Hence their surroundings were
comfortable, bright and merciful “under the springs of Pisgah.” Such ex-
perience, history, and privileges, put them under the deepest obligation! God’s
claims are great upon us, But “one great cause of our insensibility to the
goodness of our Creator,” says Paley, “ is the very extensiveness of his bounty.”


101


Iv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY,





Tur Amorites DispossEsseD.— Verses 44-49.


The importance of the defeat of the two kings of the Amorites leads Moses
again to mention it, Israel must never forget that God had given them this
possession, not through their own merits, but in fulfilment of His promise. We
may learn from this oft-repeated reference—


I. That the continued existence and prosperity of a nation depend upor
its virtue and obedience to God. Not upon its wealth, population or defences
cities, fleets and armies can be swept away when God is forsaken.


II, That when virtue and obedience are wanting God often dispossesses a
nation. Splendid dynasties have fled into exile ; thrones most powerful have
been overturned, and God has extirpated one people to prepare for another.
This is—1. A natural law. 2. A fact in history; and 3. A warning to us.
“The Lord will rend the kingdom from us, and give it to a neighbour of ours
that is better than we are” (1 Sam. xv. 28).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND 8UGGESTIONS.


Ver. 39. Consider it, etc. 1. God’s Vers. 41-43. The cities of refuge


law has little influence upon the heart
and life. Its precepts apt to glide
from our memory. 2. Meditation is
needful to remind us. “Consider it
(lit. bring back) into thine heart.”
“Meditation is the bellows of the
affections; ‘while I was musing the
fire burned’ (Ps. xxxix. 3). “'lhe rea-
gon we come away so cold from reading
the word is, because we do not warm
ourselves at the fire of meditation.”
(Watson). 3. God gives help in this
meditation—/(a) By special times “This
day.” (b) By special subjects “Know
that the Lord is God.” (c) By special
requests “I command thee.”


Ver. 40. With thy children. The
benefit of obedience. 1. T'o the present
generation—“It may go well with
thee.” 2. To the future generation—
“Thy children after thee,’


ILLUSTRATIONS


Vers. 1-4. Hearken. How much
more doth it concern us to be hearers
ere we offer to be teachers of others,
He gathers that hears, he spends that
teacheth. If we spend before we gather
we shall soon prove bankrupts.—(Sp.

103


in their names, purpose and situation.


Ver. 44-45. The law. 1. In its
minute description. 2. In the peculiar
circumstances or place of its repetition.
(a) ‘ Over against Beth-peor.”—In
dangerous proximity to the idol temple


of Moab. (6) In new territories.—In
the land of Sihon.”
Ver. 49. The Springs of Pisgah,


fertilizing the land may sugeest a
discourse on the joys and various
advantages that flow from heavenly
rospects. How much the present lite
1s benefitted and beautified by thoughts
and purposes that flow from views of
the heavenly life. Every true Pisgah
in our life, 2.2, every point of exalted
meditation, should be a fountain-head
of holy thoughts and action.—£id.
Museum.


TO CHAPTER IV,


Hail). “That it may please thee to
give to all thy people increase of grace
to hear meekly thy word, to receive it
with pure affection, an’) bring forth the
fruits of the Spirit.”


‘ings to the world (Rom. iii. 2).


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





Vers. 5, 6.—<Statutes. Look not for
another Master, thou hast the oracles
of God. No one teaches like them.
Ignorance of the Scriptures is the cause
of all evils—(Chrysostom). 'lhere is
no book on which we can rest in a
dying noment but the bible-—Selden.


Vers. 7, 8. So great. The Jews


were more than the capsarii nostri and


librarians ; they had anticipative ad-
vantages, and were to be the first to
enjoy the gospel privileges, as well as
to be the almoners of Messianic bless-
They
were like trustees of an estate who were
themselves to receive the ground-rents
till such time as the leases fill in, and
then they were both to participate
in the increased rent roll and to be the
channel through which the other heirs
were to share the inheritance with
themselves.—JVeil.


Ver. 8. When the African prince
enquired from our gracious queen the
secrets of England’s glory, she handed
him a copy of the Scriptures, and
said, “ That is the secret of England’s
greatness,”


Ver, 9. Teach them. “A pious
education is the best way of providing
for a family and the surest foundation
for its prosperity.”


Vers. 9-14. Lest thou forget. ’Tis
a general fault, that the most common
and frequent, the most obvious and
conspicuous favours of God, the con-
stant rising of the sun upon us, the
descent of fruitful showers, the re-
course of temperate seasons, the con-
tinuance of our life, the helps of
obtaining virtue and becoming happy,
we commonly little mind or regard, and
consequently seldom return thanks for
them.—Dr. Barrow.


Vers. 15-18. Similitude. It was
not until the days of Hebrew decline
that a narrow literalism pressed the
words into an absolute prohibition of
the arts of painting and sculpture.
Moses himself sanctioned the cherubic


OMAP. IV,





forms above the mercy-seat ; the brazen
serpent, and the lillies and pome-
Sia of the golden candlestick.

olomon had lions on the steps of his
throne, oxen under his “ molten sea,”
and palm trees, flowers, and cherubims
on the walls of the temple, “ within and
without” (1 Kings vi. 29). What this
commandment forbade was the worship
of God under a material form. It
asserted the spirituality of Jehovah.
While in the rest of the world there
was scarcely a single nation or tribe
which did not “make to itself” images
of the gods, and regard the images
themselves with superstitious venera-
tion. In Judaism alone was this
seductive practice disallowed. God
would have no likeness made of Him,
no representation that might cloud the
conception of his entire separation from
matter, his purely spiritual essence.—
Com. for Eng. Readers.


Ver. 19. Heaven. Instead of stretch-
ing our thoughts to the mystery of
creation, and soaring above the stars,
when we think of God, which for the
most part, is setting Him at a distance
from us, it may be of great use to
consider Him, as present in the
room or little spot where we are, and
as it were circumscribed within it, in
all His glory, majesty, and purity.—
Adam.


Ver. 23. Forbidden. There is no
vice that doth so cover a man with
shame as to be found false and per-
fidious, —Bacon.


Ver. 24. Jealous. Many attempts
have been made to show that jealousy
is unworthy of the Divine nature ; but
that the one only God, if there be but
one only God, should claim and exact
under some penalties an undivided
allegiance is natural, reasonable, and
in harmony with the most exalted con-
ceptions of the Divine essence. If God
looked with indifference upon idolatry,
it would imply that He cared little for
His human creatures; that like the
Deity of Epicurius having once created
man and the world, He esta

03


OHAP. IV.


paid no attention to them.—Com. for
Eng. Readers).


Ver. 25. Corrupt. The heathen cor-
ruptions were produced and sanctioned
by the heathen mythology and idolatry ;
while Christian nations are corrupt in
spite of and in direct opposition to
Christianity, which raises the highest
standard of virtue and acts continually
on the world asa purifying and sancti-
fying power.—P. Schaff:

“God made him, and therefore let him pass

for a man.”—Shakcspeare.


Ver. 26. Witness. There was never
miracle wrought. by God to convert an
atheist because the light of nature
might have led him to confess a God.
Bacon.


Ver. 27-30. Tribulation. Afflictions
are God’s furnace, by which He cleanses
His people from their dross. As gold
and silver are refined, so men are puri-
fied. The process is never complete
so long as any dross remaing As
Tennyson suggestively says—

“ Life is not like idle ore ;

But iron dug from centyal gloom,
And heated not with burning fears,
And dipt in baths of hissing tears,


And battered with the shocks of doom,
To shape and use.”


Vers. 33, 36. The phenomena accu-
mulated to impress the people seem to
have been loud thunder, fierce flashes
of lightning, a fire that streamed up
from the mountain to the middle of
the sky, dense volumes of smoke pro-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


ducing an awful and weird darkness,
a trembling of the mountain as by a
continuous earthquake, a sound like
the blast of a trumpet loud and pro-
longed, and tlien, finally, a clear,
penetrating voice (cf Ex. xix. 16-2".
So awful a manifestation has nev-r
been made at any other place or tine
(ver. 32), nor will be until the consum-
mation of all things—Com. for king. -
leaders.


Ver. 89. Lord. Fe is not only
“God,” but “the Lord” or Governor.
We know Him only by His properties,
by the wise and admirable structure of
things around us, and by their final
causes; we admire Him on account of
His perfections ; we venerate and wor-
ship Him on account of His govern:
ment.—sir Isaac Newton.


Vers. 41-43. Cities of refuge were
appointed—three on each side of Jor-
dan—with straight and good roads
leading to them from every direction,
to any of which the murderer might
fly; and if he got into it before the
avenger overtook him, he was safe from
his rage until he had a fair trial. If it
was found that he was guilty of wilful
murder, he was delivered up to the
avenger to be destroyed, and not even
the altar was allowed to protect him;
but if it was found that the murder
had not been intentional, he was
allowed to remain in the city of refuge,
where none might come to do him
evil; and on the death of the high
priest he might return in security to
his own home.—Dr. Coa.


CHAPTER V,


CerricaL Rewarxs.—The Deuteronomy, or second law, is now given and enforced. But
Moses refers to the covenant relation between Jehovah and Israel, and recapitulates the Sinaitio


code in its most important features,


Ver. 1, Moses called marks the publicity and importance of the address,


Ver, 3, Our fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; bat with the nation as an organic whole,
those identitied with the people who entered into the covenant at Sinai.


Ve. 4. Face to face, not in visible form, but familiarly, near ae one person to anothee,


104


HOMILETI! COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. CHAP. V.


ri





Ver. 5. Even as regards the ))ecalogue this statement has its application. Moses “stood
between the Lord and them” whilst it was delivered, and perhaps it was (Ex. xix. 19) addressed
directly to Moses, though in acceats audible to the assembly beneath. ‘hus was the law,
including even the “Ten Words,” *‘in the hands of a mediator” (Gal. iii, 19).—Sp. Com.


Ver. 6. An introduction to the vo dments which follo Rink eh alick,
verbal alteration the same as in Ex es PE 2 w, and w are given with slight


Vers, 7-16, First table of the Law.


Ver. 7, Before me, lit. beyond me (Gen. xlvifi. 22 ; Ps. xvi. 2), in addition to me (Gen. xxx. 50 ;
Deut. xix. 9); meaning by the side of me, or in my presence.


Ver, 8. All symbolic representations prohibited. Heaven, stars or birdss earth, all kinds of
animals ; water, fish and water creatures,


Ver. 9. Jealous, who gives not to another honour due to himself (Is. xlii. 8 5 xlviii. 11), nor
tolerates the worship of any ilol. Visiting, not charging the iniquity, but permitting its con-
Bequences to flow beyond persons or nations committing it.


Ver. 10. The third and fourth Soni :
SicasaklGh. 0 genera are punished (visited) 3 but mercy is shown to the


Ver. 11. In vain, ist., lift up the name of Jehovah thy Godin vain. Lift up, take up a pro:
verb (Num. xxiii. 7), asong (Ps. lxxxi. 3), or a prayer (Is. xxxvii. 3), All employment of God’s
name for vain and unworthy purposes forbidden; not merely false swearing ; but profane and
idle swearing in daily life. Guiléless, left unpunished.


Vers, 12-15. Sabbath, already in existence has to be sanctified (a festival-keeper, Ex. xvi. 23)
to be observed a day of rest, belonging to the Lord and consecrated to Him. Neither man nor
beast to work. ‘“ The exhortation is poiuted by reminding the people that they too were formerly
servants themselves. The bondage in Egypt and the deliverance from it are not assigned as
grounds for the institution of the Sabbath, which is of far older date (cf. Gen. ii. 3) ; but rather
as suggesting motives for the religious observance of that institution. The exodus was an entrance
into rest from the toils of the house of bondage, and is thought actually to have occurred on the
Sabbath day. Hence arose special and national obligations with respect to the Sabbath, on which
it is exactly within the scope of Moses’ purpose in Deuteronomy to insist.”—Sp, Com.


Ver. 16. Well with thee. An insertion not in Ex. xx. 11, but found in Ep. vi. 8, and ampli-
fying the promise of long life.

Vers. 17-21, Second table of thelaw. ‘Che enactments are from outward deeds (kill, adultery,
steal), to words, (false witness and lies) to inward desires (covet and desire).


Ver. 22, Added, lit., “He did not add,’ i.e. He spoke no more with the great voice directly
to the people, but addressed all other cominunications to them through Moses.


Vers. 23-33, Here we have a fuller account than that in Ex. xx. 18-21. God’s reply
(vers. 18-81) to the people’s request is not given in the summary of Exodus. The people were
alarmed at the awful phenomena in which God revealed His glory and uttered His will;
entreated Moses to stand between as mediator, that they might not die, and then promised to
hear and obey. God approved the request, because it indicated a feeling of unfitness for


intercourse with Him, but added—

Vers, 28, 29. “ Would that they always had this feeling—this heart in them to fear me, that
it might be well with them and their children.”

Vers. 30, 31. The people are directed to their tents; Moses is appointed mediator, to whom
God would give all law for the people.


Vers, 32, 33. Events are brought to a close by an exhortation to careful observance of the
commandments, never to turn aside, right or left, from the way pointed out, that it may be well


with them (¢/. cp. iv. 40).


Tue Covenant in Hores.— Verses 1-5.


Moses was about to recapitulate the law. It was fitting to remind them of
the circumstances in which it was given, and the special relation between God


and His le.
peop 105


CHAP. ¥, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





I, The method in which the covenant was given. Jewish and other writera
have speculated on this subject, but we can only reconcile the various statements
in Old and New Testaments (Ex. xx. 2; Deut. v. 4; ¢f Acts vii. 53; Gal. iii
19; Heb. ii. 2) by remembering the spirituality of God, and His special agency
in the revelation of His will. From this narrative we learn that—l. The
covenant was specially, made with them. “The Lord made not this covenant
with our fathers,” It is specially with us, a covenant not of circumcision
(Acts wii. 8) but ten commandments. Light gradually shines, and children
know more of God’s will than their forefathers. 2. 7he covenant was given
familiarly ta them. ‘‘The Lord talked with you face to face,” as one
friend with another. Not in dreams and dark visions as of old (Job iv. 12, 13),
but directly, openly and clearly. 3. The covenant was given amid divine
splendour. ‘‘Qut of the midst of the fire.’ The natural phenomena and
peculiar surroundings were intended to impress their minds and beget right
feelings and willing obedience. 4. The covenant was given through a mediator
“T stood between the Lord and you ”—at your request, and by God’s approval ;
to allay your fears and preserve your lives. We have Jesus the Mediator of the
new covenant (Heb. xii. 24) to remove our guilt and intercede with God.


II. The obligations under which the covenant put the people. — Special
favours beget special obligations. This covenant is with us, reminds us of our
privileged condition and reciprocal duty. 1. God’s commands must be performed.
“Do them.” Not talk and speculate about them. We must personally accept
the terms and bind ourselves to constant performance. 2. God’s commands must
be understood before they can be performed. ‘That ye may learn them.”
Obedience must be intelligent, ‘‘a reasonable service,” not mechanical. Intellect
is concerned as well as heart. ‘ With all thy heart; with all thy mind.”
3. God’s commands must be heard before they can be understood. “ Hear,
O Israel.” They must be observed and attentively considered. The ears must
be employed for God. “TI speak in your ears.” Things heard must not slip or
glide out of our treacherous hearts and memories as out of leaking vessels
(Heb. ii. 1). Thus there can be no obligation without law to found it upon, and
no law in religion but from God. God, therefore, must be heard, feared, and
glorified. Loyal obedience is necessary,not to purchase salvation, but to please
God and benefit men. ‘'Ihat ye may live, and that it may be well with you.”


Tae First ComManDMENT: Gop’s SUPREMACY OVER OUR AFFECTIONS.
Verses 6, 7.


The decalogue, or ten words, have been appropriately divided into two parts,
called tables of the law. It is a natural division founded on the distinct
character of the precepts themselves, and sanctioned by our Saviour in
Matt. xxii. 37-40. In one sense the law was a republication of the law of
nature. But sin had corrupted the original impress on the human heart, hence
it was necessary to make it the basis of the national constitution with Israel, and
to preserve it as the rule of life for all mankind, Man is instructed, and God is
exalted in this moral law.


I, God must be the sole object of our affection. “Thou shalt have none other
Gods before me.” Our duties arise from our relations, Our relation to
God is the earliest, most essential, and most lasting ; regard to Him
therefore as our God is our first and highest duty. here are systems
of morality which omit, or, slightly notice, the high claims of God upon our
hearts, bP ig exhalt domestic and social duties, and which sustain and pion the


ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. Vv.





relation of friendship and the claims of politics and philanthropy. These
systems are from men, but the first commandment from God is “ thou shalt
have no other gods but me.” 1. No other god instead of Jehovah. Nothing must
usurp the place of God in our hearts and affections. Riches, learning, and
power are gifts from—and must not be worshipped instead of—God. ‘here is
@ tendency in man to imagine and make other gods. The Jews were prone to


. fall into the gross enormities of polytheism ; classic nations of antiquity, amid


all superstitions and devotions, were “without God.” In this age—clear with
indications of God’s existence and unity, with tender and most constraining
motives to cleave to Him—there is still a tendency in our hearts to depart from
God and make idols of the creatures; still a necessity to urge the claims of
Jehovah, and maintain virtue and piety in the world. “Little children, keep
yourselves from idols.” 2. No other god along with Jehovah. There cannot be
two gods. It is impossible to serve ¢wo masters. If we hate one we shall cleave
to the other, or hold to the one and despise the other (Matt. vi. 24). Yet many
try to serve God and the world—make a compromise, and, like Israel, join a
false god with the true. “They feared the Lord and served their own gods.”
8. Jehovah, and Jehovah only, must be our God. He must be the object of our
choice and affection. We are forbidden to deny God; to give the glory due to:
Him to another; and to forget our relation to Him as our God. We must know
and acknowledge, worship and serve God as one God, as the only true God, and
as our God.


II. The grounds on which God claims to be the sole object of our affection.
The law begins with a declaration of God concerning Himself, which serves as a
ground and motive for obedience. “I am Jehovah thy God.” These words are
often repeated, because the tendencies of our nature to forget or slight God’s
manifestations are deep and dangerous. 1. God’s supreme authority. “I am
Jehovah.” Self-existent, infinite, and eternal, the source of life, authority and
happiness. Our maker, and has right to dispose of us according to his pleasure.
2. God’s covenant mercy. “Thy God.” ‘The name Jehovah might terrify, but
“thy God” is the charter in Christ of all blessings, allures and draws us to him.
“ Happy are the people whose God is the Lord.” 3. God’s wonderful deliverance.
“ Which brought thee out of the land of Egypt,” ete. This was an act of power,
wisdom and goodness, specially fitted to incite them to obedience, and kindle
their hearts into warmest love. God delivers that he may be served. When
he has made and redeemed us surely no other god should hide him from view.
“ Therefore will we serve the Lord, for he is our God.”


Tur Szconp CoMMANDMENT: Gop’s SUPREMACY OVER OUR WORSHIP.
Verses 8-10.


“The first commandment regards the object of worship—the living and true
God, and requires that we worship Him, and no other. The second respects the
means of worship, and requires that we worship tke true God in such a way only,
and by such ordinances as He hath appointed in His word. ‘The first may be
discovered by the light of nature, but the second can be discovered only by
revelation.” (Patterson). In one command God declares that He will be
worshipped by His intelligent creatures, and in the other He prescribes the
method of solemnizing His worship.”


I, The spirituality of the Divine nature requires spirituality of Divine
worship. God in contrast to all false deities, is a spirit—must be worshipped in


spirit and in truth—cannot be, and must not be represented in Mepis shape.


CHAP. VW. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.








There is no resemblance to Him in anything He has made. Whatever men
plead in favour of sense aiding faith, God says “thou shalt not.” 1. We are
not to make nor fancy any material image of God in heaven above or on earth
beneath, or in the waters beneath the earth. 2. We are not to worship any
icture or painting of God. “Thou shalt not bow down thyself unto them.”

e long to set the object of our affection before our ayes—feel it difficult to fix
our mind upon an unseen God; but we must trust to no image. ‘The Holy
Spirit can help our infirmities, and give spirituality of mind and fervour of
devotion. Religious worship is an act of thought, principles, and affections—
not attitude, genuflections, and outward rites. It must be in spirit and in truth—
not in crucifix, bodily form, and graven image. “'Tc whom then will ye liken
God? or what likeness will ye compare unto Him?”


II. Spirituality of Divine Worship is enforced by special sanctions. Tu
enforce this second (and the first) commandment, certain penalties are threatened
and certain mercies promised. 1. God’s righteous eg Sorbids any other
worship. “For I the Lord thy God am a jealous Gui.” He is zealous for His
honour (Is, xlii, 8; xviii, 11) cannot brook a rival. nor receive a partial or
divided homage. 2. God’s wonderful providence will punish any other worship.
One great error of idolatrous systems—and congenial to every sinner—is to
suppose that because God is invisible, He does not, notice human conduct. But
these words show that His government is universal, extending to individual
agents aud particular actions. ‘The inspectiou or administration of God is
presented in two aspects—(1) A threatening «spect to those that hate Him.
Sin and its punishment are transmitted. Idolatry and its evil consequences
descend from father to son, and God punishes the sius of the parents in the
children to the third and fourth generation. ‘his truth appeals to the strongest
instincts of our nature, guards the purity of religion, by enlisting the affection
of a parent for his offspring and grafting on that affection salutary fear of Divine
visitations, (2) A merciful aspect to those that love Him. The world is not
goverued by blind fate. ‘There is no irresistible necessity in the continuous results
of evil. A merciful God restrains the sinner, checks the evil, and forgives all
who are brought back to Him in penitence, prayer, and love, ‘The same
principle of involving the children with the fathers is followed ; but, mark the
difference in the extent of its application! ‘The visitation of anger was to reach
the third or the fourth generation ; the display of mevey was to continue through-
out thousands of generations !” “ Thou showest loving kindness unto thousands,
and recompensest the iniquity of the fathers intu the bosom of their children
after them ” (Jer. xxxii. 18).


“A Deity believed, will nought avail ;
Rewards and punishments make Gud adored 3
And hopes and fears give conscience all her power.” — Young,


Diving Vistrations.— Verses 9, 10,


It was needful for the sake of the Jews themselves, and for the honour of the
true God, that His presence and providence with His people and with other
nations should be sensibly realised and enforced by rewards and punishments—
that these rewards and punishments should be so distributed as to evince His
special interference. We are often more educated by the eye than by the ear.
Since we are incapable of lofty abstractions, and insensible to remote conse-
quences of deeds, God seeks by special manifestations to impress our minds and
aid us in our duty, Hence the declaration of His government, and the principles
on which it is conducted,

108


HOMILELIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. GHAP. V.





I, The government of God is active. He is “visiting.” He is neither
dead nor asleep as heathen gods. Nor has He left the world to the government
of chance or abstract law. God may seem to be inactive and uninterested in
our concerns, but He is ever watchful. Mr. Lloyd Garrison, addressing a
meeting on one occasion on behalf of negro emancipation, was almost despairing,
and cast a gloom upon the audience. Up jumped an old negress, and in a voice
of thunder shouted, “ Mr. Garrison, is God dead? will he not visit His people?”
This was like an electric shock, imparting new life and new hopes. From that
day the cause assumed a brighter aspect.


II. The government of God is just. “Visiting the sins.” Men may wink at
sin, but God does not. Sentence against evil is not executed speedily ; men
may be too confident and resolved, their hearts may be. fully se¢ (the whole
energy directed) upon evil (Ecc. viii. 11), but God’s patience is not forgetfulness.
He is just, and punishment will come. “It comes with feet of wool, but it
will strike with hands of lead,” says Bp. Reynolds.


III. The government of God is merciful. Shewing mercy unto thousands.
Merciful and benevolent in its general nature and in its results. Punishment is
needful, always just and rightly administered in God’s moral government. The
threatening is merciful, intended to prevent sin. Anger is shown to a few, but
mercy to thousands. “The Lord God, merciful and gracious, long suffering and
abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands,” etc. (Ex. xxxiv.


6, 7).


IV. The government of God is universal. It extends to all places—to all


individuals.


“Them that hate me” and “them that love me ;” to all genera-
tions, not only to “the third and fourth” but to the end of the world,


“The


eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil and the good.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND 8UGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. Hear, O Israel. 1. God
speaks to the people. 2. The people
are commanded to hear what God
utters. 5. To learn what they hear.
4. To keep when they know the laws.
“The difference between Divinity and
other sciences, is, that it is not enough
to learn, but we must keep and do it;
as lessons of music must be practised,
and a copy not read only, but acted.—


Trapp.


Ver. 5. J stood between. Moses
Mediator. 1. Desired by the people
who felt their guilt and distance from
God. 2. Provided by God (Ex. xix. 2).
8. Typical of Christ.


Ver. 6. God set forth. 1. In essen-
tial greatness, “I am the Lord,” ie,
Jehovah. 2. In covenant mercy.
«Thy God.” 3. In wonderful provi-
dence. Brought from Egypt, the house
of bondage. “ God’s right to give laws


to the Hebrew nation is not founded
upon His being the one only God, but
upon his having, by miraculous inter-
positions and works of power, laid the
foundations of their state—not upon
His character and claims as the Creator
of heaven and earth, but upon His
peculiar relation to them as their
national founder and protector; and
hence by the unparalleled services
which he had rendered to the Israelites,
He had acquired all the title to their
willing and grateful obedience that a
benefactor could have.” —Jamieson, Dr.

The Lord thy God. 1. God’s sove-
reignty over us. He is our Lord—we
are His property and subjects. He has
absolute right to prescribe, and ab-
solute power to dispose. 2. God's
propriety in us. “Thy God” in re-
demption and covenant mercy chiefly,
for all have forfeited His favour and


love.
109


OmaP. V.


HOMILETIC COUMENTARY ; DEUTERONOM Y,


a


Vers. 6, 7. This may well Jead the
van and be set in the front of all
the commandments, because it is the
foundation of all true religion. The
sum of this commandment is that we
should sanctify God in our hearts, and
give Him precedence above all created
beings. There are two branches—
1. That we must have one God. 2.
That we must have but one; or thus—
1. That we must have God for our God.
2. That we must have no other.—
Waison.


Vers. 8-10. Image worship. 1.
Impossible. God cannot be repre-
sented. He is spiritual and invisible.


to the work of men’s hands. 3. Un-
scriptural. Against the command of


God (Lev. xxvi. 1; Deut. xvi. 22).


Vers. 9, 10. Family religion. 1.
Parents should consider well before
they act; lest they (1) expose them-
selves, and (2) ruin their children by
their wickedness, 2. Children are not
excused through bad examples of
parents—should imitate their parents
in right only, and be thankful if they
have been trained up to love and obey
God. How careful should we be to
set good examples, to maintain the
worship of God in the family, and to
live that we may rightly influence


2. Irrational. For the workmen is future generations,


better than the work. Absurd to bow


Tue Turrp CommanpMENT: Gop’s Supremacy Over our Lips,
Verse 11.


God is absolute and cannot be seen in His Divine essence, yet He reveals His
glory in His name. Since he cannot be known by similitudes, He manifests
Himself in His works and word—in the government of the world and the life
and death of His Son. God connects His name, therefore, with the solemnities
and transactions of Divine truth. This name must not be abused, but its
majesty must impress our minds and guard our lips.


I. It is our duty to revere the Divine Name. “ Thou shalt not take the name
of the Lord thy God in vain.” Our tongues must not be claimed as our own
(Ps. xii. 3), but devoted to the glory of God. 1. In religious worship. In
prayer, praise, and thanksgiving, the heart, and not the lips merely, must be
engaged. Our vows must not be made in times of sickness and peril, and for-
gotten in health and deliverance. Our worship must not be hypocritical, super-
ficial, and insincere ; nor our service formal and cold. Our profession must not
be in words, but in deeds. If we “swear to the Lord of Hosts,” we must serve
Him “with reverence and godly fear.” 2. In ordinary conversation. We
profane the Holy Name by its use in light, flippant conversation—in jesting and
idle talk. In private intercourse, in the market place, and in courts of law, we
must give no force to falsehood. All language garnished with oaths and irre-
verent use of the Divine name is a violation of this commandment—“ Hallowed
be thy name.”


II. The irreverent use of the Divine name will be punished. “The Lord
will not bold him guiltless.” Many excuse themselves from habit and custom;
others justify themselves in profaning God’s name when they are crossed, dis-
appointed, avd carried along by passion, Such are not innocent, but guilty;
and though they may escape public rebuke from friends, and punishment from
human laws, yet the Lord Himself will execute the law. “ He that blasphemeth
the name of the Lord, he shall surely be put to death,”


110


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY., OHAP. V.





Tue FourtH ComMANDMENT: Gop’s CLAIM UPON oun Toe.


“There is a close connection between the commandments of this first table.
The first commandment is intended to regulate our views and feelings, in
relation to the object of our supreme homage; the second has respect to the
medium through which that homage is expressed ; the third regards the spirit
which is to accompany us in all the solemnities of truth and of religion ; and
the fourth, the appropriation of a portion of our time to His service—thus to
indicate our subjection to His government, and our willingness to be entirely
consecrated to His glory” (Stowel). In these words we have an acquaintance
with the Sabbath presupposed. It must have been known, and perhaps observed
in some respect. Hence the injunction—“ remember.” The Sabbath was then
instituted, and its obligations made known before the giving of the Law at
Sinai. Now the command is given to “keep” and “sanctify” it. Notice the
dbservance of the Sabbath as a day of rest.


I. All classes are under obligation to keepthe Sabbath. 1. Individuals must
observe the day. “ Zhou shalt.” It is binding upon every one as subjects of
God’s government. Religion—for the permanent interests of which the Sabbath
was made—is a matter of personal conviction, experience, responsibility, and
practice. 2. Heads of families must observe the day. ‘“ Nor thy son, nor thy
daughter.” Parents must habitually regard its sanctity and encourage the
performance of its duties in the arrangements and discipline of the family.
Thus only can the order and welfare of domestic religion be maintained,
8. Masters must observe the day. ‘“ Nor thy manservant, nor thy maidservant.”
Rest was to extend to domestics who specially required it, in performing the
heavy duties of the household, God also “ careth for cattle.” Dumb animals
as well as human beings were embraced in that mercy which is “over all His
wor.


II. The method of keeping the Sabbath. Two ways are pointed out. 1. It
must be kept as a day of rest. Work was laid aside for man and beast. All
kinds of business in the field and in the market must cease. “ ‘Thou shalt not
do any work.” Physically and morally we require rest. If God saw fit to rest, how
much greater need have we to cease from labour. Abolish the Sabbath and human
life would be shortened by weary, wasting toil. In 1793 France invented decades,
and made every tenth day a sabbath, but found out her mistake and returned to
the appointed day. We must cease from worldly employments and servile work.
“ Six days shall work be done, but on the seventh day there shall be to you a
holy day, a Sabbath of rest tothe Lord.” 2. It must be kept as a day of worship.
As God blessed the day and hallowed it, filling it with peace and good to all; so
we must “keep the Sabbath day to sanctify st.” Work must be laid aside for
worship. The time is set apart for public and private worship. We must neither
forget nor carelessly perform the duties required ; nor must we profane the day
by idleness, unlawful works, or unnecessary recreation. God dignifies human
labour, condemns avarice and excessive toil, and teaches us to look upon work
not as aimless, incessant, unprofitable, but as pointing to arest, a fruition which
is typical of that eternal Sabbath which “remaineth for the people of God”
Heb. iv. 9.


III. The Inducements to keep the Sabbath. Many reasons are given for its
observance. 1. It is reasonable to keep it. God has given us six ter work,


oHaP. V, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





and only claims one for Himself. It might have beenthe reverse. Is it not, there-
fore, unreasonable—ungrateful to grudge a seventh part of our time to the
worship and service of God! 2. It ¢s right to keep it. God has special claims and
ropriety in this part of our time. God is in covenant relation, condescends to
hold communion with us on that day. Hence it is a great privilege to observe,
and an awful robbery to desecrate that day. ‘The seventh day is the sabbath
of the Lord thy God.” 8. God commands us to keep it. “God hath commanded
thee.” As the law of God, it is authoritative and ultimate—not mere counsel
and advice, not a naked rule, a bare prescription of what is right. It demands
obedience, and its demands are accompanied with just and awful sanctions,
4. God’s goodness urges to keep it. Israel were reminded of their servitude in
Egypt, of deliverance from it, and of introduction into rest. Therefore their
hearts should be warmed to gratitude, and they should be prompted to observe
that day which reminds them of the goodness of God (ver. 15). Special displays
of Divine mercy, relief from oppression and despair, should lead us on every
return of the day of rest to remember our escape and praise our Redeemer.


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS,


Ver. 11. 1. What required in this ted the seventh day.” (6) By His bene-


commandment: areverent use of God’s
attributes and titles, ordinances, and
word. 2. What forbidden: all pro-
faning or abuse of everything by which
God makes Himself known to us,
3. What reason annexed to enforce
observance. ‘The Lord will not hold
him guiltless that taketh His name
in vain.” “The caution that a breach
of this commandment incurs guilt in
the eyes of Jehovah is especially ap-
propriate, in consequence of the ease
with which the temptation to take
God’s name in vain besets men in
their common intercourse with each
other” (Speak. Com.). Learn—1. The
necessity of having becoming views of
God. 2. The obligation always to
fear Him, and to guard against offend-
ing Him by perjury, profanity and
blasphemy.


Vers. 12-14. How God esteemeth
the strict observance of the Sabbath
may appear by the exact delivery of it.
For He hath fenced it about like
Mount Sinai, with marks and bounds,
that profaneness might not approach it,
(1) By His watchword, “ Remember,”
(2) By His bounty, “Six days,” ete.
(3) By His sovereignty, “It is the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God.” (4) By
His latitude. “Thou, nor thy son,” ete.
(5) By His own example, “ And He res-

112


diction, “ He blessed it,” and ordained
it to be a means of much blessing to
those that observe it (Zrapp). The
sabbath adapted to the necessities of |
man. 1. By affording rest from toil;
hence promoting health and enjoyment.
2. By giving opportunity for family
intercourse and instruction. 3. By
securing due observance of public wor-
ship. Hence in His individual, social,
and religious condition the Sabbath
romotes the welfare of man. Chief

ustice Hale observed that according
to his care in observing the Lord’s day,
he commonly prospered in his under-
takings the week followinz— Blessed
is the man... . that keepeth the
Sabbath from polluting it” (Is. lvi. 2).


Ver. 15. Remember Egypt. We
are prone to remember the palaces and
pleasures of Egypt; God admonishes
us to remember its slavery. ‘lhe me-
mory of our former state should be—
I. An antidote to discontent. Though
the labours and trials of the wilderness
were many, yet in Egypt we had more.
If we labour, it is not to make bricks
without straw—not for another, but
for our own profit. II. A stimulant to
zeal. Remembering Egypt, let us press
on toward Canaan ; give no advantage
to our enemies. III, A reason for
obedience, He who graciously delivered


AHOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY,


OHAR V.





—ushas right to ourservice. If we made
bricks for Pharaoh, “what shall we


He who has begun the work will com-
plete it. V. Acallto humility, I wag


render unto the Lord?” If fear pro-
duced activity, how much more should
love! 1V. Wings for faith and hope.
Remember that that God who could
- deliver from Egypt can bring to Canaan.


but a servant, a slave: I owe all to my
Deliverer. Without Him I were a
slave again. “By grace I am what
I am.”—( from Bib. Museum.)


Tae Furta CommanpMent: Honovr To Parents, on THE RELIGION oF Homz.
Verse 16.


The present division of the commandments may trench upon symmetrical
arrangement, but practically that in which the fifth commandment begins, the
second table is convenient and important. The four we have considered
comprise our duties towards God, the six which remain, our duties towards man
in natural order of relationship. If God is to be acknowledged, worshipped in
spirit and held in reverence; if the sabbath is to be devoutly kept ; it is needful
to imbue the mind, and regulate the conduct with remembrance of these truths,
This is the highest of parental duties. Children should be taught from earliest
days not merely to love, fear and obey, but to honour their parents.


I, Honour is due to parents from children. “Honour thy father and thy
mother.” Customs of society distinguish the separate claims of father and
mother, but here they are represented as sustaining towards their children one
undivided, honourable claim. 1. Honour is due to Parents om account of
relationship to their children. Next to relation to God is that of parents to
children. ‘There is a beautiful resemblance of one to the other. In the care
and interest, the tenderness and authority of a father, we have a faint image of
the superintendence, compassion, and government of God. Children should
honour their parents because they are related to them. (a) As authors of their


being. (6) As their support and comfort. (c¢) As their educators and
protectors. 2. Honour ts due to Parents on account of affection for their
children. Parents often love their children as themselves, hence terms of


”) 6 48


endearment concerning them, “ olive branches,” “sunbeams,” “ jewels,” and all
that is delightful and beautiful. They impoverish themselves to enrich them.
They are not like the raven, or ostrich which are cruel to their young. (Job.
xxxix. 14). What adebt of gratitude and honour do children owe to parents !
Yet how few try to pay it. Philip the son of Charles V., Einperor of Germany,
became master of a new world and of the richest and most extensive dominions
in Europe by his father’s voluntary resignation, but was so ungrateful that he
kept his generous parent waiting a long time for the payment of a small pension.
Milton was dependent on his family on account of infirmities ; yet his two elder
daughters seem to have been destitute of affection and pity. Hooker often
prayed that he might never give sorrow to his mother, and used to say that he
loved her so dearly, that he would try to be good as much for her sake, as for
his own,


II. The inducements which children have to honour their parents. This is
said to be “the first commandment with promise (Ep. vi. 2).” The promise
may be applied to the Jews, and to all who keep the commandment, and thus
we trace the confirmation of the word, in the providence of God? 1. /¢ 18
pleasing to God. (Col. ii. 20). It is joyful to Rea themselves, and
acceptable to God. “This is right,” a duty grounded on the simple, natural


and unchanging principles of equity. 2. /¢ has a tendency to sean human
a


GHP, v. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





life. “That thy days may be prolonged.” Long life was considered a blessing
ee xci. 16; aeeviil 6), but ste children find a grave in the cradle, or die in
the flower of their age. ‘The observers of this commandment have a promise
of long life and prosperity ; whereas those who neglect the duties of it, have no
promise of these things at all. To the former, long life comes in virtue of a

romise which is infallible, so far as it shall serve God’s glory aud their good ,
bo to the latter it does not come in virtue of any promise at all, for such have
no interest in the promise ; on the contrary they are under the curse of God ;
for it is written, ‘cursed is every one that continueth not in all things which
are written in the book of the law to do them’” (Paterson). 3. It guarantees
the well being of life. ‘“‘That it may go well with thee.” Long life without
the blessings and comforts of life is not desirable. Life is only a blessing,
when we retain health and reason, and grow in grace and usefulness, as we grow
in age. ‘Observe and hear all these words that it may go well with thee
and thy children after thee for ever.” 4. Jt pledges national existence. Life
and its enjoyments, possession of Canaan, and national ce depended upon
filial respect. Jewish, Roman and other histories, bear witness to this truth,
The words set forth a universal principle of national life and existence.
“Because ye have obeyed the commandment of Jonadab your father, and kept
all his precepts.... therefore saith the Lord of Hosts, Jonadab, the son of
Rechab, shall not want a man to stand before me for ever.” (Jer. xxxv. 18, 19).


Tur Srxta CommMANDMENT: OR THB RELIGION or TempEn.— Verse 17.


The next three commandments determine our duties towards our neighbour,
and secure life, marriage and property. In Lev. xix. 18 they are summed up
in one word, “‘ Love thy neighbour as thyself.” Not only is murder condemned,
but all our passions from which murder originates. Hence we may term this
command the religion of temper.


I. What this commandment forbids. Mere killing is not prohibited, for that
was lawful sometimes, but every act of violence which inflicts personal injury
and endangers human life. “The omission of the object, still remains to be
noticed, as showing that the prohibition includes not only the killing of a
fellow-man, but the destruction of one’s own life or suicide.” (Keil). 1. Violent
deeds are forbidden. Suicide, or taking away our own life. Ancient systems,
taught as a aay, sentiment of morality, that a man might withdraw from life
when he found it expedient. Mode verdicts and modern customs of
assigning insanity as the cause of this crime lead us to regard it with pity and
not detestation. We must look at the act in its real nature, in the law which
prohibits it, and the dreadful consequences by which it is enforced. “ Do
thyself no harm.” Duelling is a vestige of feudal barbarism. It constitutes
the person who thinks himself injured the judge, witness, and avenger of his
own wrongs. The grounds of its defence, are irrational, and subversive of all
law, justice, and humanity. The duellist makes a law for himself, exalts it
above the institutions of his country, and the laws of God. “He that is slow
to anger is better than the mighty : And he that ruleth his spirit, than he that
taketh a city.” Murder is forbidden. Every man is our brother. We are
bound to love him, and promote his welfare. To murder is to hate him, to
in4ict the greatest misery on him for ever. In the gospel a sacred dignity is
attached to man. He is made in “ the image of God,” and associated with the
nature of God. Hence, infinite majesty is insulted, infinite goodness abused,
and divine authority trampled on. “ For in the image of God, made he man.”


(Gen. FH e 2. Violent passions are forbidden, As explained and fulfilled by


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. V.





Jesus Christ, this commandment embraces a class of most powerful human
affections and desires. It is enforced by all the facts and principles of the
gospel Anger is a species of murder, and when roused to excess, will produce
outrages most shameful. “In their anger they slew a man.” Causeless anger,
scornful contempt, and passionate reviling are three breaches of this command.
(Matt. v. 21, 22). Hatred often leads to excess in language and actions.
“Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer.” (John, ili. 15). A scornful
spirit must not be indulged. To scorn is to despise, vilify and revile. Revenge
must not be cherished. He who is proud of his own importance, careless of the
rights of justice, and sacrifices the peace, character and life of the offender to
the indulgence of passion breaks this law. ‘“ ‘Thou shalt not hate thy brother
in thine heart. ‘Thou shalt not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the
children of thy people.” (Lev. xix. 17, 18).


“ What will not ambition and revenge descend to.”—Milton.


II. What this commandment enjoins. It teaches the very opposite feelings
of envy, hatred, and revenge. 1. /t enjoins feelings of humanity. We must
not envy nor grieve at the prosperity of another—not quarrel, nor rail, nor plot
against another. We must exercise mercy, not cruelty. We must be kind,
tender-hearted, and forgiving towards our fellow creatures, and put away “all
bitterness and wrath.” 2. /é enjoins the use of all lawful efforts to preserve life.
Whatever tends to destroy our natural life is expressly forbidden. We must
avoid all intemperance, gluttony, and drunkenness. We must not be indifferent
to our own wants, nor neglect the wants of others. Every effort must be made
to feed, clothe, and preserve the body, to avoid immoderate labour and indul-
gence, and to keep the life of another. Destroy not your own souls by false
confidence, pernicious sentiments, and neglect of “the great salvation.” Destroy
not the souls of others by neglect in preventing them from sin, in abandoning
the religious interests of family, society, and neighbourhood, and by with-
holding your effort and influence to save men. Oh, avoid the guilt of spiritual
murder !

Murder forbidden. Observe, this commandment is—I. Universal in appli-
cation ; to each person is said, “ Zhou shalt not kill.” There is no exception to
this rule. II. Emphatic in its wording; “shalt not.” Note the brevity of the
whole commandment by which additional force is given to it. Brevity is not
only the source of wit, but of wisdom also, III. Concerning the greatest of
crimes. The awful nature of murder is sufficiently shown by—1. The abhorence
ip which it is held, both by God and man. 2. The terrible reproaches of
conscience with which the murderer is tormented.—J. 8. Clarke,


“© horror ! horror! horror! Tongue, nor heart
Cannot conceive nor name thee.” —Shakespeare,


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 16. Reverence due to parents.
Honour your parents, te, 1. Obey
them; 2. Respect them; 3. Treat
their opinions with regard; 4. Treat
their habits with respect. They may
be different from ours; may be anti-
quated, and to us strange, odd, whim-
sical; but they are the habits of a
parent, and are not to be ridiculed.
5. provide for them when sick, wearv,
old, and infirm.—Barnes,


Prolonged. A good child lengtheneth
his father’s days ; therefore God promi-
seth to lengthen his, Ill children, as
they bring their parents’ “ gray hairs
with sorrow to the grave,” so they are
many times cut off in the midst of
their days, as Abimelech was: God
rendering upon him the evil that he
did to his father (Judges ix 56). Besides


the punishment they have in their


posterity, to whom they Tr been
1


GHAP. V.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY.


lt a ee


peremptores potitis quam parentes.—
Trapp.

We have a command—“ Honour thy
father and thy mother.” The political
fathers or magistrates (Job. xxix. 16) ;
seniors, venerable with age (Lev. xix.
32); spiritual fathers (1 Cor. iv. 15);
domestic fathers, fathers of households
(2 Kings v. 13) ; natural fathers, fathers
of the flesh (Heb. xii. 9). How chil-
dren are to obey this command. 1. By
a reverential esteem of their persons.
(a) Inwardly, by fear mixed with love
(Lev. xix. 3). (6) Outwardly, in word
and gesture. 2. By careful obedience.
(a) In hearkening to their council
(Prov. i. 8). _(b) In complying with


1. It is the solemn command of God.
2. It is well pleasing to the Lord


(Col. iii, 20). 3. Parents deserve
honour on account of their great


love and affection for their children.—
Watson.


Ver. 17. 1. The value of buman
life. Philosophy, science, and supersti-
tion dignify not human nature. Only
where the Gospel is known is life
appreciated, preserved, and consecrated
to right ends. 2. The guilt of taking
away human life. It may be taken
away by violence, excess, or neglect.
If a beast killed a man, it was stoned ;
what punishment, then, shall fall upon
the murderer when God comes to


their commands (Jer. xxxv. 6; Col. ili,
20). 38. By relieving their wants
(Gen. xlvii. 12). The reasons why
children should honour their parents.


“make imquisition for blood” (Pa.
ix. 12).


‘Uae Seventa ComMANDMENT: TE SANCTITY OF Marriace.— Verse 18.


“Nature,” says Grindon, “is a system of nuptials.” Human love is the
highest form of love. When true lovers meet, God hath joined them together.
Marriage is a symbol of the union between Christ and His Church ; intended to
be an honourable and abiding institution, and must not be violated by unfaith-
fulness and adultery. “Let not man put asunder.”


I, The sanctity of marriage must be duly regarded. Adultery was prevalent
in Eastern countries, where heat and idleness seem to nourish sinful lusts almost
beyond control, It is the most awful perversion of God’s institution, and the
strongest language ever used in Scripture depicts its accursed nature. In the
light of the New Testament we read this law in broader spirit than mere letter
indicates, and that domestic bonds may be destroyed and the household invaded
in different ways. ‘“‘'The desertion of a husband or of a wife; the neglect of
conjugal duties, so minutely specified and so persuasively urged in various parts
of the New Testament ; divorce for any reason but the ascertained perpetration
of the crime denounced in this prohibition; the degradation of the marriage
contract, by subordinating it to schemes of avarice, ambition, or sensuality—
each of these is a gross violation of the seventh commandment,” says Stowel,
“This is the will of God, even your sanctification, that ye should abstain from
fornication ; that every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in
sanctification and honour.”


II. To secure due regard for marriage sanctity, personal chastity must be
cultivated. This sin and the whole class of passions and gratifications of which
it is a part, are offences against purity—the purity of God, of ourselves, and of
those affected by our example. Cultivate—1. Chastity in thought. Thoughts
are dangerous and only require opportunity to break forth into open wickedness.
“ Whosoever looketh upon a woman to lust after her, hath committed adultery
with her alread» in his heart” (Matt. v.28). 2. Chastity in conversation. Words
as well as acts may violate the spirit of this commandment (Matt. xii. 37).
Let no ce: worthless through putridity, communication proceed out of your


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY, OHAP. V.





mouth” (Eph. iv. 29). 3. Chastity in actions, Fornication, polygamy, and all
unnatural pollutions—immodest behaviour and unchaste looks and dress must
be abandoned. “ Fornication and uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be once
named among you, as becometh saints” (Eph. v. 3).


Tae Eranta ComMMANDMENT: ''HE Ricuts oF Property.— Verse 19.


Man is endowed with a principle which impels him to the acquisition of
wealth. ‘The proper exercise of this principle leads to gradations of social rank,
and lays the foundation for the institutions and laws by which property is
preserved and transmitted. But since man is sinful and selfish, it is necessary
to embody this law in the legislation of the community.


_I. How this commandment may be violated. The highwayman who steals
his neighbour’s purse; the domestic who takes his master’s cash, and the
apprentice who steals his drugs ; the tradesman who makes “the ephah small”
(Amos viii. 5), and weighs with “the balances of deceit” (Hos. xii. 7), who
seeks to overreach or defraud ; the dishonest partner ; the fraudulent bankrupt ;
the traducer of character; the borrower and receiver of stolen goods—all violate
this law. Spiritually, a man robs God by taking away the Sabbath, withholding
what is due from him to support and propagate the gospel, by neglecting his
own soul, and foolishly wasting life, with its calls and opportunities, ‘ Willa
man rob God?”


II. How to guard against the violation of this commandment. To obey the
law and preserve the healthy exercise of a principle which becomes sinful by
excessive indulgence we should 1. Be diligent in a lawful calling. In the
avocations of Jife we have the happiness of individuals combined with the in-
terests of society—a sphere in which our powers have no need to be lavished on
trifles nor perverted by sinful pursuits. Employment for our own support and
that of our family is needful. We are urged not to be idle, careless, and sloth-
ful—not to engage in gambling, nor to cherish a covetous, grasping disposition,
but to be “diligent in business” and “ abide in eur calling.” “ Let him that
stole steal no more ; but rather let him labour, working with his hands the thing
which is good, that he may give to him that needeth” (Eph. iv. 28). 2. Be
content with your lot in life. It is the arrangement of God and not the work of
chance. With all our shifting and tricks, our avarice and plots, we cannot alter
things. ‘ Both riches and honour come of Thee, and ‘Thou reignest over all:
and in Thine hand it is to make great, and to give strength unto all.” Our in-
dividual histories and efforts subserve to the plans of God as much as the fall of
states and the motion of stars. Rich and poor are exhorted to trust in God and
acquiesce in His providence. “‘ Be content with such things as ye have ” (Heb.
xiil. 5). 3. Moderate your views, expectations, and desires. A sober estimate
of our wants and means of gratification is required. Vigorous restraint must be
put upon the tendency to over estimate our own claims, and the indulyence of
romantic hopes which are often facinating and ruinous. Fret not nor vex
yourselves for the wealth and property of another. “Give me neither poverty
nor riches; feed me with food covenient for me, lest I be full and deny
thee, and say, Who is the Lord? or lest I be poor and steal, and take the
name of my God in vain.”


Ay


omar. V. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


ae


Tar Nivra CommanpMent: THe GovERNMENT oF THE TonavE.— Verse 20.


We have been considering the law of the family, the law of social right, the
law of social purity, and the law of honesty; now we notice the law of truth.
We are to regard our neighbour's reputation, and not injure his character. Our
great poet says—

“ Who steals my purse steals trash ;
But he who filches from me my good name,
Robs me of that which not enriches him,
Yet leaves me poor indeed !”

I. What is forbidden in this commandment. False witness may be given
in various ways; but in everything we must put away lying and speak truth
with our neighbour (Eph. iv. 25). 1. Jn courts of law false witness was especially
condemned. ‘The prosecutor is forbidden to make unjust demand, to lay false
charges, and to suborn false witnesses ; the defender to deny a just charge, and
to make artful evasions ; the witnesses must not deny or keep back any part of
truth ; the advocate must not defend what is wrong, nor the judge pervert
justice and condemn the innocent. We must freely, sincerely speak the
truth, and nothing but the truth. “A faithful witness will not lie; but a
false witness will utter lies” (Prov. xiv. 5). (Qf. Deut. xix. 18, 19 ; Jer. iv. 2;
Zech. viii. 17). 2. In daily life false witness is forbidden. Backbiting, evil
construing, and malicious accusation must not be indulged. Nor must we
be guilty of idle gossip, tale-bearing, and raising, receiving, and spreading
scandal or false report. ‘Io credit common report is in itself a species of
calumny,” says one. “A wicked doer giveth heed to false lips; and a liar
giveth an ear to a naughty tongue” (Prov. xvii. 4). Give no currency to
scandal, nor join those mischievously employed, crying out “ Report, and we
will report” (Jer. xx. 10). ‘How many thousand souls are hurt every day by
the words of others,” says Baxter. “Thou shalt not raise (credit, take up,
bear) a false (empty, untruthful) report; put not thine hand with the wicked
(render him no help) to be an unrighteous witness” (Ex. xxiii. 1). (¢ Lev.
xix. 16; Ex. xxiii. 7; Ps. ci. 5; Prov. xix. 9.)

“ Whoever keeps an open ear
For tattlers, will be sure to hear
The trumpet of contention 3
Aspersion is the babbler’s trade 3
To listen is to lend him aid,
And rush into dissension.—Cowper.


II, What is enjoined in this commandment. It enjoins truth and simplicity
in our intercourse one with another, an agreement between the heart and the
lips. 1. Truthfulness in speech. Lying is offensive to God and unfits for
society. How can you converse or bargain with a man when you cannot trust
his word? ‘Therefore put away lying, speak every man truth with his
neighbour ; for we are members one of another.” (Ep. iv. 25). 2. Regard for
our neighbour's good name, Invest him with the character of a friend, charitably
cover his infirmities, betray not his secrets, readily acknowledge his gifts, and
receive good report concerning him. Defend his reputation when unjustly
attacked, envy not his success nor take pleasure in his disgrace, ‘ Speak evil
of no man.” (Titus iii. 2), 8. Love to others as to ourselves. We should be
pleased with the good of another, as well as with our own good. Never keep
an account of the misdeeds of another, with a view to sum up and charge
against him when occasion serves. Abound in that charity which “doth not
behave itself unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh,
(imputeth) no evil.” (1 Cor. xiii. 5). Our neighbour lives near us, comes under

118


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY, GHarP. V.
SS


our notice, and lies more or less at our mercy. His claims are therefore
pce nearness, by intimate acquaintance with him, and by all local and
= a ee igations that bind us together. “Thou shalt love thy neighbour as
“Who that dares
His brother's name, his brother’s cause m


The very law maligns, spurns its restraints,
And umpire sits, where he himzelf should bow.”


Tas Texte Commanpment: Untawrut Desire. — Verse 91.


“ As the sixth, seventh, and eighth Commandments forbid us to injure our
neighbour in deed, the ninth forbids us to injure him in word, and the tenth in
thought. No human eye can see the coveting heart ; it is witnessed only by
him who possesses it, and by Him to whom all things are naked and open. But
it is the root of all sins against our neighbour in word or in deed. (Jas. i. 14,
15). The man who is acceptable before God, walking uprightly, not backbiting
with his tongue, nor doing evil to his neighbour, is he who “ speaketh the truth
in his heart.” (Ps. xv. 2, 8).—Sp. Com.


I, The way in which this commandment is violated. By that discontentedness
with our lot in life which leads us to fret, repine and rebel against God’s
providence. “ Neither murmur ye as some of them murmured.” (1 Cor. x. 10).
By envying or grieving at our neighbour’s good. “Grudge not one against
another (Jas. v. 9). By indulging unlawful desires for things which belong
to our neighbour. Excessive longing after another’s wealth and possessions is
branded by this Commandment as sin. ‘Take heed, and beware of
covetousness,””


II. The spirit which leads to the violation of this commandment, “ ‘Thou
shalt not covet.” The words indicate the intense spirituality and holiness of
the law. St. James (i. 15) looks upon sin as an outward act. St. Paul looks
upon it in its source and earliest stages. The province of human law is the
deed, that of divine law the heart, the thoughts from which spring the actions,
The thought and desire may lead to execution of evil. Evil concupiscence is the
root of all sin, especially of offences which men commit against their fellowmen
(Matt. xv. 19; Mark vii. 21). Eve and Achan “saw, coveted, and took.”
Covetousness instigated Judas to betray the Saviour, and induced Ananias and
Sapphira to “tempt the Holy Ghost.” “TI had not known sin (clearly aud fully
as an indwelling and virulent principle), but by the law; for I had not known
lust (irregular and ungoverned desire), except the (Mosaic) law had said, ‘hou
shalt not covet” (Rom. vii. 7).


III. The method of correcting this spirit. Hippocrates advised a consultation
of all the physicians in the world for the cure of covetousness. What they could
not discover the Bible prescribes. 1. Horm a right estimate of worldly good.
We covet what never satisfies. “Solomon had put all the creatures in a retort,”
says quaint Watson, “and distilled out their essence, and behold ‘all was
vanity’” (Ecc. ii. 11), 2. Be satisfied with present possessions. Why ungrateful
because we have not more and others less. ‘The more we have the greater will
be our account at the last day. Let us believe that condition best which God
has given to us. Contentment, says Socrates, is ‘‘ tae wealth of nature.” i |
have enough,” cried Jacob (Gen. xxxiii. 11). “I have learned, in eee


CHAP. ¥. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY,








atate I am, therewith to be content (é.¢., sufficient in one’s self, self-contained,
opposed to outward blessings). (Phil. iv. 11-13.) 3. Pray for Divine grace to
help. This alone can subdue lust. Cherish faith in God who feeds the birds
and clothes the lilies. Faith is the remedy for care and covetousness, It
overcomes the world, purifies the heart, and makes God our portion (Ps. xvi. 5).
Ask the Holy Spirit to make you heavenly minded, and fix your thoughts on
Christ and things above. ‘Covet earnestly the best gifts,”

The closing commandment is of great importance in two distinct points of
view, first, as exhibiting the spirit of all the previous commandments, and
secondly, as laying the foundation for just and consistent views of all the
doctrines of the Gospel. It exhibits the spirit of the divine law, as extending to
the desires of the heart ; the subtlest movings of the mind, as well as the
visible actions of the life. In other commandments, a man may lose sight of
the real character of the government under which he is placed, and may imagine
that if he secures the confidence of his fellow creatures he is safe. This is the
prevailing state of mind of men of every rank. It is thought if we infringe
not on the rights of others—seize not their property—nor malignantly traduce
their characters—nor wantonly endanger their lives, we are moral, But this
commandment brings us under the eye of an omniscient ruler, under the
authority of a spiritual government. It teaches us that our thoughts and wishes
are minutely inspected. It pursues us to our secrecy—pierces the veil of
external appearances, and lays open the foldings of self-delusion. It scrutinizes
our very souls, and makes us feel the omnipresence of Deity. It brings the
sanctions of His law to bear directly on our present consciousness ; links the
moments of our existence to the last judgment, and pours into the inmost
chambers of the spirit the light of a future world. “I had not known sin,
except the law had said, ‘thou shalt not covet.’” Secondly. The importance
of this commandment will be felt when we consider it as laying the foundation
for just and consistent views of the doctrines of the gospel. The sublime truths
of the one are from the same God who “spake the words” of the other. It is
only by invalidating the authority, or by subduing the lofty tone, of the com-
mandments, that a man can either resist the evidence or pervert the meaning of
the gospel. How cana man for instance, consistently deny the total depravity of
the human race, without first destroying the uncompromising strictness of the
divine law, thundering forth its curses on even an irregular desire? How can
a man persuade himself that it is not his duty to believe on the name of Jesus
Christ for salvation, without first persuading himself that it is not his duty to
love God with all his heart and his neighbour as himself, in a word, that nothing
is due from him to God, and consequently that he is not a subject of moral
government of God? The great promise of the gospel to our first parents, was
delivered in circumstances illustrative of this sentiment ; for the views they had
of the sentence passed upon them, made them feel the necessity and value of
this promise. How often in the public discourses of Jesus, and in more private
dialogues, with various classes surrounding him, do we see his anxiety to produce
an impression of the sanctity and strictness of the commandments,—evidently
for the purpose of silencing the objector and preparing him to “ receive the
Kingdom of God?” In the same spirit the apostles preached and wrote. A
consciousness of guilt will lead you to rely on the perfect obedience of Christ.
Here we have not simply, an exhibition of mercy, but of “ mercy and truth”
meeting together—not merely the triumph of grace, but of “grace reigning
through righteousness, into eternal life.” ‘ God hath set him forth, not only asa
propitiation through faith in his blood, for the remission of sins ;” but also, “ to
declare his righteousness, that he might be just, and the justifier of him that
believeth in Jesua.”—rom Dr. Stowel,


120





HOMILETIC COUMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY,


CHAP. V.





HOMILETIOC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS,


Ver. 18. The sum of this com-
mandment is the preservation of bodily
purity. 1. Something tacitly implied ;
which is that the ordinance of marriage
should be observed. (1 Cor. vii. 2;
Heb. xiii. 4). 2. Something expressly
forbidden ; which is infecting ourselves
with bodily pollutions.— Watson.


Ver. 19. Dishonesty forbidden.
Observe the simple comprehensiveness
of this commandment. 1. Nothing
is said about the value of the thing
stolen. ‘The law is broken whether the
thing taken, be a kingdom or a pin.
2. Nothing is said about the nature of
the thing stolen ; it may be property,
time, reputation, etc. 3. Nothing is
said about the method of stealing ;
whether it be secretly appropriated, or
violently wrested from its owner.—
Biblical Museum.


Ver. 20. In this commandment,
three kinds of interests are combined—
the interests of truth—of character—
and of neighbourhood.— Stowel.

Learn—1. The value of a good
name. 3. The sacredness of truth.


3. The necessity of guarding our
tongue. 4. ‘he danger of false wit-
ness. (Deut. xix. 18, 19 ; Prov. xix. 5).


“ Give thoughts no tongue.” —Shakespeare.


Ver. 21. The injunction is repeated
to call attention and impress the mind,
The form here differs from that in
(Ex. xx. 17). The order of the words
house and wife is reversed, two different
words desire and covet are used here,
and the word jieldisadded. The first
two variations are explained by the
general character of the passage, and
it seems natural to mention the “ field,”
when Moses was speaking with the
partition of Canaanin view. Learn—
1. The nature of covetousness. It
denotes a state of mind from which
the Supreme good has been lost, labour-
ing to replace Hin by some subordinate
form of enjoyment. 2. The origin of
covetousness from within. Desires,
lusts ete. 8. The forms of covetous-
ness. Worldliness, rapacity, avarice,
prodigality, etc. 4. ‘The guilt and
evils of covetousness. 6. The doom of
the oovetous. ‘“ The covetousness
whom the Lord abhoreth.”


Tux Masesty oF Gop’s Law.— Verses 22-25.


The delivery of the commandments was accompanied with every display of
grandeur, and amid circumstances of terror. Everything was ordered to impress
the mind with the glory of God, the rigour of law, and the dread of penalty.
This imposing manner and appalling phenomena indicate the majesty of God’s
law. ‘This majesty is seen in different ways.


I. In the divinity of its origin. ‘These words the Lord spake.” The voice
of God was distinctly heard articulating, and that voice was louder than the
loudest peals of thunder. Many ask, “from whence do we get the moral law?”
The answer is given here. It came from God—the grandest and highest origin
to which anything can aspire! It is elevated above the code of Egypt, Persia
and Greece—a standard of life infinitely beyond the invention of man, and to
which the holiest have never reached. A distinguished lawyer rather
sceptically inclined on this subject undertook to read the Old ‘Testament
to satisfy himself concerning the validity of its claims. When he read the
Decalogue, lost in admiration he exclaimed, “ where did Moses get that law ?”
Further study removed every sceptical doubt, and produced conviction of its
divine origin (¢f, Pulpit Com. p. 106), “We know that God spake unto

”


Moses.
12)


Omar, ¥. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





II. In the terrible phenomena which accompanied its delivery. Such phen-
omena were varied, most terrific and designed to produce the conviction of the
authority and holiness of law. 1. There was natural agency. The deepest
impressions are made upon the mind through the senses, God who knew what
was in man signalized his descent on Sinai, with thunder and lightning, smoke
and fire, “the sound of a trumpet, and the voice of words.” What must be
the aim and dignity of a law thus given? What should be the regard and
obedience we pay to the great Lawgiver Himself? ‘That thou mayest fear this
glorious and fearful name, the Lord thy God.” 2. There was supernatural
agency. ‘The word was spoken “ by angels.” (Heb. ii. 2). The law was received
“by the disposition (ministration) of angels” (Acts vii. 53); “ ordained
by angels in the hand of a mediator.” (Gal. ili. 19), The presence of angels is
often referred to in the giving of the law, to indicate its solemnity and claims.
“He shined forth from mount Paran, and he came with ten thousands of saints,
(myriads of holy ones, ¢.¢. angels); from his right hand went a fiery law for
them,” Deut. xxxiii. 2 (¢f Psa. lxxxviii. 17; Heb. iii. 3).


III. In the design for which it was given. There was mercy mixed with
majesty and the appalling phenomena produced the desired effect. 1. To test
their obedience. Israel had been surrounded by idolatry, and the ideas of God’s
majesty and reverence for law had been lost, by deifying objects of sense. ‘The
manifestations of Sinai were directly adapted to inspire the soul with reverence
for the infinite majesty and eternal power of that Being with whom they had to
do— to put their obedience to a fresh proof and give them a more signal oppor-
tunity of showing devotedness to His will. “For God is come to prove you.”
2. To keep them from sin, They learned the guilt of offending a God go terrible
in strictness and holiness. They felt that they were weak, frail, and sinful
creatures, and were struck with consternation at such awful displays. Moses
himself was overpowered with fear (Heb. xii. 21). This was a dispensation of
terror, designed to prepare for the gospel. “Therefore knowing the terror of
the Lord we persuade men.” 8. To show the need of a mediator. Conscious of
guilt, they were greatly alarmed. “This great fire will consume us.” They
wondered that they remained alive after witnessing such appearances. “ For
who is there of all flesh that hath heard the voice of the living God, speaking
out of the midst of the fire, as we have, and lived?” ‘They expected
to hear more, but could not forbear it, and requested Moses to hear and
speak for them, “Go thou near,” etc. (ver. 27). Jesus is the mediator of the
new covenant,


IV. In the method in which it is handed down to us. We may judge of
the value and importance of communications by the forms in which they are
written. 1. Zhis law ts complete, “and he added no more” (ver. 22). The
great voice spoke no more directly to the people. The scene was not repeated,
and the law was complete in itself and distinct from other revelations given
through Moses. “The law of the Lord is perfect.” 2. This law és permanent.
“He wrote them in two tables of stone,” to preserve them from corruption, and
transmit them pure and entire to posterity. Let us thank God for a writien
revelation, which is a natural and human method of conveyance, more complete,
uniform, and permanen: than any other form. Vow audita perit, littera scripta
manet, “a word heard perishes, but a written letter remains.” Tradition passes
away like the morning clouds; the Bible will continue as long as sun and moon
endure. “'I'he word of the Lord endureth for ever,”


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. V.





Tue Use or Nature oy Divove Instauction.— Verses 23-26.


Nature and the Bible have the same author, and both are written for the
instruction of man. “Thus there are two books from whence I collect my
divinity,” says Sir Thomas Brown, “besides that written one by God, another
of His servant, Nature—that universal and public manuscript that lies expanded
unto the eyes of all; those that never saw Him in the one have discovered Him
in the other.” God, in the revelation of His will, has often created the scenes
and used the elements of nature. This is specially seen in the giving of the Law
on Sinai. Hence learn the use of natural phenomena in Divine instruction.


I. Man is constituted to learn from nature. His senses are adapted to
the external world. ‘Ye have heard His voice—we have seen this day.”
For every organ of sense there seems to be an object in nature. But man’s
moral nature is affected throuch the medium of sense. Many talk of “the
sensuous minds of the Jewish people,” but we are children in this respect.
We are frightened at the lightning and the thunder—terror-stricken at floods,
fires, and earthquakes. We are roused to a sense of our danger and our guilt
by the manifestation of God in His works ; and, like Massillon’s audiences in the
Eee Court, dread His terrible judgments, ‘Let not God speak with us lest
we die,”


II. Nature is constituted to teach man. Nature is God’s mind expressed
in matter: “a product of His power and wisdom—a mirror in which His
attributes are reflected—a volume in which, by legible characters or expressive
signs, He maketh Himself known” (Dr. Jas. Buchanan). “ Natural theology”
is only the true insight and real exposition of God’s revelation in Nature ; for
“in His temple doth everyone speak of (marg., every whit of it uttereth) His

lory” (Ps. xxix. 9). But Nature, as well as the Bible, allows special Divine

interpositions. Matter is not eternal, nor is abstract law endowed with
attributes of deity. We have often direct interpositions which seem—but only
seem, perhaps—above natural law. God speaks to us by the elements, forces,
und scenes of Nature. He often extorts confession, vows, and prayers by its
awful displays, and speaks in tones which lead us to cry for mercy and a
mediator. “ Let not God speak with us,” but “do thou speak with us, and we
will hear it and do it.”


Moses Cuosen Meprator.— Verses 27, 28; 30, 81.


As all the people stood before the mount, terrified by the vivid flames and
the trembling earth, they feared death. The voice of God overpowered them
more than anything else, and the heads of the people and elders requested Moses
to intercede.


I. The reason of this mediation. In this awful display Israel realised their
moral condition as unfit for communion with Jehovah. Guilty man has alwa; 8
felt his distance from God, and at every indication of the supernatural cried out
with fear. Convinced of sin we feel the necessity of a mediator.


II. The nature of this mediation. When the people “ stood afar off,” conscious
of guilt and afraid of God’s wrath, “ Moses drew near unto the thick darkness,
or was made to draw near (Ex. xx. 21), for he durst not venture himself. The
Rabbis think that God sent an angel to take him by the hand and lead him up.


1. He spoke to God for the people. 2. He spoke to the people for ah, Speak


OHAP. V. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


a anne


thou unto us all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee.” Moses typified
Christ by whom we draw nigh to God without fear and reluctance. By him
“we have boldness, courageous outspokeness (Acts iv. 13), and access with con-
fidence,” Eph. iii, 12.


III. The Divine approval of this mediation. Perhaps they did not know the
full import of what they did, but the nomination was well pleasing to God.”
“They have well said all that they have spoken.” Moses is duly appointed, and
God speaks to them through his mouth, and they promise to hear and obey.
‘Thus was the covenant made between God and Israel. Moses was honoured as
the giver of the law, but Jesus is more highly exalted. “ For this man was
counted worthy of more glory than Moses, inasmuch as He who hath builded the
house hath more honour than the house,”


Dirrerence BerwEEN Worps aNnD Dreps.— Verse 28.


He expressly mentions having heard what they had said to Moses. God
always hears what we say, not as an unconcerned auditor, but as witness and
judge. Solemn thought! The words here were words of religious avowal.
“We will hear and do it.” God has heard our religious resolutions and
engagements. /“irst our private ones—that we would watch against such a temper ;
pray for grace to resist such a temptation ; to redeem the time and honour the
Lord with our substance. Secondly, our more public and solemn ones; when
we joined ourselves to His people ; went to His table ; and over the memorials
of His dying love said, ‘“ Henceforth by thee only will I make mention of Thy
name.” J have heard, says He, the voice of the words, ete. ; and adds with
approbation, containing in it complaint, “They have well said all they have
spoken. But talking and doing are two things, Even amongst ourselves, one
goes a little way without the other. Actions speak louder than words. What
is lip service in religion! Judas gave our Lord the lip—kissed and betrayed
Him. Ezekiel’s hearers extolled his preaching; brought others to admire
him ; but their hearts went after their covetousness. Here they spoke well in
expressing their readiness to hear and do, But God, who knew them better
hee they knew themselves, exclaimed, “O that there was such a heart in
them.”

Speech is one of the most uncertain criterions to judge of character, as to
reality or degree of religion, From education, reading, and hearing, persons
may learn to talk well—may surpass others far better than themselves : as an
empty vessel sounds louder than a full one, and a shallow brook is more noisy
than a deep river. Some speak little, concerning themselves especially, for fear
of deception, or lest they should appear to be what they are not. Baxter says,
in his life of Judge Hale, I feared he was wanting in experimental religion, as
he seldom spoke of his own spiritual views and feelings. But upon better
acquaintance I found out my mistake. He had heard from many so much
hypocrisy and fanaticism that he was arged towards the extreme of silence.
It would be better for some to talk less of high confidence and wonderful
ecstacies before those weak in faith and comfort, and in danger of being
depressed by comparison, ‘Io how many individuals will these words
apply! he champion of truth, has defended its purity and importance—
contended earnestly and as far as argument and evidence goes, wisely for the
faith. He has well said all that he has spoken. But where is the spirit of
truth? the meeknessof wisdom? the mind of Christ? Another in the sanctuary
has acknowledged in language equally beautiful and true, we have erred and
strayed from thy ways like lost sheep, ete. He has well said all that he hag

134


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY, OfaP. v.


——





spoken. But where is the broken heart, the contrite spirit? How often
after these vonfessions is the sermon founded upon them disliked and the
preacher condemned! A ¢hird has gone to his brethren in distress and justified
the ways of God to man, but does he justify God’s dealings with himself in
trouble? He has well said all that he has spoken; but reminds us of Job's
language, “Behold thou hast instructed many and thou hast strengthened the weak
hands. Thy words have upholden him that was falling and thou hast strengthened
the feeble knees, But now it is come upon thee, and thou faintest : it toucheth thee
and thou art troubled.” Men mistake themselves though often sincere as they are
earnest. They do not distinguish between impulse and disposition, outward
excitement and inward principle. Hazael, at the prediction of his cruelties,
ignorant of the change that power would produce in him, really execrated the
character he became. Peter presuming, but not false, said though ull should be
offended, yet wili not I. The disciples supposed themselves established in faith,


beyond the danger of temptation to forsake Him, when they said ‘“ Now we


believe.”
—FHrom Jay.


But Jesus answered them, “ O that there was such a heart in you!”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 23-26. A Triple Prodigy.
1. They heard the voice of God speak-
ing with them in distinct language.
2. They saw the fire, the symbol of
His presence, the appearance of which
demonstrated it to be supernatural.
3. Though God appeared so terrible,
yet no person was destroyed, for He
came not “ to destroy, but to save.”—
Wilson.

Why should they fear to die?
Since they had seen that day that God
doth talk with man, and He liveth ?
It is answered that they looked upon
their present safety as a wonder, but
feared what would follow upon such
an interview, if continued. It is still
the work of the law to serve man, and
to drive tiem to seek for a mediator.
If God speaks to us from heaven His
stillest rhetoric would be too loud for
us.— Zrapp. °

Terror of law. 1, Its design. 2.
Its results. 3. Its inefficiency to save.


“The law was delivered in this terrible
manner, partly to procure reverence
for the doctrine of it, and partly to set
forth the nature and office of it;
which is to terrify and thunder-strike
offenders. This fire wherein the law
was given is still in it, and will never
be out of it.” (Deut. xxxiii. 2).—
Trapp.


Vers. 25-27. 1. The condition of
the people, in the state of their mind,
and in the locality of their camp, “ afar
off” in both senses, 2. ‘I'he necessity
of intercourse between God and the
people. 3. The medium of intercourse.
“A mediator, Moses was not of re-
demption as Christ that “ mediator of
the new covenant,” and “surety of a
better testament (Heb. vii. 22 ; ix. 15),
but of receiving the law, and deliver-
ing it to the people, for which end he
went up.” —T'rapp.


Taur Renicion Desorrsen.— Verse 29.


These words express God’s wish for His people, and describe the obedience
which He requires from them. The law had produced a penitent feeling, and
Israel had made good resolutions under the influence of that feeling. But true


religion does not consist in good feelin


true heart and constant obedience.
True religion is described— -


gs and good resolves. God wishes for a
“A heart in them to fear Me always.”


125


OHAP. V. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.
i


I. Inits nature. The fear of God. 1. Not emotion. Many are capable of ©
impression and feel deeply sensible of their wants. But frames and feelings
change ; emotions die away and leave the heart cold and indifferent. _ Men may
be sensitive in their nature, penetrated with the beauty, power and interests of
religion, but at the call of duty—the demand for resolute obedience, “ they are
offended.” 9. Not resolution. Israel resolved, and God commended their
resolutions, but where was their constancy, their sincerity and heart? Men

romise what they forget to perform, and their hearts do not chime in with their
ips. 8. But the fear of God. Not the spirit of a slave, but of ason. The
love which drives out fear and brings us near to God. We must know God not
as our Creator and governor, but as our Father. The sense of His peace
authority and love must penetrate the mind, elevate the soul, and temper
sacred awe, with filial confidence.


II. In its centre. ‘A heart in them.” The tone, colouring, and direction
of the outer life depend upon the condition of the heart— the inner feelings. Our
hearts must be renewed and made susceptible of sympathy and love. “ A new
heart,” “a heart of flesh,” “a clean heart” must be given and fixed on God.
“ Such a heart.” Words and profession, mere knowledge and religious excite-
ment are superficial. The seat of Jife and conduct is within a man. “ For as
he thinketh in his heart sois he.” _


ITI. In its manifestation. Keeping the commandments. If religion exists
it will be seen in its fruits. As light shines forth in beauty, so love in the heart
will manifest itself, not in impulse but obediqice. “If ye love Me keep My
commandments.” This keeping must be—1. Universal. “ All my command-
ments.” We are not to select some, like the Pharisees,. rigidly to observe as
compensation for the breach of others. All must be kept. This only is accept-
able to God. 2. Constant. ‘‘ Keep all my commandments always.” In words,
actions, and heart. Pledges are made under terror, but God requires expres
sion of steadfast principle, and seeks “ patient continuance in well-doing.”


IV. In its rewards. There is no merit in our obedience. It is defective and
unworthy. In fact we never can perfectly obey even one commandment in ten,
But where true conduct springs from a right heart, there will be happiness or
well-being. Thus the way of holiness is the way to happiness and God's favour.
1. Personal happiness. “That it might be well with them.” 2. Happiness
upon posterity. “And with their children.” 3. Happiness perpetual, “‘ For
ever!” “A perpetuity of bliss alone is bliss.” All this from a right heart !
Have we got sucha heart inus? We are taught how it may be gained. “TI will
put My fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from Me” (Jer. xxxii. 40).


Diving Soxicrrupe.


How lovely does God appear in the concern He here expresses! It is the
language of complaint. As much as to say, “ But I do not find it so.” Is He
then disappointed ? Not as to fact—for He knows all things—but as to right.
Surely, He may expect from us attention to His voice and improvement of
advantages with which we are favoured. When He meets with nothing of this,
He has reason to complain. ‘This is the meaning when He says, “ What more
could have been done for My vineyard, and I have not done it? Wherefore,
when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes ?
These three mene I came seeking fruit, and finding none.” It is the expression
of desire. hen Scripture ascribes human attributes and feelings to God, they
must eben according to the perfection of His nature. They do not


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY., CHAP. Vv.


precisely mean the same in Him asin us. Yet there is always a truth, which
is the basis of such metaphorical representations. Slavish adherence to
systematic divinity has injured some of the finest passages of Revelation ;
and which wereintended to be felt rather than criticised. Do not object,
therefore, that “ God is in the heavens, He hath done whatsoever he pleaseth ;”
and ask “who hath resisted His will?” for this is His own language, “ O that
there was such a heart in them!” ‘ How often would I have gathered thee
as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!” Yes,
these are expressions of a God that cannot lie. This affords me encouragement.
Unworthy as I am, He does not abandon me. He is willing to save, and waiting
to be gracious to me. What is the inability of man to harmonize such declara-
tions with some other parts of their creed, to the oath of the living God. “ As
I live, saith the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth.” It is
the dictate of parental solicitude. The voice, not of a severe legislator or judge,
but of a Father. A Father who spared not His own Son, but delivered Him
up for us all—who does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men—
who says of the refractory child, ‘‘ How shall I give thee up, Ephraim?” who
says of the relenting child, “Is Ephraim My dear Son?” How often does He
assume this relation to deprive His greatness of terror, and render it our
encouragement and confidence. He pities “as a father pitieth his children,”
and takes the heart of a mother for the image of tenderness. “As one whom
his mother comforteth.” ‘Can a woman forget her child?” She may. Ah!
ye mothers, your affection is ice ; your heart is iron compared with His! ”—
* Yet will I not forget thee.” Surely “he that loveth not, knoweth not God—
for God is love.” Can this encourage us to sin? Can we grieve His spirit ?
Can we hear //im saying in vain, “ O do not that abominable thing which I
hate?” “ Or despisest thou the riches of His goodness,” etc.—From Jay.


CarEFuL WaLxrina.— Verses 30-33.


After Moses was chosen mediator he directed the people to return to their
tents, urged them to observe carefully all the commandments which they had
received, and not to turn aside to the right hand or to the left, that it might be
well with them. “This signifieth an exact care to walk in God’s Law, as in the
highway from which men may not turn aside, as in Deut. ii, 27,”—Ainsworth,


I. Human life is under God's direction. To Israel the message was—“ Get
you into your tents again ;” but to Moses, “Stand thou here by me.” Thus
some are appointed to one place, and others to another. Gods law is given for
guidance, laid down (for Jaw means that which is laid down or fixed) to show us
the way. “O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes !”


II. This direction is given by chosen agency. Men often choose their own
guides and miss their way. Intellect, education, and human laws are not
sufficient. The Scriptures and the Christian ministry are the appointed means
for instruction. 1. The ministry of man. Moses was chosen teacher and
mediator between God and His people. Men must know God in the holy life
and teaching of their fellow men, “Speak thou tous.” 2. 7he revelation of
God. Moses had not to speak his own, but the words which God had spoken to
him. If we speak not according to the law we have no light—no truth in us,
¥] will speak unto thee all the commandments, and the statutes, and the
judgments, which thou shalt teach them.”


III. This direction, given bv chosen agency, is easily understood. “Do,
therefore, a3 the Lord your God hath commanded you.” So plainly eee path


OHAP. V.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


oe Te eee
opened up that “the wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein.”


1. There must be no halting.
fixed. Hesttate and linger not.
2. There must be no turning aside.


“(Observe to do.” ‘The eye and heart must be
Never fear, but humbly walk before God.
“Ye shall not turn aside to the right hand


or to the left.” “Let thine eyes look right on” (Prov. iv. 25-27), not behind,


nor all around, but “straight before thee.
reward. Pray for perseverance and guidance.
word behind thee, saying, “ This is the way, walk ye in it.”
“Ye shall walk in all the ways.”
“Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect


unto all thy commandments (Ps, xi. 96).


no partiality.
unreserved, and unwearied.


” Straightforward progress will ensure
“ And thine ears shall hear a
3. There must be
The obedience must be full,


IV. When the direction thus given is obeyed, the rewards will be great,
“That ye may live, and that it may be well with you.” “ Verily there isa


reward for the righteous,” not of debt, but of sovereign grace.
reward in temporal benefits and spiritual enjoyments.


A present
A future reward of


eternal bliss (Is. xlviii, 18; Jer. vil. 23). In “keeping His commandments


there is great reward.”


HOMILETIC HINTS 4ND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 29. God's wish for Israel. 1. A
true heart. 2. Sincere obedience. 3.
Perpetual happiness. Such a heart.
That heart that will enable us to fear
the Legislator, and in thought, word,
and deed keep all His commandments.
But such a heart, so inclined, is an evi-
dence of previous acceptance ; and
such conduct resulting from such a
heart is the evidence of that character
which belongs to a christian, and indi-
cates one whose state has been changed
in Christ, and whose character has been
elevated by sanctification of the Holy
Spirit.— Cumming.


Perfect obedience. 1. Its source—
the heart. 2. Its extent. All com-
mandments and always, 3. Its ruling
principle—the fear of God. 4, Its
blessed results—well with individuals
“and their children for ever.”


Ver. 30-33. 1. The honour confer-
red upon Moses. “ Near” God. 2,
The duty of Moses—“ stand ” in atten-
tive, willing attitude, as mediator and
teacher, “I stood between the Lord


and you at that time, to show you the
word of the Lord ; for ye were afraid
by reason of the fire, and went not up
into the mount.”


God’s manifestations in théir effect
upon men. Repelling some and attract-
ing others. This effect depends upon
our state of mind and moral condition.
Teach them—1, The position of a true
teacher. “Ilere by me.” 2. The
matier of a true teacher. “ All the
commandments and the statutes and
the judgments.” 3. The design of a
true teacher to produce obedience.

Ver. 33. Walk in the ways. 1.
Specific direction. 2. Activity and
progress in that direction. We must
not simply know, but practice the
commandments. We are ignorant,
and require Divine instruction ; weak,
and need strength and support. Our
hearts must be right, and we must be
steadfast in His covenant (Ps. lxxviii.
87.) Like travellers in the way, we
must look carefully to the end and be
eareful lest we miss the way.


ae


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





CHAP» V.





ILLUSTRATIONS TO OHAPTER Y.


Vers. 1-5. Law. ‘These words”
comprise the whole duty of man ; and
as interpreted by Christ, they are so
comprehensive that there is no con-
ceivable condition in which the human
race can exist where these precepts are
not applicable asarule. ‘The language
of each is so brief, and so precise, as to
be capable of furnishing a perfect guide
for the moral government of man. It
is so immeasurably superior in its
character to that of all other nations
that there is no way of accounting for
its existence, except by ascribing it to
Divine revelation. Infidels themselves
are constrained to admit its high origin.
For how came the Jews to possess so
pure and admirable a law? How were
they distinguished for snch a sublime
code of morality, while all other people,
some of them far superior in civilisation
and the arts to the Hebrews, fell far
short of them in this respect? It was
God who “spake all these words.”
(Dr. Jamieson.) The moral law is a
copy of God’s will, our spiritual direc-
tory ; it shows us what sins to avoid,
what duties to pursue. It has truth
and goodness in it (Neh. ix. 13).
Truth, for God spake it; and good-
ness, for there is nothing the command-
ment enjoins but it is for our good.—
Watson.


Vers. 6,7. First. This may well lead
the van, and be set in front of all the
commandments, because it is the foun-
dation of all true religion. None will
have cause to repent of cleaving to God
and His service. Cardinal Wolsey said,
“Oh, if I had served my God as I have
my king, He would never have left we
thus.” — Watson.


Vers, 8-10. Second. People pray
to the images of the gods, implore
them on bended knees, sit or stand
long days before them, throw them
money, and sacrifice beasts to them
with deep respect.—encca.


Ver. 11. Third. Remember the


commination and threatening in the
text. Here is a metosis—less is said
and more intended. “He will not
hold him guiltless ;” that is, He will
be severely avenged on such « one.
Here the Lord speaks after the manner
of a judge, who holds the court of
assize. ‘I'he judgeis God himself; the
accusers, Satan and a man’s conscience ;
the charge is, “ taking God’s name in
vain ;” the accused is found guilty and
condemned : ‘ The Lord will not hold
him guiltless.”’— Watson.


Vers, 12-15. Fourth. O, what a
blessing is Sunday, interposed between
the waves of worldly business, like the
Divine path of the Israelites through
Jordan. ( Wilberforce.) The streams
of religion run deeper or shallower, as
the banks of the Sabbath are kept up
or neglected. (Calcott.) Coleridge ouce
said toa friend on Sunday morning,
“T feel as if God had, by giving the
Sabbath, given fifty-two springs in
every year. — Bowes.


Ver. 16. Fifth. Richard Knill so
regarded this commandmeut, that he
would not even go out as a missionary
without his motlier’s consent. He said,
“ [know that God never smiles on a boy
that breaks his motier’s heart.”’—
Pul. Com.


Ver. 17. Sixth. There is a close
connection between anger and murder,
“Killing is not mere hlood shedding.
Anger witbout cause is murder.
Oppression of the weak is murder.
Depriving aman of the means of getting
a livelihood, to gratify revenge, is
murder.” —Dr, Parker.


Ver. 18. Adultery debases a person,
and makes him resemble the beasts—
Nay, it is worse than brutish ; for
some creatures void of reason, by the
instinct of nature, observesome decorum
and chastity. ‘The turtle dove is a
chaste creature, and keeps to its mate ;
and the stork wherever he flies, comes

129


CHAP. V. HOM


into no nest but his own. Naturalists
write that if a stork, leaving its own
mate, joins with another, all the rest of
the storks fall upon it and pull its
feathers from it. Adultery is worse
than brutish, it degrades a person of his
honour.— Watson,


Ver. 19. Highth. A man may rob
God as well as his neighbour. He who
wastes his employer’s time is a thief.
He who withholds just praise is a thief—
social and literary thieving. He who
detracts from the Just honour of his fel-
low man is a thief. He who vows and
does not pay is a thief.—Dr, Parker,


Ver. 20. Ninth. Aman that hath
no virtue in himself ever envieth virtue
in others; for men’s minds will either
feed upon their own good orupon others’
evil ;-and who wanteth the one will
prey upon the other. (Bacon.) There
would not be so many open mouths if
there were not so many open ears.—
Bp. Hall.


To speak no slander, no, nor listen to it.—
Tennyson.


Soft buzzing slander ; silky moths
That eat an honest name.—7’


Ver. 21. Tenth. ‘The covetous man
is like a greedy ostrich, which devours


any metal ; but it is with an intent te
feed upon it, and in effect it makes a
shift to digest and excern it. The
avaricious man islikethe foolish chough,
which loves to steal money only to bide
it.—Archbp. Trench.


The cloyed will,
That satiate yet unsatisfied desire,
That tub both filled and running.—


Shakespeare.


Vers, 22-25. Great voice. Richard
Morris, a Baptist minister in England,
when @ young man attended as a
spectator a funeral, which he had
followed into St. Mary’s Church,
Stamford. His mind being solemnised
and softened by the scene, the blast of
six trumpets sounded together to set
the evening watch, and reverberated
through the dome, striking the whole
audience with awe. The thought was
vividly suggested to his mind that he
must certainly hear the tremendous
sound of the trump of God. With this
impression upon his mind, Mr. Morris
retired to his room and prayed to that
God whom he knew would be his judge.
His prayer was heard, and he began a
life of religion and usefulness. ‘This
trifling occurrence arrested attention,
gave rise to workings of conscience
which ended in conversion.— Whitecross.


CHAPTER VL


ITIOAL Notes. —M 1. had r h Tr ed the la , i d d p p.

Or e ose ehears w, reminde the 110) le of the cir cumstances in
i t as gi n, and n h seta f th ts tal octrines t e ature and

wh ch UW ve ow ne or 1 essential and fundamen d ry h pet


1. Commandments, lit., commandment (sin, ;
g- noun), equivalent to “the law,” cf. iv. 44 ée.
the sum and substance of all that Jehovah had given (ef. Keil), Statutes, ete, ee of


the command,


2. Reason for giving law to awaken fear and obedience to every injunction,
5. Constant fear of Spas result in prosperity and increase of the nation. ef. Gen,


1; xvii6 Ex. iii 8


4-9. The exposition now begins with
“ v & declaration concerning Jehovah (Elohim plu.). Thi
ae hay icpas: to the unity of God, but simply states that 5 Hin an the nee Taken
g ly yeh as the one absolute God to whom no other Blohim can be compared, ¢f: Zook


fiv. 9."— Keil.
130


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. VI.





& To this one God, who is Isracl’s God, a love must be given, with the heart, seat of feeling
and affection ; the soul, thy breath, the vital spirit, or rational soul, capable of intelligence and
thought, Matt. xxii. 87 ; Mark xii. 80; Luke x. 27 ; strength of body and soul.


6, 7. True love will be regulated by regard to the commandments, which must be laid up im
the heart, ever present to thought and will; taught to children, and talked about on all fitting
Occasions, Teach, /i¢., whet or sharpen, a figure for earnest and frequent instruction,


8, Sign, token, memorial, as rings used on wrists and fingers containing religious sentiment,
John iii. 383 3 2 Tim. ii. 19. Frontlets, Ex. xiii, 16. Moses here turns to good account usages
prevalent in his times, and still common in the East. (See Speak Com.)


®. Posts, Ex. xii 7; Deut. xi, 203 Job xix. 23, 26.


10-15. After specific duties, Moses gives warnings and cautions against dangers to which
prosperity would expose them, viz., of forgetting Ged aud His mercies. Entrance into Canaan
brought them into possessions for which they did not labour with their own hands; beautiful
towns, houses full of good things, wells of water, vineyards and olive plantations. Swearing
(ver. 13) refers to judicial oaths in court. ‘ Moses refers to legal swearing; our Lord to
Swearing in common conversation,” God’s worship precludes idolatry (vers. 14, 15), which a
jealous God will not endure, but punish with destruction from the face of the earth.


16-19. Tempting God by murmuring and unbelief as at Massah, t.e., Rephidim (Ex. xvii. 1-7),
fs forbidden ; diligent observance of commandments and right-doing are urged. To east out,
(v. 19) the casting out, the result of obedience. Ex. xxiii. 27; xxxiv. 11.


20-25. Directions for the instruction of children more fully given thanin ver. 7. Signs (22)
and wonders, cf. iv. 84. Mighty hand, exercise of great power. Ps. cv. 23 28. ur good,
(24), first reason for serving God, it is right; other blessings follow. Righteousness, 1.e.,
observance of law constitutes their title to the land and gives them acceptance with God.
Before the Lord, in his right and according to his judgment, ef. Pa. lvi. 18; cxvi. 9.


Toe Fear or Gop tHe Enp oF THE COMMANDMENTS.— Verses 1-3.


Two objects are indicated in these verses as sought by the Law-giver in thus
expounding anew these important duties. He aims at awakening a holy fear of
God in the heart of his people ; a fear which shall manifest itself in steadfast
fulfilment of the covenant ; and he seeks no less the temporal prosperity of
Israel, which is shown as a certain result upon such fidelity. ‘Ihus the glory of
God and the welfare of man are seen to be the grand ends he has in view.—
Speak. Com.


I. The Commandments of God should be the rule of Life. “'That ye might
do them.” Plato and other philosophers taught that perfection consisted in
conformity to certain forms or ideas laid down for man by his Creator. But for
one thing to be the standard or measure of another it must be jiwed and true,
Sophists would persuade us that there is nothing fixed and permanent. Our
senses deceive us, the laws of nature change, right and wrong, virtue and vice,
are fancies and vary with individual feelings and tastes. But God’s law is
unchangeable, His truth is sure and eternal. He has given rules for moral life
and conduct. Our own sensations must not be set forth, our own opinions
exalted into standards of truth. “ Fear God and keep His commandments, for
this is the whole duty of man.”


II. The fear of God is the most powerful principle to, produce obedience
to this rule. Love to the Lawgiver begets respect for his law. We cannot
honour-a master, nor be happy in his service without love for his character,
Affection influences the will and prompts to happy obedience. Service from
any other motive would not be disinterested and true, either in religion or daily
life. ‘Ihe fear, or the love of God in the heart therefore, is the only power toe
produce loyal obedience to God.

' “1 cannot worship what I cannot love” a


OHaP, VL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





IIT. To beget this obedience is the design of religious instruction. “The
Lord your God commanded to teach you.” We must know a person before we
can love and serve him ; so the law of God must be known before it can be
observed. The people must be taught the character and will of God. The
children must be trained and educated, not for their own glory, nor that of their
parents, but for the service and glory of God. Obedience to God’s law must
be the design of family training and economy. “Gather the people together,
men and women, and children, and thy stranger that is within thy gates, that
they may hear, and that they may learn and fear the Lord your God, and
observe to do all the words of this law.”


IV. The results of religious instruction and obedience to God’s law will ba
beneficent. Since the law of God consults our highest good, obedience will
always be to our interest. God mercifully teaches what is good, and promises
to bestow that good upon us. In various ways, personal and social, temporal and
spiritual, benefits come to help us to remember Him who is “ the highest good,”
“God over all, and blessed for evermore.” 1. In personal happiness. “ Well
with thee” in body, mind, and estate. ‘Say ye to the righteous, that it shall
be well with him ” (Isa. iii. 10). “ But it shall not be well with the wicked
because he feareth not before God” (Ecc. viii. 13). 2. Jn length of life. “hat
thy days may be prolonged.” ‘The wicked shall not live out half their days.”
3. In the increase of posterity. “That ye may increase mightily.” Virtue
always tends to promote health, material prosperity, and national welfare.
Without recognition of God and obedience to His commands, we cannot secure
nea or heavenly inheritance “in the land that floweth with milk and
1oney.


Divine REQUIREMENTS.— Verses 4, 5.


These verses assert that Jehovah is one, indivisible and supreme God, and
wong love supreme and undivided. It is not enough to hear, we must obey
and obey with all the heart and soul.


I. God is worthy of our love and service, We love a person for what he is
in himself and for what he does to others. God is excellent and exalted in
himself. He alone is God, and therefore deserves our homage. (oethe taught
that “beauty, truth and goodness” are the objects of human worship.
But this is “the religion of culture,” the worship of the “creature rather than
the Creator,” and does not satisfy personal wants. God is a Living Being, on
whom we can think and with whom we can converse—the centre and cause of
all beauty, goodness and truth. In Him these are objects for worship, and —
subjects for enjoyment. He does good, makes good and communicates His
blessings unto His creatures. “Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and
honour and power.”


II. God requires us to love and serve Him with entire self-surrender.
The terms used to indicate this are most comprehensive. 1. Affectionately,
“with all thine heart,” without indolence, unfaithfulness or half-heartedness,
With fervent, undivided affection. Ifthe heart, the whole heart be withheld,
apostacy will be the result, 2. Jntelligently, “with all thy mind,”
(Mark xii. 80; Luke x. 27). The intellect and understanding must be
concerned as well as the leart. Giod’s service is not a blind, unreasonable
service. “We know what we worship.” 38. Hnergetically, “with all thy
might” of will and active powers. If not free and cheerful, it is slavish and
irksome. “If ye be willing and obedient,” (Isa i 19). & Hntirely, “ with

132


a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. Vi.
eee
all thy soul.” It must be sincere and constant, not superficial but “rooted in
love,” (Eph. tii. 17). God must be loved above all creatures, with all our


powers and with all the energy of those powers, “The royal law according +o
the scripture.”


: III, God’s relationship to us is a motive to prompt this required service,
“The Lord thy God.” Jehovah was Israel’s God and had shown Himself such.
Nothing can touch the will, and excite to motion which we do not perceive and
appreciate. What is out of the view of mind and heart cannot affect them.
God’s presence had been seen aud His goodness displayed in wonderlul ways.
He made a covenant with Israel, eat them for His people, and gave them
every reason to honour and obey Him. “I am the Lord thy God.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 3. Hearing and doing. “ Hear
O Israel and observe to do it.” 1.
The Word heard. Man deaf and blind
in spiritual things. “ Having ears, he
hears not ; having eyes he sees not.”
Only when God speaks does the heart
open (Lydia) with new power of atten-
tion and interest.” ‘‘ Be more ready
to hear.” 2. Zhe Word considered,
“Observe” —attendanceisnot attention
—eyes and ears must be open. “ In
order to learn,” says Coleridge, “we
must attend ; in order to profit by what
we have learnt, we must think.” “'I'ake
heed how ye hear.” 3. The Word
obeyed. “Do it.” We look for novelty
and not for edification. “Our great
object is to be impressed and affected,
and to have old and new truths reduced
to experience and practice.”—Judge
Hala,


Ver. 4. The unity of God. 1. The
centre of Israel's belief. How sound
in principle, elevated in tone and
powerful in moral influence, compared
with heathen religions! 2. Zhe foun-
dation of Israel's polity. Polytheism
was the basis of other social fabrics,
“'l’his clause not merely forbids poly-
theism, but also syncretism, which re-
duces the one absolute God, as King
over all the earth, to a national deity,
a Baal (Hos. it, 18), and in fact every
form of theism and deism, which creates
for itself a supreme God according to

hilosophical abstractions and ideas ”
Keil). 3. The law ef harmony in our
moral constitution, The mind is not


capable of containing more than one
object at atime. ‘I'he heart and affec-
tions can only be loyally attached to
one Sovereign, and fully developed by
one person,


Ver. 4,5. 1. The command, “ Hear,
O Israel.” God seeks to make us atten-
tive to what He is in Himself, and
what He is to us—to check our pre-
sumption—kindle our affection and
dissipate our fear. 2. 7he duty. Love
God with all thine heart. First the
heart and then the deed. We must
first be right before we can do right.
“Tt is greater to conquer by means of
the heart, than to conquer the heart,”
says Schiller. ‘“ Give me thine heart.”
3. The method of performing this duty.
(a) Willingly. God sometimes acce)ts
the will for the deed ; never the deed
without the will. (6) Sincerely. Ama-
ziah did that which was right in the
sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect
heart (2 Chron. xxv. 2). (c) Constantly.
“ Blessed is he that doeth righteousuess
at all times” (Ps, cvi. 3).

Moral life proceeds from the heart,
and manifests itself without, zn the
three forms of activity indicated. Tie
impulse Godward proceeds from the
heart, and is realised in the lifathrough
the affection, which feeds on that
supreme object; through the will,
which consecrates itself actively to the
accomplishment of His will; and ¢hrouah
the mind which pursues the track of His
thoughts in all His w srks.—Godet.


133


OWAP, VI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





Tae MetHop or PreseRvina THE Divine Law.— Verses 6-9,


To keep a sense of duty in their minds, it was ordered that Israel should
carry great principles into daily life. A system of parental instruction was
instituted, and provision was made for the remembrance of the commandments
in most familiar and oft-recurring scenes of life. The means of preserving
religion are minutely specified.


I, In personal experience. “ Shall be in thine heart.” The memory may be good
and the tongue glib without any feeling of heart. The truth must not only be
received by the mind, but deposited and warmed by the heart. We must
understand, value and love the Bible. Since we are in danger of losing the
things, if we forget the words: “these words” must be matters of experience
and conversation. Our soul must be brought under their influence and direc-
tion. “ ‘The law of God is in his heart, none of his steps shall slide’ (Ps. xxxvii. 31.


II, In home training. “Thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children.
Children are ignorant and self-willed. They will never instinctively or intuitively
develop into saints. And while their secular education must not be forgotten
their religious training must be first and most diligent. This may be given.
1. Jn various ways. In domestic intercourse, “when thou sittest in thine
house ;” in ordinary walking, “when thou walkest by the way ;” in the times
of the day, “when thou liest down and risest up ;” by common representations,
“for signs and fronilets,” and by constant writing, “thou shalt write them.”
2. In diligent methods. “ Diligently,” sharpen up the children by earnest,
assiduous and repeated instruction. As tools are prepared for work, so children
should be taught for God and prepared for life.


III, In Religious Conversation. “Talk of them.” In the present age
knowledge is spread by writing more than by speech. In earlier ages oral
communications were the means of instruction. The living voice is still a great
power in the world, and its mighty influence will be felt in future generations,
Conversation was one of the methods employed by Jewish doctors and Jesus
Himself, for imparting knowledge. Among friends and companions, in the
domestic and social circle, in walking in a journey and in retiring to rest, we
may converse about Divine things. “I will speak of Thy testimonies also
before kings, and will not be ashamed.” Pa. cxix. 46.


PaRENTAL OsLication.— Verse 7, 8.


In these verses it appears—(1) That parents are bound to give their children
a religious education, to sow in their eS the seeds of scriptural truth, to
teach them the elements of christrian doctrine, to inculcate upon them the
observance of moral duties,and to beget in them an attachment to the ordinances
of religion, in their attendance on which we may expect the communication of
the grace of the Holy Spirit, to render the word of truth, the power of God unto
their salvation. @) God’s testimonies must not only be taught to our chidren,
but the utmost diligence must be used tomakethem understand them. ‘“ ‘Thou
shalt teach them diligently.” That is, again and again, as one who whets a
blunt instrument in order to sharpen it, which is done by reiterated /riction or
grinding. ‘lhis part of parental duty is a most difficult task, and it requires
much patience, much prudence, much judgment and much piety in the parente,
to eat them to do this good, this most important work, in the best and most


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY, OHAP. VI.
Cos a a I ge TA


effectual manner. (8) Parents are required to embrace every opportunity of
inculeating the Divine commands upon their children, 1. This duty must be
performed at home and abroad ; ‘“‘When thou sittest in thine house, and when
thou walkest by the way.” 2. It must be done in the night season and in the
daytime; “when thou liest down and when thourisest up.” (4) This command
shows that every father had access to scripture, in a language which he and his
children understood. Moses entertained no fear that the people would misin-
terpret it, or wrest it to their destruction. It is probable that many aJew did so;
nevertheless, that was no reason against every Jew possessing a copy of the law.
The fact is, that under the Jewish law, the scriptures were put into the hands of
all kinds of persons, young and old, male and female, learned and unlearned, priest
and people, with a command to read them and teach them to others, so that
faith of all might rest on the foundation.—Lev. J. Wilson,


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS,


Vers. 6,7. The Bible—the Family Ver. 9. “Write them upon the


Book. ‘To be read and taught in the
family to promote personal piety and re-
ligious education. “The most precious
legacy you can leave your children isa
thoroughly sound Christian education.
This will never be finally and for ever
forgotten ; for in the worst and most
distant aberation from God, some
early light struck out in the early
years of childhood, will leap like a live
spark from memory, as was tlie case
with John Newton, when a prodigal at
the helm in a tempestuous sea—the
text forgotten for twenty years, but
taught had by his mother in the
nursery, was the first on which turned
his everlasting and happy destiny.—
Dr, Cumming.


Ver. 7. Children should be taught
the principles which they understand
not. (1.) ‘That they might have occa-
sion much to think of the things that
are so much and commonly urged. (2.)
That if any extremity should come,
they might have certain seeds of com-
fort and direction to guide and support
them. (3.) ‘I'hat their condemnation
might be more just, if having these so
much in their mouths, they should not
get something of them into their hearts.
—lrapp.


posts.” 1. At the time this command
was given there were few written copies
of the whole law, and the people had
it read to them only at the feast of
tabernacles. God, therefore, seemed to
have appointed, at least for the present,
that some select sentences of the law
should terally be written upon their
gates and walls, or on slips of parch-
ment, to be worn about their wrists,
or bound upon their foreheads. 2. ‘The
spirit of the command, however, and
the chief thing intended, undoubtedly
was that they should give all diligence,
and use all means to keep God’s laws
always in remembrance; as men ire-
quently bind something upon their hands
or put something before their eyes, to
prevent forgetfulness of a tning that
they much desire to remember. But
the Jews, forgetting the spirit and
design of this precept, used these
things as superstitious people do
pesatats or charms. ‘I'hey used also
to put these slips of parchment into a
piece of cane, or other hollow wood,
and fasten that to the door of their
houses, and of each particular door in
them, and as often as they go in and
out they make it a part of their
devotion to touch the parcliment and
kiss it J. Wslaom


OHAP. VI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY,





Tue Dancers oF Prosrrrity.— Verses 10-12.


Moses anticipates the time when Israel will come into possession of Canaan
with all the good promised. But he also sees the dangers to which this prosperity
will expose them—forgetfulness, idolatry (ver. 14) and distrust (ver 16). He
warns them against these dangers, and describes the remedy. ‘“ Forewarned,
forearmed.”


I. Prosperity renders the heart insensible when we should be grateful
“When thou shalt have eaten and be full; then beware lest thou forget the
Lord.” In poverty we despond, murmur or blaspheme ; in prosperity we deny
God (Prov, xxx. 9). “ Prosperity doth best discover vices,” says Bacon.
Exaltation often intoxicates, and blessings easily gained are not often valued.
We are most sensible of things which cost us dearly ; but unmindful of the giver
when the gifts come easily and freely. We riot in carnal luxuries and the heart
becomes effeminate and self-indulgent, hardened to the reproofs of the Divine
law and to the goodness and claims of the Lawgiver. “They did eat, and were
filled, and became fat (senseless, doltish, ef. Is. vi. 10), Neh. ix. 25.


II. Prosperity begets pride when we should be humble. Man depends upon
God for everything, yet often casts off God, expects nothing and fears nothing
from Him. He is proud of rank, talent, and acquisitions, like Nebuchadnezzar
(Dan. iv. 30). We forget our need of God, our obligations to Him, and become
self-sufficient instead of humble. “ In all time of our wealth, Good Lord deliver
us,


III. Prosperity lulls into carnal security when we should be watchful.
“ Beware ” of the danger and guard against it. A self-indulgent life, incapaci-
tates for vigourons watchful obedience to God’s commands. Nature is subdued
by that which feeds it, its sensitiveness and spirituality die away, and carnal
security leads to ease and perfect indifference.


“O souls! In whom no heavenly fire is found,
Fat minds and ever grovelling on the ground.”— Dryden,


ForcetruLness or Gop.— Verses 12-15.


When we give our thoughts and hearts to the world God is soon forgotten.
fe displaced and ignored, and we become guilty of ingratitude, robbery, and
idolatry.


I, The danger pointed out. “Beware, lest thou forget God.” 1. Non-
recognition of (rod’s presence. Even amid seusible and awful displays of that
presence “they forgot God and His wonders that He had showed them.”
2. Disregard of God's providence. ‘“ Which brought thee forth out of the land
of Egypt.” A providence most constant and striking, yet despised when they
should have remembered it most.” ‘They remembered not the multitude of thy
mercies ; but provoked Him at the sea, even at the Red Sea (Ps. evi. 7).
8. Disobedience to God’s law. We cannotserve and obey those whom we forget.
God has the greatest claim upon our gratitude and love. But “ when the danger
is past God is forgotten.” Men cry for mercy in trouble and adversi ty, but when
these are changed for sunshine and substance “ they forsake God who made them,
and lightly esteem His law,”


“Satan now is wiser than of yore,
na And tempts by making rich, not making poor,”— Pope,


'-


_ ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OMAP, VL
a epee


II. The Method of avoiding this danger specified. God provides safeguards
against dangers into which we are apt to fall. Some are given in these words :
1. The fear of God. “Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God.” Reverence for
God is the great preservative from sin. On this principle Abraham educated
his children and governed his household. Joseph feared to offend God and was
flirected to wisest counsels. “Happy is the man that feareth alway.” 2.
Obedience to God. “Serve Him.” We cannot forget God if we walk with
Him and continually obey His will, Servants must not neglect their master’s
commands, nor soldiers rush out of the ranks. Disobedience is disrespectful,
disloyal, and insolent. ‘Be not hasty to go out of his sight.” 8. Von-con-
formity to evil customs. “Ye shall not go after other Gods, of the gods of the
people which are round about you,” (ver. 14.) Israel would be tempted by the
license and indulgence of idol worship around them. Numbers influence and
attract men. ‘I'he fashions, the prit:ciples, and the maxims of the world govern
many professors. But we must not join a majority in any sinful cause, however
prevalent and popular. “‘lhou shalt not follow a multitude to do evil.”
4 Public confession of God. “ And shalt swear by His name.” God is the
source of truth and the avenger of wrong. In all covenants and appeals we
must regard Him. In ordinary intercourse and in common affairs of life we
must be truthful. We must recognise the presence and majesty of God and
not assert anything but what is right. God in the fulfilment of His word must
be recognised as our example of faithfulness. ‘‘ He that sweareth in the earth,
shall swear by the God of truth” (lit, the God of Amen, i.e., firm and true, ef.
Rev. iii. 14; xix. 11) Is. lxv. 16.


Tur Forsrmppen Patu.— Verses 14-15.


In all our hearts there is a tendency to depart from God, to forget what He
commands, “ to go after” what He forbids. his forbidden path is described—
1. lt is entered by many. ‘The path of “ the people,” “the gods” of the age.
But the vox populi is not always the vor Dei. Idolatry of every kind is the
root and nourisher of error and superstition—the expression aud epitome of
human nature—the foul dishonour to God and His supremacy. ‘Go not after
other gods to serve them and to worship them” (Jer. xxv. 6). 2. /¢ is offensive
to God. It stirs up God’s anger and rouses His jealousy. Bp. Patrick observes,
that we never find in law or prophets, anger, or fury, or jealousy or indignation,
attributed to God, but upon occasion of idolatry. 3. /¢ is destructive in its end.
“ Destroy thee from off the face of the earth.” Idolatry corrupts the holy and
petrifies the heart. Like a withering mildew it overspreads the earth and
blights the nations, God has condemned and cursed it, and will punish all who
are guilty. ‘I'he warning voice from above should be heard ; “ Ye shall bear
the sins of your idols, and ye shall know that I am the Lord God.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 18. Threefold characteristics the fundamental characteristic of the


of God’s service. 1. God to be honoured.
2. God to be feared. 3. God to be
served. “ Not forgetting” is described
from a positive point of view as fearing
God, serving Him, and swearing by
His name. Tear is placed first, as


Israelitish worship of God. It was no

slavish fear, but simply the holy awe

of a sinner before the holy God, which

includes love rather than excludes it.

“Fearing” is a matter of the heart;

“serving,” a matter of more and
37


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





striving ; and “swearing in His name,”
the practical manifestation of the wor-
ship of God in word and conversation.
— Keil.


Ver. 13-16. 1. The fear of God the
principle of service. 2. The preven-
tative from idolatry (vers. 14, 15). 3.
he remedy for unbelief.


Vers. 14, 15. Ye shall not go after.
1. The course forbidden. 2 The
warnings to keep from it; God’s anger
and God’s jealousy. 3. The conse-
- quences of disregarding these warnings.
“Destroy thee from off the face of the
earth.” When lesser warnings will not
serve, God looks into His quiver for


deadly arrows.” “From hardness of
heart,” etc. Serving God. Inquire—
I. What it is to serve God. 1. To
dedicate ourselves wholly to Him. 2.
To make His law the rule of our life.
8. To endeavour to please Him in all
things. II. Why should we serve Him ?
Because He is—1, Our Maker. 2. Our
Preserver. 3. Our Redeemer. 4. Our
Master by covenant. III. The nature
of the exhortation here given. 1.
Directions: serve Him scripturally,
obediently, willingly, cheerfully, faith-
fully, etc. 2. Motives: This is the
end of your creation and of all God’s
mercies to you; it is the work of
heaven, and will be well rewarded.—
Wm. Stevens.


Temprine Gop.—Verse 16,


The word “tempt,” here means to try to prove; and mindful of the circum-
stances alluded to God was not only provoked, but “tested” in His power and
goodness. ‘This sin we are warned against, for the apostle distinctly recognises
that events in Israel’s history were typical and filled with Divine purpose and
warning. “ All these things happened unto them for ensamples (types, patterns
fe pes and instruct” 1 Cor. x. ii.) How did Israel and how can we tempt

?


1, By doubting God’s presence and power to help. God was present with
them night and day in the wonderful pillar, yet they cried, “Is the Lord among
us or not?” (Ex. xvii. 7.) God had destroyed their enemies, delivered them
from famine and danger, yet they “tempted God in their hearts” and cried in
unbelief, “Can God furnish a table in the wilderness?” (Ps. Ixxviii, 18-20.)
We murmur at our daily mercies—the manna and the stream; count actual
enjoyments nothing, if they do not conform to our fancy ; and pine for some
imaginary good. When we circumscribe to infinite wisdom, mistrust omnipotent
power to accomplish His purpose, we “limit (sign, requiring miracle to satisfy
us) the Holy One of Israel” (Ps. lxxviii. 41.)


II, By rebelling against God's authority. We find fault with God’s will,
set up our own will instead, and thus insult God. At the Red Sea and the
waters of Marah, in the wilderness of sin and in Rephidim, they provoked God
their Creator and Lawgiver. 'I'hey were base enough to deny His presence,
doubt His power, and abuse His servant. In their wicked disposition “ they
sinned still,” went on sinning and rebelling, and were not “in a mood to be
convinced.” “ Yea, they spake against God,”


III, By provoking God’s patience. He led them in the wilderness, gave
them plentiful supplies, but their gratitude was not commensurate with His
goodness, “ How often did they provoke Him?” ‘Times enough did they
rebel, and were as constant in provocation as God was in kindness.“ They have
tempted me these ten times” (é.¢., often and in full measure), Num. xiv. 22;
but at last God’s patience was provoked, and they were punished for their sins,

is By insensible to our conduct. We may vex His Holy Spirit, which


HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. Vi.
eee ee ee EP


would have been long ago withdrawn if God had not been merciful to us
We are dependent, and need God’s guidance and grace ; let us not “grieve Him
in the desert.” As Israel tried God by longing for the things left belind ia
- Egypt and distrusted for the future, so we may tempt and offend God by
hankering after pleasures which are forbidden, longing for that liberty in sin
’ from which Christ has delivered us. “ Neither let us tempt Christ as some of
them also tempted, and were destroyed of serpents” (1 Cor. x. 9).


Tae Way or Lirzs ann Sarery.— Verses 17-19.


God is never indifferent to His claims upon us, Epicurus depicted his gods
as totally regardless, and scorning the affairs of earth. But our God has
“set his heart on man,” desires his eternal good, and points out the way to
secure it. Amid the darkness and dangers of our journey God has provided
help, “ For the commandment is a lamp, and the law is light; and reproofs of
instruction are the way of life” (Prov. vi. 23).


I, A way in which God’s word must be our constant guide. “ Ye shall
diligently keep the commandments of the Lord your God.” ‘he way has not
to be invented or found out ; it is revealed. We have not to make, but heop
the command. ‘“ The way of life is above to the wise.” It is of heavenly, not
of earthly origin, neither devised nor discerned by foolish men. We must
constantly recognise and devoutly consult God’s word as our guide in our
journey. 1. Carefully, as travellers anxious to be right and not lose the way.
Some give careless service to God, and careless attention to His word. There
must be no cold and formal observance, but effort to please and obey.
2. Karnestly. Diligence signifies not only energy and activity, but heart
and affection. Heartiness and love must be displayed ( Diligently the Latin for
lovingly). When Aristotle was asked what benetit he had derived from his
philosophy, he replied: “I have learnt to do without constraint that which
others do from fear of the law.” ‘I will delight myself in thy commandments
which I have loved.” 3. Constantly. Not fitful or accidental, but patient and
coutinual regard. Many forget and forsake the law. If it is displeasing to us,
we easily neglect it ; but when our hearts and minds are fixed upon it, then we
love and practise it continually. When governed by the Word we are wise,
safe, and strong. “Happy is the mind to which the word is a special
companion,” says Bernard (cf. Ps. cxix. 7, 24; Prov. vi. 22),


II. A way in which God’s will must be our constant regard. ‘Do that
which is right and good in the sight of the Lord.” ‘The will of God is the
standard of duty, and this must not be lowered to meet the opinions and wislies
of men. It is not what is useful or expedient before men, but what is right
before God. That alone is right which is pleasing to Him, which He commands,
and which He requires from us. Conformity to God’s will and character must
be the aim of our life. In this respect Christ is our example, who came to do
the will of Him that sent Him, and could say, “1 do always those things that
please Him ”’ (John vi. 29).


III. A way which leads to our present and future good. Religion confers
the highest blessings upon us. The will of God is the fountain of all happiness,
and the service of God the source of weil being. 1. Our Mend good, * Vuat
it may be well with thee.” If it is not well with us, if we are not benefited
by serving God, we may suspect something to be wrong. Our thouglits,
employments, aud pursuits may be opposed to God’s will, and then it cannot be
well with us “It shall be well with them that fear God, but it arr not be


OHAP, VI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





well with the wicked.” 2. Our future good. Man has a future of weal or woe.
To forget this future is simply to court destruction, But continual regard to
God’s will, and dependence upon God’s grace (a) will help us to overcome enemies.
“To cast out all thine enemies from before thee.” We cannot overcome in our
own attitude and strength. God dislodyes our enemies, and clears our way to
heaven (¢f. Ex. xxiii, 22; Jos. xxiv. 8); (6) will secure to us the inheritance—
residence on earth, progress and grace in Christian life, and heaven at length.
Thus do the Scriptures set before us the way of life. Are we walking in it?
“What man is he that desireth life and loveth (good days, or days of good,
Seventy) many days, that he may see good” (Ps. xxxiv. 12),


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS,


Ver. 16. Tempting God (Ps, Ixxviii. thority interposed. Testimonies and
18). They tempted God, tried His statutes “ which He commanded thee.”
patience over and over again, made as 3. ‘he regard for this authority re
it were another experiment upon it, quired. ‘ Keep the commandments,”
and, from the expression of “ tempting
Him in their heart,” it would seem as Vers. 17-19. 1. The end desired—
if they had made it a thing of mental “good.” 2. The method of securing
calculation whether He would still bear it. Filial obedience to God. 3. ‘The
with them (7. Chalmers on Ps, Ixxviii. results which follow. “ Possess tle
18). 1. They tempted God’s patience. good land,” ete.

2. They tempted God’s wisdom. 3. The charge of Aloses to Israel. In
They tempted God’s power. 4. They this passage we remark—I. A solemn
tempted God’s wrath. Herein, asin a charge given. 1. Liear the word of
mirror, we see ourselves, Israel in the the Lord. 2. Observe the word of the
wilderness acted out, as in a drama, Lord, doctrine, precept, promise. 3.
all the story of man’s conduct towards Obey the word of the Lord. II, Im-
his God.—7Zreasury of David. portan* benefits proposed. 1. Safety.
%. Prosperity. 3. Peaceful possession
Ver. 17. Notice. 1. The Lawgiver, of Canuan.—Zeta.
“The Lord your God.” 2. 'The au-


THe RELIGION oF Enquiry.— Verses 20~25.


God’s remarkable dealings with His people could not fail to excite their
curiosity even to the latest generations. ‘There was au express injunction
that in every succeeding age they should carefully acquaint their children with
the facts of their history. There must be a perpetual memorial of their great
deliverance and a profound reverence in the mind of the nation of that
Supreme Power to whom they were indebted for their civil and religious
ey fe Questions were to be encouraged, parents were to answer questions
by explaining divine institutions, that the laws of God might be perpetuated,
family religion nourished, and national good secured.


I, The Religion of the Bible cultivates free enquiry. ‘When thy gon
asketh thee what mean the testimonies.” Man thinks. Reason is the attribute
of his soul, ‘The religion for man must not therefore overlook his intellect,
Christianity is adapted to man in his capacity for knowledge and in his power
to reason and conclude from that knowledge. “Come let us reason together,”
is the language of our Creator. Manv declare that Christianity is only fit for
the ignorant and weak minded, and that it affords no scope for free enquiry,

140


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. VI.





But it affords the finest scope for reason in which the mind can be exercised.
Examination and enquiry are demanded from everyone. We are to “ think on
these things,” to “ search the scriptures,” and “ prove all things (test like money
changers) and hold fast that which is good” (2 'Thes. v. 21).


II. God has made provision for the demands of free enquiry. We cannot
help but ask ‘“‘ from whence am I| and whither am I going?” “ How can man
be just with God?” ‘“ What mean the testimonies,” etc. Solemn questions
will prompt themselves which neither the philosophy of man nor the light of
nature can answer. But God answers man’s enquiries—1. In the facts of history.
“We were bondsmen in Egypt.” In the Bible we have a record of facts
beginning with the Creation and leading us through various dispensations to
the consummation of (Giod’s purpose in the death and work of Christ. In the
lives of the patriarchs, prophets and apostles, in the events of Jewish history
and in the works of Jesus Christ we have grand historic facts, which are the
basis of religion, the foundation of our faith, and the elements, “the rudiments
of childhood’s lessons” (cf. Gal. iii. 24; iv. 3). 2. Inthe doctrines of Scripture.
Upon the facts of history the doctrines of religion are built. There is a growing
tendency to take ideas without facts ; to separate events from their supernatural
surroundings; and to find in Scripture “a legendary summary of primitive
belief.” But in the facts and doctrines of Christianity God has provided for
the necessities of our nature and not left us to “cunningly devised fables.”
3. In the records of Providence. God’s power and presence were seen in His
dealings with Israel. His purpose and promise have been fulfilled in the history
of nations. The system of Providence is accommodatory to our nature in
teaching by sensible signs and striking events, “'lhe Lord showed signs and
wonders,”


III. It is our interest to enquire and possess this Religion. The facts and
doctrines of Scripture must be confirmed in our experience and traced in our
life conduct. ‘ He that believeth hath the witness in himself.” If we fear
God and keep His commandments we shall realise the power of God to help ;
the grace of God to pardon and renew, the need of the Holy Spirit to enlighten
and guide. 1. Jt will be for our good, verse 24. To investigate truth, to follow
God will not only be enjoyment but “our good.” Our views will be enlarged,
our convictions deepened, and we shall find that every event of Providence and
every command of God contribute to “ our good always.” 2. J¢ will be for our
righteousness (ver. 25). Just as loyal obedience secured to Israel their standing
and inheritance, so Christians can only justify their claims and position as God’s
people by holy life. They are God’s peculiar people, redeemed to serve Him
and to train future generations in their holy faith. Just as youth are embued
with righteousness and truth, and posterity taught the will and works of God,
will the Christian church and the nation have within themselves the principle
of perpetuation and the security of natural life and religious position. “ That
they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and of their children after
them,”


A Wownperrvu, History.— Verses 21-23,


Israel’s history from first to last is a process of moral education. In its
gradual progress, its divine symbols and its spiritual design, we see divine pur-

se comprehend in the good of the nation and the redemption of the world,
in these words we have two or three remarkable epochs or displays filled with
moral instruction.


L The Great Deliverance. “The Lord brought us out of Egypt.” For
14


CHAP, V1. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





generations Israel had been oppressed and held in bondage most bitter. But in

“the self-same day” of promise, they were rescued without delay. Slavery

ended, task-masters gone and liberty gained! Salvation most complete and joy

unspeakable. All escaped. Promises and deliverance in Christ to those in
bondage of sin and death. He gives life, liberty, joy and glory.


II. The wonderful way in which it was accomplished. 1. By Divine might.
“With a mighty hand.” Pharaoh could not resist the omnipotence of God.
The “strong man armed” can only “ keep his palace” until “ the stronger than
he cometh.” 9. By marvellous deeds. “Signs and wonders, great and sore.”
Most alarming were the judgments of God upon Egypt. God touched the support
of life and the objects of worship—annoyed with pain and disease—turned the
wealthy land into a wilderness. Then came the dark shadow and finally the
stroke of death itself upon “the chief of all their strength.” Judgments upon
sin may be light at first, but if disregarded will destroy in the end the wicked
treasure, ‘“‘ wrath against the day of wrath,” ‘“ because of the blindness (Aardness)
of their hearts” (Eph. iv. 18).


III. The Gracious Design. “To give us the land.” Canaan, acquired, not
by valour and human skill, a gift of God. “To give us” Patriarchs had been
sojourners and strangers there; now descendents in full possession. 1. Ar
inheritance promised “which he sware unto our fathers.” ‘The covenant 400
years before now to be established ; God never forgets. “ Never think that
God’s delays are God’s denials. Hold on; hold fast; hold out.” (Buffon).
With Him a thousand years as one day (Ps. xc. 4). 2. An inheritance into
which they were guided. ‘He brought us out, that He might bring us in.”
Canaan not only offered, but Israel helped to get it. The way long, the dangers
great, but the Angel of the Covenant never forsook them. God will guide us
oe written word and the Holy Spirit if we follow Him, “J will instruct


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 20-21. Notice—1. Divine to be learned, and benefit of practising
Institutions have meaning and design. them.


2. Our duty to enquire about them.


3. Children especially should be en-
~ couraged to question, etc. A Persian
hilosopher was asked by what method
os had acquired so much knowledge,
answered, “By not being prevented
by shame from asking questions when
J am ignorant.”


Ver. 20. The Children’s Question.
1, Children to be encouraged to seek
knowledge concerning the Bible and
the Church. 2. Patiently and wisely
ex})lain, doctrines, duties and priviloges,
8. Early teach children to acknowledge
God and refer deliverances and all
Yer biessings to hum. 4, Believe
that the Holy Spirit will iwpress
youthful hearts with what they see
® d bear in God's house. Zhe School
in the Lamily, pupils, teachers, tessons

143


Vers. 24-25. God's commands, our
life and righteousness. 1. Israel to be
a separated people (ver. 23). 2. Their
continued existence depended upon
obedience to God (ver. 24). 3. In this
continued existence would be the
justification of their character and
position (ver. 25). “Every Israelite
who yielded an external obedience to
the Mosaic law was termed righteous,
and had a claim in virtue of that
obedience, to the land of Canaan; se
that doing these things, he lived by
them (Lev. xviii 5; Deut. v. 33),
The import of the statement in these
verses, then, 18 that a faithful observ-
ance of “all these commandments”
should constitute their title to the
promised blessings of tL» covenant”
—vdamieson,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.,


OHA4P. Vi.


A ee,


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER Vi.


Ver. 1-8. Fear. This fear of God
is the foundation of religion; for the
great support of virtue among men is
the sense upon their minds of a supreme
Governor and Judge of the universe,
who will finally and effectually reward
what is in itself essentially worth
of reward, and punishment what is
worthy of punishment. Consequently
fear brings us into subjection to
God’s authority and enforces the
practice of duty ; for the fear of the
Lord is to depart from evil. (Duty of
Man) Love. Our affections are drawn
to an attractive object as naturally as
iron is charmed by loadstone. God
made us to love; and when brought
near to such an object our feelings in-
twine themselves around it, as the soft
and pliant tendrils of the vine do around
the support it clothes with leaves, and
hangs with purple clusters. Such
analovy is there between the laws of
mind and matter.— Dr. Guthrie,


Ver. 4-5. One Lord. We believe
God to be one, sowe believe Him to be
in such manner one, that there cannot
possibly be another, for all things must
derive their being from Him, and what-
soever being has its existence from
another cannot be God, but must be a
creature. ‘his unity of God is of
universal obligation to be believed that
we may be fixed as to the object of our
worship, and place our religious adora-
tion there only, where it is due; and
alsothat we may give Him that honour,
whichis due to Him alone; part whereof
is, that we have no other Gods but one,
in him only must we trust and love
with all our hearts, because He only
is infinite goodness, beauty and glory.


Vers. 6-9. Write. It is now cus-
tomary among the Arabs, and the
Oriental nations, to write pes of
the Koran, and other moral seitences,
on the gates of citizs, walls, and door-
posts.—Dr. Boothroyd.

Teach, Yt was the godly practice
of the pstriarchs to instruct their


children concerning the creation of the
world, transgression of man, destruc-
tion of the old world, God’s providence,
the Messiah to be revealed, and thelike.
The parents’ mouths were large books,
in which their children did read the
noble acts of the Lord. Philip was
glad that Alexander was born whilst
Aristotle lived, that he might be in-
structed by Aristotle in philosophy. It
is no mean mercy that thy children are
born in the days of the Gospel, a land
of light, where they may be instructed
in Christianity.—Geo, Swinnock.


Vers. 10-12. Forget. Prosperity is
@ more refined and severe test of
character than adversity, as one hour
of summer sunshine produces greater
corruption than the longest winter day.
—LHliza Cook


Vers, 12-15. Forget God. Men
who put their supreme idea of life in
self-indulgence, cannot understand
what God means, who makes self-
exertion, in Himself, in angelic powers,
in all His creatures, the test of real
being. If men are seeking to be
supine, to have infinite enjoyment
without earning it, and God is deter-
mined they shall be stirred up by
storms of hope and fear, pain and ease,
inorderthatthey may grow and develop,
of course they cannot understand Him or
His administration. ‘I'he prizes in this
world are placed where those men shall
get them who by development, by
opening and educating their powers,
seek them.— Beecher,


Vers, 14-16. Tempt. Although
God cannot be tempted with evil, he
may justly be said to be tempted,
whensoever men, by being dissatisfiea
with His dealings, virtually ask thas
He will alter those dealings, and pro-
ceed in a way more congenial with
their feelings. Suppose a man to be
discontented with the appointments of
Providence ; suppose him to murmur
and repine at what the me ty allota

43


OmAP, Vi.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





him to do or to bear, is he not to be
charged with provoking God to change
His purposes? and what is this if it be
not “tempting” God—a striving to
induce Him to swerve from His late
though every one of these plans hag
been settled by infinite wisdom. In
short, unbelief of every kind and
degree may be said to be a tempting
of God; for not to believe on the
evidence which he has seen fit to give,
is to tempt him to give more than He
has already given—offering our possible
assent, if proof were increased, as an
inducement to him to go beyond what
his wisdom has prescribed.—H. Melvill.


Vers. 20-25. What mean the testi-
montes? ‘lhe mother of a family was
married to an infidel, who made a jest
of religion in presence of his own
children ; yet she succeeded in bring-
ing them all up in the fear of the
Lord. I one day asked her how she


preserved them from the influence of a
father whose sentiments were so openly
opposed to her own? She answered :
“Because to the authority of a father I
did not oppose the authority of a
mother, but that of God. From earliest
years my children have always seen
the Bible upon the table. This Holy
Book has constituted the whole of
their religious instruction. I was silent
that I might allow it to speak. Did
they propose a question; did they
commit any fault; did they perform
any good action ; I opened the Bible,
and the Bible answered, reproved or
encouraged them. The constant read-
ing of the Scriptures has alone wrought
the prodigy which surprises you” (A.
Monod). “Young man, attend to the
voice of one who possesses certain
degree of fame in the world,” said Dr,
Samuel Johnson, “ and who will shortly
appear before his Maker—read the
Bible every day of your life,”


CHAPTER VIL


Cerrtcat Nores.—Tsracl is forwarned against the idolatry of the people whose co


were about to enter (ef. vi. 14).
deliver them.


The nations were more powerful than Israel, but God ‘roel :


2. They must be destroyad, devoted to destruction as accursed, put under the ban. Lev.
xxvii. 28. No covenant must be made, nor alliancez formed with them lest their children


should be seduced.


4. From following, lit. from behind me (Jehovah) fe, entice to other gods.


6. Deal.


All appendages of idolatry to be destroyed. Ex, xxxiv, 18; xxiii. 24.


enclosures of trees, Ashtoreth, a wooden pillar, very high and firmly fixed in the und (of,
Jud. vi 25-27 chap, xvi. 21), a female god (Ashtarte) companion of Baal. a (e


6. Holy consecrated to God and not to be lost through idolatry. Special. lit, » people of
property to God, 1 Chron, xxix. 3; Eccl. ii, 8 ; Tit, ii, 14. Above, ous of all people.


7. This selection, not through numerical strength ; bet


8. Through the covenant of love (chap. iv. 87). This led to deliverance from Egypt.


9-12. By this Israel were to know that God was faithful in


showing me to those


that love Him and repaying, t.e., punishing enemies fo their face, i.¢., whilst still living } im theix
presence, in their own sight ; or perhaps in their proper persons, Ex. xxxiii, 14,


11. This display of God’s faithfulness should teach them to keep His statutes,


32. Asa consequence of observance God’ fa
womb, increase of flocks and herds, of, Ex. xxiii 967 P0 *0 4m blessing the trait of the


144


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY, CHAP. Vi.


Sy cc eames creer


18, In preservation from virulent sickness of all kinds (E . 26 peciall
evil diseases of Egpyt. iat Hania orl


16. Consume, lit., devour as food, snare, i.¢,, Incentive to idolatry, Ps. cvi. 86.


17,18. If they felt unable to meet with these powerful nations, they must remember FE


with its temptations, signs, and wonde © chap. iv. sypt,
the Canaanites, se las ? ers (of. chap. iv. 343 vi. 22). God would do the same te


30. Send hornets against them ; for God was mighty and terrible to do this,


21, 22, Gradually would they be put ont (plucked lest. b
bodies were left on the ground (cf. Ex. xxiii, . '30). Fee temaircccc sony cnrene, it Gand


$4, To stand, lit., to put oneself in the face of a person, to withstand, Lev. xiv, 48.


25, 26. Idols to be destroyed, gold and silver which overlaid them, to be burned, §$
aly ae 2 » . Snared
ofl (Joab igh hey should fall under the course, to which all idolatrous objects were


Forsiwpen Intercourse. — Verses 1-5,


Israel were about to possess Canaan, to go into danger and temptation.
Moses forewarns them against toleration of idolatry. They must have no inter-
course with these nations, be entirely separated from them, and by God’s help
utterly exterminate them.


I. No toleration of them. “Nor show mercy unto them.” What we tolerate
we begin to pity and love. Evils most repulsive at first become attractive after-
wards. Hence we must avoid tlie very appearance of evil. In obedience to
God, rid ourselves of every danger, though dear as a right hand or a right
eye.


II. Entire separation from them. The command is stringent and oft
repeated. 1. /n social intercourse. ‘Thou shalt make no covenant with
them,” (ver. 2). 7 7eaties were forbidden with Canaanites so gross in idolatry
and infamous in custom and lust. Marriages were forbidden. ‘“ Neither shalt
thou make marriages with them,” Ifa covenant was made with the people they
would participate in idolatrous feasts, intermarry, join in worship, and be
seduced into idolatry. The examples of Solomon and others in subsequent
history prove the necessity and importance of this policy. ‘“ Evil communica-
tions corrupt good manners.” Life’s dearest ties are to be regulated by God’s
will. Weare to marry in the Lord. In character, custom and life, be “ not
conformed to this world.” 2. ln religious worship. They were not to bow down
to their gods, nor serve them, nor do after their works (Ex, xxiii. 24; xxxiv. 13).
At first ee were commanded to “quite break down their images ;” then.
after they had displayed idolatrous leanings they were to destroy “altars and
groves,” which would lead to the worship of the gods if retained. The
entire apparatus of idol worship must be destroyed and forgotten (ver. 5).


III, Complete extermination of them. ‘Thou shall smite them and utterly
destroy them.” Nations, like individuals may become incorrigible and hopeless
in their moral condition. Iniquities often call for Divine interposition. - ‘I'he
Canaanites defiled the land with their abominations (Lev. xviii, 6, 23), and God
as Sovereign Disposer employed what agency He plvased to dispossess them. Let
us take warning, remove everything that offends God and perpetuates idolatry,
“ Pull down the nests, and the rooks will disappear” was the maxim of Knox,
this is the wisest policy, the only security from God’s anger. Drive from the
heart, uproot and destroy in the world, every sinful custom; that a worship

4


OHAP. VII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY.





eee


of God may be established and every abomination stamped out, “lest it be for
® snare in the midst of thee.”








 Destaw or Isnagt’s Exattation.—Verses 4-6.


They were to destroy the nations, because their existence, character and
position were concerned. ‘They were selected by God to be a holy and special
people. ‘This great honour and high privileze they were to keep and not cast
away. Hence they were chosen and blessed with inheritaace.


1. To preserve religious worship. “For they will turn away thy son from
following Me.” ‘'I'o preserve their national existence all corrupting influences
must be put away; for “sin is a reproach (disgrace) to any people” (Prov.
xiv, 34.) To keep their national faith, idolatry with all its monuments must
be utterly exterminated. The land must be purged, every trace of impurity
swept away, and the place consecrated to God and pure worship, Christians are
called out of the world, to maintain conflict with its evils, to win and keep it for
the habitation of God and His Spirit.


II, To maintain a special character. Israel was chosen to take a special
place, to be “a peculiar people,” historically and spiritually, among the nations
of the earth. lt was needful therefore to elevate and preserve them by moral
law, wonderful providence, and special policy. 1. As a holy people. “ For
thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy God.” Holy by special covenant,
and should be holy in personal character and conduct, separation from the world
involves watchful care and constant dedication to God. Israelites were to be
near to God as priests of other nations thought themselves to be. Christians
are entitled to draw nigh and offer to God their gifts and allegiaace. “Ye
shall be unto Me a Kingdom of priests and a Holy nation (Ex. xix 6.) 2. As
special witnesses for God. “‘A special people unto himself, for His glory, truth,
and use.” ‘Their value was not in themselves, but in their position, virtues, and
design. A nation is not to be estimated according to its wealth and ascendancy,
but according to its moral worth and righteous deeds. What Israel was designed
to be, ( hristians are now. “ Ye are My witnesses saith the Lord,” to testify to
flis existence, mercy, and purpose. “'T'his people have I formed for Myself ;
they show forth My praise” (virtues) Is. xliii. 21; “the praises (virtues) af
Him that hath so called you” (1 Peter ii. 9).


Tas Cuosen Prortn— Verses 6-8,


Moses is here referring to the ground or motive from which the election of
Israel was originally made. ‘I'hough it might have seemed suitable that the
God of the universe should choose to Himself the mightiest nation of any, yet
God had not so acted. He chose to Himself Israel, when as yet but a single
family, or rather a single person, Abraham; though there were already numerous
nations and powerful kingdoms in the earth.—Sp. Com.


I, The reason for the choice. God has always reasons, though not always
assigned for what He does. They ara given here negatively and positively,
1. Not numerical strength. “ For ye were the fewest of all people.” ‘hey
were but a handful of people till ies the death of Joseph. Nations of the
East were great, and populations enormous; but God’s choice depends not on
size oF spears 2, Not moral worth. They were no better than other people

:


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. VIL.





though they prided themselves in virtue and calling,, and were taugnt by rabbis
that they were holy above all nations, they often pursued perverse and unworthy
conduct. God derived no advantage from them. They were “a stiff-necked
and rebellious people.” Christians are not chosen on the ground of merit, fore-
seen repentance and faith, but “ because it hath pleased the Lord to make them
his peuple.” 8. But from free grace. (a) Pure love. He loved them because He
would love them. A simple, foolish reason in the opinion of men. We love
when there is something loveable in the person loved. Our love depends upon
excitement without. God’s love is free, sovereign, and in spite of everything
unworthy. (b) Divine faithfulness. ‘He would keep the oath which He had
sworn unto your fathers.” God wasadebtor to them on account of His
promise, not through their conduct—a promise which He would perform, not-
withstanding their sinfulness. ‘‘ To perform the mercy promised to our fathers,


and to remember His holy covenant ; the oath which He sware to our father
Abraham.”


II. The manifestation of the choice. The purpose was formed, the choice
made, but had to be carried out and manifest in Israel’s history, 1. In their
wonderful deliverance. “ From the hand of Pharaoh, King of Egypt.” “ Let my
people go” was the demand. They could not serve God in Eyyptian bondage.
Only when they were free was it seen that they were God’s inheritance and
choice. 2. In their holy character. If holy, they were to evince it by holy
life and make their calling and election sure by separation from idolatry and
consecration to God. 3. By hearty co-operation with God. “For thou art an
holy people unto the Lord” (ver. 6), therefore work with Him in destroying
His enemies and fulfilling His purpose. @od’s purpose does not interfere with
our responsibility, duty, and use of means.


III. The design of the choice. The motives which led to the election and
redemption of Israel were beneficial to themselves and illustrative of God's
wisdom and glory. They were chosen to be holy and could only fulfil their
mission by obedience to God. External separation must lead to spiritual
devotion. They were made the depositories of God’s will. In their sacred rites
and institutions, in their selection and history, God displayed His grace and
prepared the world for His truth. “Neither the Egyptians, with all their
wisdom,” says Vholuck, “nor the imaginative Indians, nor the vain and
speculative Greeks, nor the haughty Romans could have received a revelation,
or have been employed in this work without marring it. “The Lord hath
chosen Jacob unto himself, and Israel for His peculiar treasure.


Lessons FroM THE Past.— Verses 8-11.


Israel were constantly reminded of the wonders of God in the past deeds to
which they owed their national existence, and which were fitted as distinet
manifestations of love to impress their minds and incite to obedience. Solemn
are the lessons taught by their history. We may live in the past aud not only
discern the mind of the philosopher, historian, and politician, but the mind of
God.


I. The Grace of God to distinguish men. Israel were distinguished and blessed
above others by divine love. Privileges and personal gifts, honours and distinc-
tions are to be traced to soverign grace and not human merit, For who
maketh thee to differ (distinguisheth thee) (1 Cor. iv. 7) “ By the grace of God
I am what I am.” ye


OHAP. VII, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.








II. The Power of God to deliver men. “Redeemed you out of the house
of bondmen.” Israel were set free, guided aud settled in the land, by a strong
hand. his hand is not shortened, but delivers in sickness, dangers and trouble.
No enemy, bondage, or chains, can retain God’s people. “ Who delivered us
from so great a death and doth deliver; in whom we trust that He will yet
deliver.”


III. The faithfulness of God to encourage men. “ Because he would ke
the oath which he had sworn.” God will never disregard or forget His wo
The promise may be set at naught, fulfilment long delayed, and His ae le
severely tried ; but the oath is taken and will be verified. He is the Go of
Amen, and we may ever trust Him. His veracity is written in miracle, tender
forbearance, and covenant mercy. “God is not a man that He should lie;
neither the Son of Man that He should repent” (Num. xxiii 19; 1 Sam. xv,
29; 2 Tim. ii, 13.)


IV. The providence of God towarn men. Providence is the school of life in
which we discern God and His purpose. Its relations to men are personal, and
its lessons various. We have—1. <A lesson of mercy. “He keeps covenant and
mercy with them that love Him.”  God’s mercy infinitely transcends His
righteous anger, and is shown to “a thousand generations.” ‘I'o enjoy this
mercy we must love God and “‘ keep his commandments.” 2. A lesson of justice,
“ Repayeth them that hate Him.” There is repayment or retribution in the
government of God. The sinner cannot escape justice and sin go unpunished.
This repayment is (a) personal “to his face.” The sinner himself will see and
feel that he is smitten of God (Job xxxiv. 11). “Iam visited of God,” cried
a dying man. (4) Open “to his face,” may mean openly, manifestly, discerned
by others to warn them. (c) Sudden. “ He will not be slack.” Delay is not
forgetfulness or winking at sin, but given to induce repentance. (d) Severe “to
destroy.” God’s patience may be provoked, the day of grace may be lost, and
vengeance may fall upon men suddenly, and that without remedy. 3. A lesson
of wnstruction. “Thou shalt therefore keep the commandments.” If God thus
deals with men, rewards them according to their works, take heed, be warned
against rebellion and apostacy, and keep “ His statutes.” “Behold the goodness
and severity of God; on them which fell, severity ; but toward thee, goodness,
if thou continue in His goodness ; otherwise thou also shalt be cut off,’


“ For human weal, heaven husbands all eventa,”"— Young,


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 1,2. Gaining the inheritance.
1. By Divine guidance. “The Lord
thy God shall bring thee into the land.”
All inheritance, honour and_ position
through God’s blessing. 2. By earnest
co-operation with God. Israel must
follow, “thou goest;” must fight,
“cast out.” Then God would deliver
them, and “they would utterly destroy
them.” We must work with God to
enter any position and succeed in any
pursuit.


Maes” Israel ministers of de-


struction. 1. The people destroyed ;
an act which can only be reconciled
with the Divine character, except on
the assumption, that the gross idolatry
and enormouswickednessof the Canaan-
ites left no hope of repentance and
amendment. 2. The monuments of
idolatry destroyed. ‘The Gods wera
deemed to be vanquished with the
people whom they could no longer de-
fend. There must be no rival with
God inthehuman heart, in the Christian
church, or in the world, All must be
consecrated to Him,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


CHAP. VIL


ee


Vers. 4-6. Divine reasons for
severity, 1. Human wickedness. Ca-
naanites had filled up the measure of
their iniquity. 2. I'he good of His
bovine Preserving their existence, by

eeping them from danger ; maintain-
ing their holy character and position
by removing snares to evil.


Vers. 6-8. A special people. 1. In
the impress of their character. “Thou
art an holy people.” 2. In the privi-
leges which they possessed. ‘To whom
pertaineth the adoption,” etc. (Rom. ix.
iv). 3. In the prodigies by which they
were defended. What safeguards and
helps from God ?


Ver. 9. The faithful God. The
od of Amen (Ps, xxxi. 6). “The


Amen, the faithful and true witness”
(Rev ii. 14) that “will not suffer His
faithfulness to fail, nor alter the thing
that is gone out of Hislips” (Ps. Ixxxix.
33), all His precepts, predictions,
promises, menaces, being the issue of a
most faithful and righteous will, void
of the least insincerity or falsehood
(1 Kings viii. 24). Neither could
any day or age produce one instance to
the contrary.— /rapp.


Vers. 7-11. Important truths. Flec-
tion (ver. 7). Redemption (ver. 8).
Grace (ver. 9). Justice (ver. 11). Law
(ver. 11). God revealed indeeds. Deeds
of wonder (ver. 8). Deedsoflove(ver.7).
Deeds of faithfulness and mercy (ver. ‘
and deeds of righteousness (ver. 10).


>


Tur Buiesstnas or Oseprence.— Verses 12-16,


As there was retribution for disobedience, so there would be rewards for


obedience.
rights.


“Tf ye hearken to these judgments.”


Israel was God’s servant, and must render to their Ruler His just


If they would observe and keep


them, great would be their prosperity, temporally and spiritually.


I, The source of these blessings,
Love is first, and love is last.


God begi
love and obedience to Him (1 John iv. 10; John xiv. 21.).


“ He will love thee and bless thee.”


in love to us, and we should return
In mercy “He


sware unto thy fathers,” and in mercy he kept the oath. Change is impossible


with Him, and fail He never can.


History testifies to God’s love,


His purpose


to bless in Christ, like a thread of gold, runs through all ages.


II. The extent of these blessings,


ments of personal, domestic, and religious life. ]
This is an object of legitimate desire, and held out as the promise
@ Freedom from personal sickness.


be abundant.
of loyal obedience.


Prosperity would abound in all depart-


1. Zemporal prosperity would


“The Lord will take


away from thee all sickness” (ver. 15). Sickness often results from sin, and might


be overcome or prevented by a sober,
Divine scourges for neglect of natural and spiritual laws,


life. Plagues and pestilence are


odly
If Israel would walk


in God’s ways, He would miraculously preserve them. The special “diseases of
Egypt,” which, notwithstanding its even temperature and mildness, are indigenous
and malignant, would not touch them. Let us thank God for healthy climate,
but remember that only regard for physical and moral law will give health and
happiness. (b) Increase of womb. “ He will also bless the fruit of thy womb”
(ver. 13). God would remember His promise to multiply them as the stars of
heaven and the sand of the sea. (c) Increase of cattle (ver. 13). mee
should be barren among them (ver. 14). Abortions, untimely births an

barrenness in excess were considered signs of God’s anger, and special sacrifices
were offered to prevent them. (d) Increase of fruit. and would yield ita
increase Corn and wine would be plentiful (¢f Lev. xxvi. 3-5, 9,10; Ex. xxiii
25, 26; Pa cvii. 38). 2. Spiritual prosperity would be great. “ oo rk be


OHAP, VIL HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





blessed above all people” (ver. 14). The mercy of ver. 12 means special favour.
Whatever results from natural laws is bestowed by the Lawgiver. ‘The blessings
of bodily health, family increase, fruitful lands, and productive flocks, are modes
of displaymg God’s goodness, and should prompt to faithful service, “The
blessing of the Lord, it maketh rich, and He addeth no sorrow with it.


IIX. The conditions on which these blessings are given. “ If ye hearken
to these judgments” (ver. 12), What a frail, feeble, and uncertain condition |
some would say. But such are the terms of an all-wise God. He is faithful—
can we be? Not of ourselves, only by his grace and good spirit. If Canaan
had depended on the merit and valour of Israel, they could not have entered it,
They obeyed God and gained the land. We cannot secure heaven and Divine
favour, only by faith in Christ and obedience to His word. “That the
righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh,
but after the spirit.”


ExoovnaGEMEnt me Dury.— Verses 16-21.


with the thought that Israel would be strong and vigorous, by obedience to
God, “ Moses reverts with emphasis to the command to root out the Canaanites
without reserve, and not to serve their gods, because they would be a snare to
them (¢f. Ex. x. 7); and then in vers. 17-26 he carries out still further the
promise in Ex. xxiii. 27-30, of the successful subjugation of the people through
the assistance of the Lord, and sweeps away all the objections that a weak faith
might raise to the execution of the divine command.” —Keil.


I. The enforcement of duty. “Thou shalt consume all the people,” ver. 16.
They were utterly to extirpate them from the land, without the least pity for
their persons or regard to their religion. We are not to consult our feelings but
our duty ; not to wait for more knowledge but to act on what we have. “To
wait for God’s performance,” says Bishop Hall, “and do nothing, is to abuse
that Divine Providence which will always so work as not to allow us to remain
in activity.”


II. Fear in undertaking duty. “Thou shalt not be afraid of them (ver. 18).
When God commands we hesitate, excuse or delay. ‘Sloth in conclusion
proves laborious,” says Bacon, Fear springs—1. From overpowering numbers.
“These nations are more than I.” Seven nations to supplant. “ How can J
dispossess them?” When we look at self and forget God we magnify dangers,
“The soldier wastes his strength who fights with shadows.” Rone not, for
they that be with us are more than they that be with them.” 2. From
weakness of heart. “Tf thou say in thine heart.” If the heart gives way,
all strength is gone physically and spiritually. Weapons and numbers avail
not without heart. If we forget God we shall lose courage and be afraid
“T will send a faintness into their hearts, and the sound of a shaken leaf
shall chase them” (Lev. xxvi. 27-36.) 3. Krom lack of faith in God. God
will help and maintain the right ; why fear?” ‘Trust in Him, and His
strength becomes yours. ‘‘All things are possible to him that believes,”


‘“Our doubts are traitors ;
And make us lose the good we oft might win,
By fearing to attempt it.”’—Shakespeare,


III. Reasons for encouragement in the performance of duty. The
Bible seeks to impress the minds of God’s people most strongly with a sense of
boldness, faith, and courage. God prepares them for meeting and overcoming

150 ae ‘ag - The we


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. CHAP. VEL.





anticipated evila. Many are the motives to drive away fear. 1. The exploits of
God tn the past. Remember, and “ well remember, what the Lord thy God did
unto Pharaoh” (ver. 18). The sublime deeds of Jehovah, the grandeurs of
history must never, whatever else may be forgotten. What God has done he
can do again. He can never change. Omnipotence is never exhausted. It is
no strange thing for God to do wonders. He has always done them, hence
ground for confidence. “So shall the Lord thy God do unto all the people of
whom thou art afraid.” 2. Zhe help of God in the present. “The Lord thy
God is among you.” Faith can discover an invisible helper more than a match
for all azainst us. “ How many do you count me tobe?” said an ancient general
to his soldiers, despondingly asking, ‘‘ How many are coming against us?” “ A
mighty God and terrible.” 38. The providence of God in their favour. Napoleon
said providence was with the strongest battalion, but “God and one man are in
the majority ” very often. Israel were the fewest, yet had to destroy the strongest
peoples. (a.) God would be for Israel, but against their foes (ver. 15). Not
one could stand their onslaught. The Lord delivered all their enemies into their
hand.” (6) The hornet was their ally. “Thy God will send the hornet among
them” (ver. 20), God musters many forces for his work. Locusts, flies, and
hornets, are no insignificant helpers in the ranks of Jehovah. Insects have
swarmed and swept mighty armies before them. ‘Thus does God encourage.
Wonders in the past and promises for the present; creatures great and little
prove divine power to conquer. This energy the Gospel contains to-day. Banish

ilty fears, sloth and forgetfulness of God. “Hereby ye shall know that the

iving God is among you.’


Tos Atmicuty Hriprr.— Verse 21.


This description of God is a terror to sinners, but an encouragement to
Christians. His mighty presence is—1. Unmerited. The aid we get from
earthly friends is often a reciprocity of kinduess—a discharge of obligation.
But our goodness extends not to God. We have done nothing to deserve help.
2. Unexpected. In most extreme danger and when most unlikely, comes deli-
verance. “ Man’s extremity is God’s opportunity.” he place of fear and
sorrow, becomes one of joy and triumph. 3. Singular. God’s methods are
peculiar to himself. Events which appear to combine to work our ruin, bring
our salvation. In the deliverance from Egypt and the conquest of Canaan God
was terrible to his enemies. 4. Zimely. We think He has forgotten or for-
saken us if He appears not when we wish. But He knows better than we do
when it is time for Him to work. “'‘I'oo late,” can never be said of His mercy
“A very present help in trouble.” 5. All-sufficient. Earthly friends fail.
God is always among us, “a mighty God and terrible.” He conquers most
formidable foes, rescues from the greatest dangers.” “The Lord your God is a
God of gods and Lord of lords, a great God, a mighty and terrible.”


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 12. 1. The command. Judg- learn,” says T. Watson. 2. The pro-
ments possessed, heard, and kept. mise. “If” we do our part God will
The word must be known and prac- do His. Blessings seem to be suspended
tised. ‘If a scholar have his rules on our obedience. “ Prove me here
laid before him, and he forget them as_— with.”


fast as he read them, he will never i


GHAP. VIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY.


Oo


Ver. 18. Triple blessings. “Love
thee, bless thee, and multiply thee.”


Vers, 18, 14. Religion and Material
Prosperity. 1, An indication of its
nature (Matt. vi. 83; 1 Tim. iv. 8.)
2. An argument for its reception (Deut.
xxviii. 5-8.) 3. A proof of wisdom
and goodness in its author.


Ver. 16. Eatirpation. 1. Com-
manded and can bedone. 2. Needful
and must be done, to secure their own
safety, religion, and the favour of God.
3. If left undone, “that will be a
snare to thee.”


Vers. 17-19. Anticipated fears.
1. Natural, How apt to meet
troubles before they come! What shall
Ido?” “How can I get through?”
and “ what will become of me?” are
common questions. 2. Weakening.
Nothing more disheartens than looking
within ourselves, and measuring God
by ourselves, “ Wonderful is the case
of boldness in civil business. What
first? boldness. What second and
third? boldness” (Bacon). 3. Ground-
less. “God sometimes seems to say to
us,” says Cecil, “if within and with-
out, you have ever so much cause for
despondency, yet do not limit Me.”
“With us is the Lord our God to help
us, and ta fight our battles.”


Vers. 18, 19. Ltemember. A good
memory is very helpful and useful. 1. It
is a great means of knowledge, for what
signifies your reading or hearing, if
you remember nothing. 2. It isa means
of faith (1 Cor. xv. 2.) 3. It isa means
of comfort. Ifa poor Christian in dis-
tress could remember God’s promises
they would inspire him with new life ;
but when they are forgotten, his spirits
sink. 4. It is a means of thankfulness.
5. Itis a means of hope; for “experience
worketh hope” (Rom. v. 4), and the
memory is the storehouse of experience.
6. It isa means of repentance ; for how
can werepent or mourn for what we have
forgotten? 7. It isa means of usefulness
When one spark of grace is truly kind-
led in the heart, it will quickly endea-
vour to heat others also.—A. Steele.


Ver. 21. ThyGod. Jehovah, maker of
worlds, but the God only of His people.
Thy God by purpose, covenant, promise,
and performance. Among you the
centre of all knowledge, trust, devotion
and help. He sees and sustains, defends
and comforts. Let us extol his power
by which He works deliverance! ‘“ 'The
Lord thy God in the midst of thee is
mighty.” God’s presence and power,
1. A source of hope in fear. 2. Of
help in weakness. 3. Of guidance in
perplexity. 4. Of triumph in conflict,


Tae Conquest or Canaan.— Verses 16-24,


_ The land was to be taken and the kings utterly destroyed. But the specific
aid and the specific method are described—


I. The conquest was most difficult.


could not accomplish it. They were few, t


So difficult that Israel thought they
heir enemies many ; they were strangers


to the country ; the Canaanites knew every field of it ; they were unskilled in


the art and without much experience in the practice of war.
are mightier than I ; how can / dispossess thern ?”


“'These nations
We cannot, but God never


sends us on warfare at our own charge, 'I'o be valourous soldiers we must banish


distrust.


II, The conquest was supernatural


y gained. God had helped them in every


case and thus far brought them safely. He could yet display all mighty power


and work “signs and wonders.”
only obey and work with Him.”


His presence and providence are with us, if we
Thy God shall deliver them unto thea, and


shall destroy them with a mighty destruction (ver. 23).


153


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. VII.


III. The conquest was gradual. “ Little by little ; thou mayest not consume
them at once.” 1. This was an evidence of kindness to Israel, Wild animals
might increase too much if the land was suddenly depopulated and become a
source of danger and trouble to Israel “lest the beasts of the field increase upon
thee.” 2. This is a law of Divine grace. “Little by little” do we conquer sin
and self, the world and its temptations. Little by little do we gain men for
Christ and succeed in Christian effort. 3. This is a law of God’s providence.
Great undertakings demand patient thought; are frequently interrupted and
only succeed by Haney progress and successive order. ‘l'hus does God teach
“line upon line, line upon line, precept upon precept, precept upon precept,
here a little and there a little,


Gon’s Pzopre Invincreix.— Verses 23, 24.


God had shown that Israel had no need to be afraid. He would help by His
pee power, and providence, until all left and hidden would be destroyed.

0 inspire them with courage, the promise is repeated and success is pledged.
If they will only obey they will conquer. God’s people are invincible.


I. On account of the warfare in which they are engaged. Israel’s mission
seemed cruel, but it was the cause of God and for the welfare of humanity.
“A good cause gives a stout heart.” Christian warfare is a Divine cause.
“Fight the good fight of faith.”


“ Virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful.” Shakespeare.


ITI. On account of the enthusiasm which inspires them. “There shall no
man be able to stand before thee.” Cromwell’s Ironsides fought for liberty,
truth, and God. God would inspire His people with wonderful courage, so tiat
they would not only pursue but overcome. A handful would be more than a
match for a regiment. Five of you shall chase an hundred,” ete. (Lev. xxvii.
7, 8.)


III, On account of the leader who commands them. Great generals make
good soldiers. Czsar often restored his rebellious army to obedience, made
them attached to his person and devoted to his cause. Christ, “ the Captain of
our salvation” is merciful, mighty and victorious, never lost, and never will lose
a battle. “If God be for us who can be against us” (liom. vill 31, 37;
Isa. xli, 11).


Tux Cursep Taine.— Verses 25, 26,


The idols of Canaan were devoted to destruction, under the curse of God and
if preserved they might entice to sins, therefore Israel were to destroy them by
fire with their ornaments and supports.


J. Idolatry is a cursed thing. The worship of gods and the worship of gol.
all superstitions and sins are abominable things which the Lord hates.


II. This cursed thing may become a snare. “ Lest thou be snared therein.”
1. By gratifying covetousness. “Thou shait not desire the silver or the gold that
is on them.” God may be served from motives of gain. Gold and silver mav
tempt and covetous lusts may endanger the soul. 2. By transforming characte:


like ttself, Man becomes like the object he loves. ‘I'he love of cay ee will


OHAP, VII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOM Y.





make us worldly ; the love of money will make usavaricious, Sin in its gilded
and attractive forms must be utterly detested, for loving begets likeness, 3.
By bringing under the curse of God. Achan “took of the accursed thing ; and
the anger of the Lord was kindled against the children of Israel” (Josh. vii.
1-21; vi. 17,18; Jud. viii. 27.) We cannot use for our good what God has put
under anathema.


III. This snare it is our duty to remove. “Thou shalt utterly abhor it.”
We are to hate what God hates and forsake what he forbids. 1. We are not to
desire but to detest it. 2. Not to bring it into the house but burn it in the
fire. ‘I'hus are we not only to oppose, but detest and destroy all idolatry and
wickedness. ‘I'he worship of man or reason, of art or mammon must find no
place in our hearts and homes. We must avoid the very appearance of evil.
Our service must be disinterested and holy. ‘“ There shall cleave nought of the
cursed thing to thine hand.”


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vera. 23, 24. Great reverses pre-
dicted. Delivered. Destroyed with a
mighty destruction. Kings destroyed.
Destruction severe and universal.
Name destroyed. “Thou mayest
choose,” says Bishop Pilkington,
“whether thou wilt be remembered
to thy praise orto thy shame.” “The
a of the wicked shall rot” (Prov.
x. 7).


Ver. 25. Snared. As the fowler
catcheth birds, and the hunter wild
beasts in their snares and traps, so
shall these Canaanites catch you by
their familiarity and commerce, and
draw you to participate in their sins
and plagues.—7/rapp.


Vers. 25, 26. Images burned, and
nothing kept. 1. To satisfy curiosity.
2. To excite pity. 3. To gratify lust.
4. To lead astray.

Idol gods. Made (images graven),
adorned (gold and silver on them),
upheld (in the house), cursed and
uprooted. Heeling towards them.
Utterly detest—utterly abhor—destroy
and burn. Learn—1. That God will
not accept divided worship. 2. That
in mixing with the world we are in
danger of being estranged from God.
3. That when estranged from God, and
brought under his curse, the punish-
ment will be severe.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER VII.


Vers. 1-5. No covenant with them.
Court not the society of worldly
persons, but “come out from among
them and be separate.” If duty calls
us there, be with them as physicians,
not companions; as monitors, not
friends ; walk as among snares, and as
Cecil advises, “ transact business with
them like a person in a shower of rain,
staying no longer than is indispensably
necessary.”


Vers. 6-8. Chosen thee. That
separation from other nations in which
the holiness of the Jewish nation

164


chiefly consisted (Ex. xix. 8, 6;
Num. xxiii. 9; Deut. xxvi. 18, 19)
was not spiritual, resulting from
rectitude of heart and a correspondent
deportment, but merely external,
derived from certain sacred rites and
ceremonies, different from or opposite
to those from other nations. The
glory of the Divine wisdom, no less
than of Divine goodness and grace,
was manifested in the choive of the
Israelites for the important purposes
contemplated by their separation.
(Jamieson). Judaism was amonst the
idolatrous nations of antiquity like a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.,


OHAP. VIL





oasis in a desert, clearly defined and
isolated ; separated and enclosed by a
rigid moral and ceremonial law.—


Vers. 8-11. Covenant and ;
TheJewishscheme proceeded on aeabily
the same principles as the general
system of Divine government over the
world, with this difference ; that the
Supreme Jehovah, the Immediate Sove-
reign as well as tutelary (iod of the
Hebrew nation, undertook to dispense
this as well as every other species of
reward and punishment, by an imme-
diate and extraordinary provision, in
which justice should be tempered with
abundant mercy, confining the provi-
dential and temporal punishment for
the parent’s crimes (as in the captiv-
ity) to the third and fourth generation ;
while it encouraged virtue and piety,
by the assurance of a reward, similar
in kind, but infinitely superior in degree,
ani which under the common course
of events could not be hoped for;
promising to extend the blessings of
parental faith and obedience (as in
the case of Abraham), to the thousandth
generation of those who loved God.—
Graves on Pent).


Vers. 12-16. Bless thee. Prosperity
is the blessing of the Old Testament ;
adversity is the blessing of the new
(Bacon). In the day of good be thou
in good. When God gives thee pros-
perity, do thou enjoy it with a cheerful
and thankful heart (Bp. Reynolds).
God's blessing upon our hearts, families
and churches,

“ My stock lies dead, and no increase
Doth my dull husbandry improve 3
O let thy graces without cease
Drop from above.”
From Spurgeon.


Ver. 17-22. Afraid. Ills that
never happened have mostly made men
wetched, (7upper.) 1. Most of our
difficulties arise from discussing what


belongs to God. 2. God does not


reason with us, but replies to our
suspicions reasoning by displaying
anew the love of His heart and the
power of His arm, (Bonar).


Ver. 21. With thee. When the
Crusaders encamped before Jerusalem,
a terrible struggle ensued. TheSaracens
possessed the city, bore down upon
them in countless numbers, and it seem
as if the Christian army would lose the
battle. All at once, we are told that
& joyful cry rang through the ranks of
the crusaders. “St. James is with us!
He fights on our side.” “In the ex-
citement of the conflict, some of them
fancied they saw the apostle in the
clouds advancing to help them. It gave
them new courage. They rushed
forward with energy which could not
be withstood and the battle was won.


Ver. 22. Little and little. Birds
build nests straw by straw. “Euripides
the Greek tragedian, was very slow in
composing his excellent dramas. One
day a poetaster met him and began to
rally him on his tardiness, adding that
he himself had written 100 verses in
three days, while Euripides had only
written three. “Ah (said Euripides)
but there is this difference, your 300
verses perish in three days, while my
three will survive 300 years.” (Brewer.)


Vers, 23-24. No man able to stand
before thee. Luther’s song of confidence
“God is our refuge and strength.”
Let God be thy love and thy fear, and
He will be also thy refuge. “The
firmest thing in this lower world is a
believing soul.” (Leighton). When
Luther was going into the presence of
Cardinal Cajetan, to answer for his
heretical opinions, one of the Cardinal’s
underlings, insultingly asked him where
he would find a shelter, if his patron,
the Elector of Saxony, should desert
him? “ Under the shield of heaven,”
was the bold reply.


CHAP, VIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





CHAPTER VIIL


Crrtoan Nores.—In addition to the danger of being ensnared by idolatry, after . reir
settlement in Canaan, Israel might fall imto pride and forget God in the enjoyment of its
products. To guard against this, Moses reviews the past and indicates the Divine purpose in
the 40 years’ wanderings,


1. Renewed admonition to keep the law,


2. Remember that God’s designs may be realised and right effecta produced (chap. xiii. 3 ;
2 Chron. xxxii. 31). Humble, i.e, to bring them by means of distress and privations to depend
upon God. Prove, i.e, to test in positions which would reveal their thoughts and hearts.


3, Manna (Ex. xvi. 14, 15), previously unknown to them and their fathers ; not only ts
sustain natural life, but to show that man lives not by bread only, but by every word, lit., every
outgoing of the mouth of the Lord ; not by material bread, but by the fulfilment of God’s will
(ff. Mat. iv. 4). God sustains life by extraordinary as well as ordinary means.


4. God provided for clothing as well as nourishment. Waaed, lit., did not fall off, waste
away, foot swell, become soft (chap. Ixx., got callous; Neh. ix. 21), which would have been the
case if their sandals had not been preserved from wearing out.


5. Thus did God chasten, /é., admonish, educate them as a father his son.


7-9. Israel were to be mindful of this paternal discipline when they entered the good
land, We have a contrast between Palestine and Egypt. Brooks, streams, mountain torrents,
and water-courses in valleys ; water the chief source of fertility. Wheat, cereal fruits specially
promised to faithful allegiance (Ps. Ixxxi. 16; cxvii. 14). Vines covering limestone rocka,
Honey, ® great delicacy.


8. Stones are iron, i.e, ferruginous. Brass, not the alloy brass, but the ore of ecpper
Mines now exhausted or neglected were worked anciently (Job. xxviii, 1-113 Is, lx 174
1 Chron. xxii. 3),


10-18. Ssrael in the midst of plenty were to beware of forgetting God.
12, Goodly houses would be strange after moveable tents
14, Lifted up, like the Pharisee in the temple


In vers. 14-16 Moses again gives a summary of the dangers of the desert 3 snakes, scorpions,
and drought. Yet Divine goodness brought water out of the hardest stone, and gave manna te
humble them, and ultimately to do good at latter end, i.e. the settlement of Israel in Canaan—the
ena and climax of the Mosaic dispensation, to which the sojourn in Egypt, the wandering in
the desert, and the arrangements of the law, all led up (Speak. Com.)


18, Wealth. God gave power to get wealth, to create property (Numb. xxiv. 18), not
on account of Israel’s merit, but to fulfil His promise this day ; the oath was confirmed, and
Israel had come through the desert to the border of Canaan.


19, 20, To strengthen his admonition, Moses pointed again in conclusion, as in
chap. vi. 14 (¢f. chap. iv. 25 sqq.), to the destruction which would come upon Israel through
ostacy from God (Keil, )


Tar Retrosprcr o¥ Lirt.— Verses 16


The long wandering in the wilderness was designed to teach self-distrust,
humility and reliance on God for the necessities of life. God’s special providence
had blessed them, and without this they could not prosper in Vanaan. lence
ey are urged to remember the experience of the past to secure obedience in
the future.


156


HOMILET:C COMMENTARY, DEUVUERONOMY. CHAP. Vil





REMEMBERING THE Way.—Verse 2


I. The way we are called to remember is “all the way,” ete. But those
things are to be most remembered which are more immediately connected with
heaven, as—1. The means which brought us into the way: 2. The afilictions
with which we have been visited since we have been walking in the path of life :
3. Our mercies: 4. Our sins,


II. To be beneficial the remembrance must be accompanied by a lively con-
viction of the overruling providences of God in all that has happened to us.
1, They are intended to humble us: 2. To prove us: 3. ''o teach the in-
sufficiency of earthly things to make us happy.


III. Besides these immediate ends they answer—l. To confirm our faith in
the Bible: 2. 'I'o increase our knowledge of ourselves: 3. To strengthen our
confidence in God.—0. Bradley.


Tue Retrospecr or Lirz.— Verses 1-6.


1, Life is a journey. “ All the way.” It is a most solemn and eventful way.
We are strangers and pilgrims on earth as our fathers were. ‘‘ You have not
assed this way before.” 1. Under Divine guidance. ‘The Lord thy God
ed thee.” Moses and Aaron, priests and counsellors, were with Israel, but they
rayed “let thy presence go with us” (Ex xxxiii. 14, 17). Many looked upor
oses alone, God’s guidance was needful. The Christian has a divine and
omnipotent leader. “So Iam with you,” Sad for those who journey without
God. 2. Displaying divine goodness. From beginning to end life is filled
with tokens of divine favours. (a) ln redeeming it from destruction as Israel
were delivered from Evypt. Dangers seen and unseen, enemies in every period
aud stage—perils, personal, social, and peculiar, have been overcome, (6) Jn
sustaining it in time of need. Food, clothing, and shelter have been given.
Manna never ceased; suppliescame every day. Decay made no progress, and God
provided for every emergency. “God will pay all our expenses to heaven,” says
an old writer. 3. Under divine discipline. “To prove thee.” Hardships,
trials, and changes, are ways by which God discovers what is in our hearts. The
bitter and sweet are mixed together in heavenly discipline, give life a moral
value and test faith, disposition and character. 4. Directed to a special end,
There is direction, dark and perplexing as events may be. We train and educata
our children for ultimate ends. God disciplines his people for special work,
special enjoyment, and “ good at the latter end.” The moral end to prove us,
and the real end eternal rest.


II. The journey of life should be remembered. “Thou shalt remember all
the way.” Life’s meaning can only be understood by its retrospect and remem-
brance. We cannot discern God’s purpose in the midst of its movement and
events. But when raised to some mount, or brought to some crisis, then wa
calmly review the past and learn its lessons, 1. In its marked duration,
“These forty years” in the wilderness. Long or short our days are limited,
The longest life brief regarded in the light of eternity. Brief contrasted with
the age of the world and the duration of God! But filled with human folly
and divine mercy! 2. In its special dangers. “In the wilderness,” a iand of
dearth, scorpions and fiery serpents, verse 15. “A land of deserts and of pits ;
through a land of drought and of the shadow of death ; through a land that no
man passed through, and whereno man dwelt” (Jer. ii. 6; Hos. xiii, 5). 3. /n tt
pecultar trials, ‘The Bed Sea with its triumphs, Marah with its aed


o#aP. Vill HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.








Rephidim with its murmurs, Sinai with its thunders and the wilderness with its
supplies, contests and incidents must never be forgotten. ‘The past records, the -
wonders of God; memory must treasure them up to aid faith. ‘“ Memory is a
fit handmaid for faith. "When faith has its seven years of famine, memory like
Joseph in Egypt opens her granaries.”—(Spurgeon.) 4. In its moral nature.
Life is more than meat which sustains it, greater than natural existence.
Man doth not live by bread alone, but by the word, the will of God or what is
leasing to God. God sustained Israel forty years with manna, and Moses
orty days and forty nights without bread to show that our well-being
depends not upon material things. Our life is nourished by God’s will, we
should therefore be more anxious to do that will, than become impatient,
fretful, and selfish in helping ourselves (¢f. Matt. iv. 4; John vi. 52-55).


III. The habit of remembering life will be helpful to use As an exercise
of memory it is useful. Memory may help or hinder according to our tastes
and moral condition. We sea, review the past. 1. Zo acquaint us with
ourselves. “Know thyself” is a difficult lesson. We blame the Jews and are
guilty ourselves. We measure ourselves with ourselves or others, and think
too highly of ourselves. But God knows what is in man, puts us into circum-
stances which test our character, and which bring out what we have in us, what
we have in our hearts, “ whether thou wouldest keep his commandients or no.”
2. To teach us dependence upon God. “To humble thee,” and uproot all
pride and self-sufficiency. ‘He suffered thee to hunger,” that God might be
recognised and trusted, What could Israel, what can we do in the wilderness
without God. Supplies came not from earth but from heaven. 3. 70 excite
gratitude to God. Gratitude cures bad memories. If we forget God’s works
we have need to learn the art of remembering. ‘‘ Eaten bread is soon forg: tten.
Nothing so soon grows stale as a favour” (Zrapp). Memory quickens the heart
and supplies fuel to grateful feeling. 4. Zo prompt obedience to God. “ 'There-
fore thou shalt keep the commandments,” etc. (ver. 6). Without a sense of
obligation there can be no real obedience. “ ‘Those who forget God’s works,” says
Spurgeon, “are sure to fail in their own.” “Thanksgiving is good,” observes
Matthew Henry, “but thankliving is better.” We should make grateful ackuow-
ledgment of God’s goodness by unreserved dedication to His service. “ All the
commandments shall ye observe to do.”


Drvinz Discrprrwrz.— Verses 5-6.


The sufferings of Israel were not only chastisements for sin, but trials of
obedience ; methods of discovering their unbelief, inconstancy and rebellion.
Thus God trained or disciplined them, that they might obey Him.


I. The nature of this discipline. In earthly families there must be correction.
“for what son is he whom the father chasteneth not!” Among (iod’s people
there is “a needs be” for thisdiscipline, 1. /¢ is often severe. ‘ No chastening
for the present seemeth to be qos but grievious.” Some are heavily afflicted.
‘They suffer in body and mind, in family and business. Dark, indeed are their
days, most intense are the flames in which they are put, until their “flesh is con-
sumed away, that it cannot be seen” (Job xxxiii. 21; xiv. 22. 2. /t ts always
affectionate. “As a man chasteneth his son”—God never suffers His children
to be ruined for want of correction ; whom He loves He chastens, and chastens
because He loves, “He rejoiceth over His child to do Him good ” (Jer. xxxii,
41). ays asa master beating his slaves, nor a judge condemning criminals; —


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY, OmAaP, VIII.





“God deals with His servants,” a an old writer, “ not as a passionate master,
but as a compassionate father.” ‘The principle which prompts him is not judicial
nor retributive, but parental. Hence cried Luther, “ Strike on, Lord, strike on,
for now I know I am Thy child.”


II. The design of this discipline. God has a purpose in view. His strokes
are not random strokes. Earthly fathers chastise foolishly, often for their own
pleasure and err in their method of discipline (Heb. xii. 5, 6.) “They err at
one time in severity, at another in indulgence (1 Sam. iii. 12; Ep. vi. 4), and
do not so much chasten as think they chasten” (Bengel.) But God trains for
our well-being and never errs in the means to accomplish it. 1 70 gtve instruc-
tion. “Consider in thine heart.” Afflictions are not to be despised, but thought
of and felt. Seneca could say “it is inhuman not to feel thine afflictions, and
unmanly not to bear them.” In this school we are taught the folly of pride, the
need of purity and the mercy of God. It throws light into our character and
leads to moral decision. God “taught the men of Succoth (made them
to know) with “thorns of the wilderness and briars” (Jud. viii. 16). W
are made to know much of sin, of Christ, of God, and of the world,
through affliction. Luther said there were many of the Psalms that he
could never understand till he had been afflicted. Rutherford declared that
he had gained a new Bible through the furnace. 2. To produce
obedience. “Therefore thou shalt keep the commandments.” Children are
wayward, self-willed, and must be preserved from disobedience. Jesus
had to “learn obedience by the things which he suffered.” “ Sufferings,
disciplinings ” (trainings) is the Greek adage. God melts in the furnace that he
may stamp with His image; corrects that we may partake of His holiness. The
rod is sent to wean from sin, train to obedience and discipline for heaven.
“Blessed ig the man whom 'hou chasteneth, O Lord, and teachest him out of
Thy law.”

* Among the choicest of my blessings here,
Stands this the foremost, that my heart has bled.”


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. L Duty to be rightly per-
formed. 1. Right in its method.
“Observe to do.” 2 Right in its


motive. From the fear of God. 3.
Right in its scope. “All the com-
mandments.” II. Duty rightly per-


formed brings enjoyment. Physical
exercise gives health, vigour, and
pleasure. Obedience to God gives
satisfaction of heart and mind. Israel
would (a) live, (b) multiply, and (c) gain
the inlieritance. 2 sera baigg is true
enjoyment,” says espeare. f

UTE the "commandments. “All” is
but a little word, but of large extent.
There are magnalia legis and minutula
legis. Look to both the greater and
the lesser things of the law (Matt.
xxiii, 23).—TZrapp.


Vers, 2-4 Practical religion. Know


yourselves thoroughly—store memory
wisely—live obediently. Remembrance
of God's commandments. Consider :
I, The duty of remembrance. A posi-
tive duty, an obligation upon us, with
regard to—1. Earthly things ; 2. Hea-
venly things, II. The benefit result-
ing from it. These events, which we
should remember, were intended to—
1. Humble us; 2. Prove us, III. Its
comfort : it ia all “to do thee good at
thy latter end” Si J, Day, M.A.)
The fetrospect. I. Let us return to
the call toremembrance. II, Observe
the subject to be reviewed. 1. The
place: “the wildernesss;” 2. The
Conductor: “the Lord thy God;”
3. The passages: “all the way;” 4
The period ; “ these forty years.” —Jay,


Vera, 5, 6 shames ia


OHAP. VIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





reckoned here as an high favour. So dom, and with great leniency. 3%

Job accounts it (chap. vil. 17, ee and Painful in their exercise. 4. Affec<

Paul deseribes it (Heb. xii. 7, 8), and  tionate in their design.

Jeremiah prays for it (chap. x. 24).— 8 Hé nothing doen or’ suffers to be dea

Trapp. sid But thou would’st do thyself, could’st thou but
Divine chastisement. Afflictions see,

are—l. Divine in their appointment, The end of all events as well as he.”

2. Paternal in their character. Inflicted Rev. R. Bond.

with tender reluctance, deliberate wise


Tue Goop Lanv.— Verses 7-9,


It is significant that Deuteronomy should abound more than earlier books in
praises of the beauty and fertility of Canaan. ‘Such a topic,” says Dean
Graves, “‘at an earlier period would have increased the murmurings and im-
patience of the people at being detained in the wilderness; whereas now it
encouraged them to encounter with more cheerfulness the opposition they
must meet with from the inhabitants of Canaan.”


¥. A good land displaying Divine bounties. Ancient and modern writers
testify to the natural beauty and fertility of Palestine. Most striking features
are mentioned first. Water abounds in natural springs, fountains, and in the
clouds of heaven. Its cereal fruits yielded sixty and often an hundred fold
(Gen. xxvi. 12 ; Matt. xiii. 8), and under its hills iron and brass werefound. It
was a land of plenty and rich variety ; displaying Divine goodness in its produce
aud position “a wealthy place” (Ps. Ixvi. 12). What forethought, wisdom, and
affection God displays in causing the earth to furnish us with the necessities of
life! Everything to satisfy the eye, promete health, and gratify the taste. But
this possession is only a type of spiritual blessings, and a richer inheritance in
the land beyond.


II. A good land in contrast to the wilderness. Compared with Egypt from
whence they came, and with the desert through which they passed, the laud was
rewarkable. Contrasts in life are many and striking—in its different stages, in itg
beginuing and end, Deserts and fruitful fields, poverty and wealth, light and dark-
ness, “are set the one over against the other,” in Divine appointment, wise propor-
tion and benevolent design, ‘‘T’o the end that man should find nothing after
him.” Nothing superfluous, defective, or irregular in the review (Ce. vil. 14),
“Tf a man should take upon himself to review the work after him, and conceive
that a greater or less degree of prosperity or adversity would have been better,
or that either would have sufficed, without the balance of the other—he only
stands before us in all the folly and presumption of fancying himself to be wiser
than God. What God has done, he has done best.” — Bridge.


III. A good land for which Israel was prep2red. There was, not only &
natural preparation in the physical changes and human cultivation of Canaan,
but a moral preparation of the people for their position. ‘The earth is prepared
for man, and the world to be the theatre of redemption ; but man is trained
and disciplined for his inheritance. We are not always fit to receive the things
we cry for. Blessings would never be appreciated without a sense of need and
adaptation. The wealth of the soul is the wealth of experience ; faith confirmed
after trial and deliverance. The place of the believer is gained through humility,
ane and discipline, me oe gi always Sia and prepared for their lot in
ile, Heaven is “a prepared place for a prepared people.” “To brin i
the place which I have ponarede ers at ap tae

160


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY. CHAP ViIE





Tue Perms or Prosprerrry.— Verses 10-18,


_ When Israel entered ths good land it would be one of the greatest changes
in their history. In the midst of plenty they might forget God, who sustained
them in the wilderness, brought them into their possession and lavished his
gifts upon them. ‘“‘ Beware thou forget not the Lord thy God.”


I, Prosperity leads to self-indulgence. ‘When thou hast eaten and art
full.” Wealth leads to surfeiting. In abundance men indulge sinful appetites.
“ Fating and drinking are themselves religious acts, or, at least, ought to be so,”
says Feuerback, “‘ with every mouthful we should think of. the God who gave
it.” God gives bread for necessities, man craves “meat for his lust.”
(Ps. Ixxviii. 18.) Self-indulgence is dangerous as “a knife to thy throat,”
(Prov. xxiii. 2) and must be avoided lest ruin ensue. ‘ Make not provision for
the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof.”


II. Prosperity tends to forgetfulness of God. Forgetfulness of His providence,
gifts and commandments, A sense of divine favours dies in the memory. ‘The
mercy of God is only remembered when it is taken away. In the order of
nature and in the events of life, God is forgotten, and self or second causes are
praised. “She did not know that I gave her corn, and wine, and oil, and
multiplied her silver and gold, which they prepared for Baal.” (Hos. ii. 8.)


III. Prosperity begets pride of heart. “Then thine heart be lifted up.”
Adversity may depress, but el aed elevates to presumption. It lifts up the
mind against God. Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar and Herod are fearful examples.
It is not mere aversion from God, but direct resistence to God, against which

-God places himself in battle array ; “God resisteth the proud.” (James iv. 6.)
“They were filled, and their heart was exalted; therefore have they forgotten
me.” (Hos. xiii. 6.)


IV. Prosperity genders self-glorification. “My pene and the might of
mine hand hath gotten me this wealth.” (ver. 17.) Proud men esteem them-
selves too highly, demand reverence from their fellow men, and glorify them-
selves instead of God. Nebuchadnezzar ascribed all the ewe to himself in his
prosperity. “Is not this great Babylon that have built,” ete. (Dan. iv.
30-32). It is false, unreasonable, and mischievous to say that we gain our
wealth and positions. Do not sacrifice to your own nets (Hab, 1 16), “ for it is
He that giveth thee power to get wealth.” (ver. 18.)


“In pride, in reasoning pride our error lies ;
All quit the sphere, and rush into the skies,
Pride still is aiming at the blessed abodes ;
Men would be angels, angels would be Gods,”—Popa,


ARGUMENTS FoR OBEDIENCE.— Verses 14-18,


God s purpose was to do Israel good at the latter end, There was no event
in their journey separate and independent in itself. There was divine issue in
averything. The end in view was to make them humble and obedient. Hence
Moses enforces his lesson by a recapitulation of mercies and points out the


danger of disobedience. 2 Hs ‘a


CHAP. VITL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.
SS


1, The past mercies of God should lead to present obedience (ver. 15.) These
are again specified, and should never be forgotten. Deliverance from bondage ;
guidance and preservation in danger, want and distress ; bountiful supplies and
careful training. Our life wonderfully displays power, mercy, and grace ; and
its review should beget profound sense of gratitude and prompt to consecration,
“‘T beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your
bodies a living sacrifice, holy acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable
service.”


II. Our dependence upon God should lead to present obedience, God gives
power to get wealth and gain success in life (ver. 18.) Israel were perfectly
helpless from beginning to end of their history. pH de in the wilderness
came from heaven. ‘“‘I'he good land” was a special gift. | We can never cease
to be dependent upon God, and should, therefore, not attribute prosperity to
“the laws of nature,” or to our own skill and wisdom. We should seek to please
and obey God. ‘“ What hast thou that thou didst not receive? Now if thou
didst receive it, why dost thou glory, as if thou hadst not received it.”


III. Future destiny should lead to present obedience. Moses often puts the
condition of blessings upon their obedience. In some respect their future was
in their own hands. Apostacy would lead to ruin. As God had destroyed
“the nations before their face,” so they would perish if they “would not be
obedient unto the voice of the Lord.” Loyal obedience would secure length
of days, and national glory. Our eternal weal or woe depends upon our conduct
and character here. “As all good things are come upon you, which the Lord
your God promised you ; so shall the Lord bring upon you all the evil things,”
etc. (Jos, xxiii. 15.)


A Caution Aaarnst Forcerrutness or Gop.— Verse 11.


The text, though delivered by Moses thousands of years ago, is addressed to
us now ; it contains an assumption, an intimation, and a charge.


I. Men are liable to forget God. This is assumed in the text, and needs
but little confirmation. All acknowledge it, but to impress it deeply upon our
minds, notice the following considerations :—1. We infer our hability to forget
Srom the mysteriousness of His nature. Things near that we handle and see
are not easily forgotten; but things remote, unseen and mysterious, are not
generally remembered. No man hath seen God; our ideas of Him are imperfect,
and hence we are liable to forget Him. 2. We infer our liability to forget God
From the moral dislike we have to Him. We easily remember those 0 whom we
are deeply attached, but forget those whom we dislike. Sinners hate God—are
contrary in their nature to Him, and are aliens and enemies in their hearts :
hence they often forget Him. 3, We infer our liability to forget God from the
Jacts that fall under our notice. We need not go among pagans, nor penetrate
recesses of licentiousness or haunts of vice. Let each individual examine his
own heart. How often we ferget God’s presence, mercies, and Jaws. 4. We
infer our liability to forget God, from the testimonies of the Scriptures. Read
Ps, x. 4; xiv. 1-3; Job xxi. 14, 15; Rom, i, 28.


Il, Forgetfulness of God is an evil against which we should be peculiarly
on our guard. ‘his is intimated in the text, founded on the following
reasons aan They who foraet God must necessarily remain ignorant of Him.


sy en arssstupereensi =


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OnA4F, VILL





Ignorance of God is censurable, for man has capacity for knowing God. He is
the most worthy object we can know. The Holy Spirit will help us to gain
knowledge. But those who forget can never know Him; nothing can be known
that is forgotten, 2. They who forget God must necessarily disobey Him.
God’s commandments are founded in justice, goodness, and truth ; bind us to
hate sin and love holiness; and in keeping them there is great reward, But
they who forget God disobey, and disobedience is a great curse (¢f Deut. xxviii.
15-20). 3. They who forget God must necessarily prove ungrateful to Him.
As our Creator, we are indebted to Him for bodies wonderfully made; souls
exalted in their nature, and adapted for elevated and eternal enjoyments, As
our Benefactor, He feeds, clothes, and defends us. As our Saviour, He gave
His Son to die for us, His Spirit to strive with us, and His Gospel to encourage
ws, This loudly calls for gratitude. But who can be grateful that forgets God?
Is not ingratitude a hateful, execrable crime? 4. They who forget God must
necessarily be punished by Him. Necessarily, for God has threatened, and it is
impossible for Him to lie (¢f Ps. ix. 17; Jud. iii. 7, 8).


III, Means should be used for the avoidance of this heinous crime. This is
the object of the charge ;—‘“ Beware that thou forget not.” 1. Serious con-
sideration should be exercised on all things that belong to our peace. How
lamentable the extreme thoughtlessness of men concerning their souls, salvation,
and God! Avoid the crime of forgetting by giving yourselves up to serious
consideration. “I thought on my ways.” (Ps. cxix. 59; Deu. xxxii. 29;
2 Tim. 2-7.) 2. Fervent and unremitting prayer should be offered up to God for
a change of heart. If not renewed in the spirit of our minds, we shall be
habitually liable to forget God. If renewed and a right spirit put within us, we
shall love and delight ourselves in God. 3. We should constantly avoid those
things which tend to exclude God from our thoughts, The expression of the
text is emphatic, Beware—be wary and suspicious of danger. Shun needless
association with sinners who forget God and excite others to forget him. Be
not too anxious to increase worldly prosperity, for nothing conduces more to
forgetfulness of God than this! What a propensity to forget God when riches
increase! 4. Let us use all the means which tend to turn our thoughts towards
God. Associate with the godly—frequent religious ordinances—read God’s holy
word—contemplate death, judgment and eternity! In conclusion. 1. Inquire,
do we forget God? ‘his may serve as a discriminating mark of moral character.
Christians love to think of God—sinners strive to forget him. 2. Exhort those
who forget God to consider their folly, ingratitude, and danger.—Beta,


Tax Pamosopny oy Wortpity Sucorss.— Verses 18-20.


1. How worldly success is to be obtained. By strict obedience to God’s
laws ; by this only. Work is what He demands, and work is the only condition
under which the prize may be won. 2. The nature of the profit we are to look
for. Not merely worldly profit. No life so dreary, so deadly as that of the
mere millionaire. The joys of the true man’s life he cannot taste; the holy
fellowships of spiritual being he cannot enter ; God stamps him reprobate. There
is a vast wealth of faculty in him, “fusting” from want of use. And power
unused soon gets acrid, and mordant, and gnaws and wears within. 3. Why
we should remember the Lord God. Because—1. It will bring us out at once
into the glad sunlight, and will make even our toil lightsome ; 2. It will spare
us all wearing and crushing anxieties; 3. It will save us the shame and
anguish of finding ourselves bankrupt at last and for ever.—J. B. he oe B.A,


OHAP. VIII.


HOM/ILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY,


ASS


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. %. Bringeth thee into a good
land. “A blessed issue to a mournful
story. Canaan was, indeed, a broad
and royal domain for the once en-
slaved tribes. God, who took them
into Egypt, also brought them into the
land which flowed with milk and
honey, and Egypt was in his purposes
en route to Canaan. The way to
heaven is vid tribulation.


“The path of sorrow and that path alone,
Leads to the land where sorrow is unknown.”
— Spurgeon.


A good land—free from scarceness,
void of sorrow, and secure from
dangers.


Ver. 10. Bless the Lord. Suitable
requital, for goodness most constant,
for gifts in rich abundance and un-
deserved.


Ver. 11. Forget not. God hates
forgetfulness of His blessings. First,
because He has commanded that we
should not forget them. (Deut. iv. 9.)
Secondly, because forgetfulness is a
sign of contempt. Thirdly, it is the
peculiarity of singular carelessness.
Fourthly, it springs from unbelief.
Fifthly, it is the greatest mark of
ingratitude.—7homas le Blane.


Ver. 15. Flint turned into a
fountain, Supplies from unlikely
sources—a type of Divine grace in the
hardest heart, and an argument for
undeserving fidelity. Mighty streams
flow to us in the wilderness. Has our
return been commensurate ?


Vers. 15, 16.


Divine supplies—
seasonable,


plentiful and miraculous,


ILLUSTRATIONS


Ver. 2. Years. Life is crowded with
pleasures. When there is shadow, it
is because there is sunshine not far

164


or Divine interpositions in direction,
“led thee” protection, and necessities
of life. Manna in the wilderness. A
celebrated event. 1. On account of
the excellence of the gift. Angel’s
food.” (Ps. ‘Ixxviit., 25.) 999(Ga
account of the rarity of the gift
“which thy fathers knew not.” 3. On
account of the source of the gift “ from
heaven.” 4. On account of the place
in which it was given “in the wilder-
ness.” ‘‘@od’s banquets are never
stinted ; He gives the best diet and
plenty of it. Gospel provisions deserve
every praise that we can heap upon
them ; they are free, full, and pre-
eminent; they are of God’s pre-
paring, sending and bestowing. Happy
pilgrims who in the desert have their
meat sent from the Lord’s own palace
above.” —Spurgeon.


Ver. 16. Good at latter end.
1. Life divided into distinct periods
which have beginning and end.
2. God has a purpose in view in the
whole of life. 3. This purpose is good.
4, This purpose will only be fully
realised at life’s end. Canaan and
heaven. “The ‘latter end’ of any
one is the time which follows some
distinct point in his life, particularly
an important epoch-making point, and
which may be regarded as the end by
contrast, the time before that epoch
being considered as the beginning.”—
Delitzsch.


Vers. 19, 20. The danger of for-
getting God. 1. It leads to idolatry.
If true God forgotten, another will be
chosen, for we must havea God. 2. It
leads to destruction. “ Ye shall surely
perish.”


TO CHAPTER VIII,
off. ts weeds and thorns are Known


by contrast with surrounding flowers,
and though upon many even of the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY,





latter there may be raindrops, those
that are without are yet more abound-
ing. There are more smiles in the
world than there are tears; there is
more love than hate, more constancy
than forsaking. Those that murmur
the contrary choose not for thy com-
pauions.—Leo, H, Grindon.


Vers. 6,7. Chasteneth. Afflictions
are blessings to us when we can bless
God for them. Suffering has kept
many from sinning. God had one Son
without sin, but He never had any
witbout sorrow. Fiery trials make
golden Christians ; sanctified afilictions
are spiritual promotions. (Dyer.) O
God, I have made an ill use of thy
mercies, if I have not learnt to be con-
tent with thy correction.— Bp. Hall.


Vers. 7,8. Good land. Othe splen-
dour of this brilliant conclusion to a
gloomy history. Glory be unto him
who saw in the apparent evil the true
way to the real good. With patience
we will endure the present gloom, for
the morning cometh. Over the hills
faith sees the daybreak, in whose light
we shall enter into a wealthy place.
(Spurgeon.) However long and dre.
be the winter, we are always indemni-
fied by the spring; not merely by the
enjoyment of it when it comes, but
by the anticipation. So with the
mists and wintry days of life; while
they last they are painful, but their
clearing away is glorious, and we find
that they are only veils and _fore-
tunners of something bright. Nature
never forgets her destination, nor
Divine love its compensation.—Leo.
H. Grindon.


Vers. 11-15. Eaten and full, “ An
epicure digs his grave with his teeth.
Gluttony kills more than the sword.”
In the day of good be thou in good,


OHAP. VII,





When God gives thee prosperity, do
thou enjoy it with a cheerful and
thenkfui heart. (Bp. Reynolds.) “In
all time of our wealth, good Lord
deliver us.”


Ver. 16. Latter end. Works of
rovidence, as works of creation, may
egin in chaos, and seein “ without
form and void” (Gen. 1, 2;) but they
end in admirable order and beauty,
(Bp. Reynolds.)


Vers. 17, 18. “Wealth. When the
danger is past God is forgotten. (/tay’s
proverbs.) No sooner does the warm
aspect of good fortune shine, than all
the plans of virtue, raised like a beauti-
ful frost-work in the winter season of
adversity, thaw and disappear. (War-
burton.) “What shall I come to,
Father!” said a young man, “If I go
on prospering in this way?” “To the
grave,’ replied the father.—G. S,
Bowes,


Vers. 19, 20. Other gods. Any
opinion which tends to keep out of
sight the living and loving God,
whether it be to substitute for Him an
idol, or an occult agency, or a formal
creed—can be nothing better than the
portentous shadow projected from the
slavish darkness of an ignorant heart.
(Hallam.) Perish. All the princes
of the earth have not had so many
subjects betrayed and made traitors
by their enemies, as God hath lost
souls by the means of images.—Jp,
Hooper.


With what unutterable humility

We should bow down, thou blessed cross, to
Thee,

Seeing our vanity and foolishness,

When to our own devices left, we frame

A shameful creed of craft and cruelty,


Landon,


165


omar. Ix. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





CHAPTER IX,


CrrrtoaL Norms.—Moses dissuadeth them from self-righteousness by recital of past sins and
rebellion,


1, This day, this time. Once before they had been at the borders of Canaan; but did not
enter. Fenced Oriental cities surrounded with high walls ; cf. 1. 28.


2. Anak, ef, Num. xiii. 22-83; Josh. xi. 21.
3. He, emphatic, consuming, of iv. 24; Heb. xii. 29. Swift and complete destruction,


4, My right. The land given not on account of their own merits, they must not pride them-
selves, therefore, in success.


5. The wickedness of the Canaanites, and the word uttered by oath to patriarchs were the
reasons for giving the land to Israel.


6. Instead of meriting anything they were stiff-necked, hard of neck, obstinate and rebellious:
35


of. Ex. xxxii. 2; xxxiii. 35.
7-8, To prevent boasting of righteousness, acts of disobedience are rehearsed, in wild, as soon
as free from Egypt, Also (even) in Horeb, “the conjunction introduces a special example of a


general statement, The time and circumstances made the apostasy at Horeb particularly
inexcusable.” (Sp, Com.)


9-12. These circumstances should be remembered. Moses up in the mountain, fasting,
receiving the tables of the law, specially written with the finger of God. When God was
speaking in fire. In the day of assembly, when all the people were called out of the camp to the
foot of Sinai (Ex. xix. 17) ; amid stupendous displays of divine majesty they corrupted themselves
with the golden calf, ¢f Ex. xxxi, 18; xxxii. 6.


12-14. Almost verbatim from Ex, xxxii, 7-10. Let me alone, desist from me, é.¢., do not by


intercession try to hinder me from destroying them. In Ex. xxxii. 10, “let me rest,” #¢., cease
to urge me.


15-17, The tables broken not as a mere cntburst of indignation on his part, bas as a declara-
tion that they had broken the covenant by spostasy.


18-19. Moses briefly mentions the first intercession, Ex. xxxii, 11-13, Afterwards another
40 days were spent, and a second intercession (Ex. xxxiv. 9) given here, “not only that he
might make the people thoroughly aware that at that time Israel could not boast even of the
righteousness of its eminent men (cf, Is, xliii. 27), but also to bring out the fact, which is still
more fully described in chap, x. 6 sgg., that Aaron’s investure with the priesthood, and the
maintenance of this institution, was purely a work of Divine grace,” (Delitz.)


2%, Aaron left responsible, guilty, and proved unfit to lead.


22-24, Not only at Horeb, but at Zab, Num. xi. 1-3; Massah, Ex. xvii. 1 aqg.; Kid,
Num. xi. 34; xxxiii. 16, 17, and Kedesh, Num. xiii, 26; xxxii.8. “The list is not arranged
chronologically, but advances gradually from the smaller to more serious forms of guilt.” (Kei.)


25. Fell down second intercession, in fuller detail.


26-29. Essential points given. Israel were God’s people ; He redeemed them, and must


not look upon their sins, ¢.¢., punish them ; but remember His oath to their ancestora. His
honour was concerned.


28, Not able, through incapacity or hatred (of. Num. xiv. 16), neither of which would hinder
from saving a people redeemed, and especially His own,


A Memorasie Day.— Verses 1-8,


Israel forty years before had reached the borders of the promised land, out to


their eerie were driven back (¢f Hom. ii. 1-3). Now they were
160


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY. OHAP, IX,





certain to enter it and nothing could hinder them. “Thou art to pass over
Jordan this day.”


I. A day displaying Divine goodness. They had been fed, defended and
guided. Goodness and mercies had followed them and that day crowned all,


II. A day reminding of Divine faithfulness. Long before had the promise
been given to those who left all to follow Him. This promise was not forgotten,
though delayed in its fulfilment. “God cannot lie,”


III. A day to be improved, “Hear” (ver. 1) and learn duty. “ Understand”
how to practise it. “Drive them out,” and thus co-operate with God (ver. 3.) When
we appreciate and improve our privileges God will assure us of His presence
and help, “ As the Lord hath said unto thee”—


Diving Favovn not Human Menit.— Verses 4-6,


God assures them of victory over enemies, and of possession of Canaan. But
they were not to think that it was on account of their own righteousness—
because good in their character or obedient in their service—that this favour
was given to them. Israel were a stiff-necked and the Canaanites a corrupt
people, all, therefore, must be ascribed to God’s grace.


I, In gaining earthly possessions. Health and strength, houses and lands,
family possessions and social distinctions are God’s gifts and not human
acquisitions. If we boast of our prudence and skill, from whence do these
come? The means and the materials of prosperity must be ascribed to God’s
favour. Success in any undertaking, positions in life are not deserved, not
given to merit, but in sovereign mercy. No credit whatever is due to us,
“ They got not the land in possession by their own sword, neither did their own
arm save them (Ps. xliv. 3.)


II. In conflict with mighty foes. The Anakims were famous in report and
mighty in stature. Israel could not “stand before” them in the field. God alone
couid destroy them. Many foes array themselves against the Christian. Doubts
and fears within; dangers and difficulties without, make him shrink from the
encounter. Sinful habits, giant evils of every degree and strength oppose his
efforts and progress. But faith in God makes “ valiant in fight.” He remembers
the promise, the scenes of conflict and triumph in past experience and the
victories of God’s people in every age. Then his trembling heart takes courage,
he goes into the combat, and the foe is vanquished or retreats. With God it is
“ Athanasius against the world,” Luther against Popedom. Not by our own
valour and numbers, in God’s strength alone can we overcome. “One man of
you shall chase a thousand ; for the Lord your God, He it is that fighteth for
you. (Jos. xxiii, 10; cf Lev. xxvi. 8.)


III. In the bestowment of religious privileges. Christian ordinances and
residence in a Christian country—pardon of sin a fruitful life—perfect peace
and the joys of heaven spring from grace and not from “ works of righteousness
which we have done (Tit. iii. 5). There is no worth, no merit or cause in us
Hence Wickliffe’s prayer: “ Lord, save me gratis.” “If by grace then is it,
no more ieee of works (as a moving cause), otherwise (in that case) grace is
no more (longer) grace (é.¢. it ceases to be grace)” (Rom. ii. 6).

“Tis not by works of righteousness


Which our own hands have done,” ete, 1s?


OmAP. Ix. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOM Y.





Penrrent RememBrance or Past Susx.— Verses 7, 8, 22, 23.


To make it evident that they had no reason to boast of their own righteous-
ness, Moses reviews their sins, Generally they had provoked God, specially in
certain places, and it was a mercy they had not been destroyed long before this,
We forget our sins, think only of our good deeds, and become self-righteous,
and self-satisfied. ‘“‘ Remember and forget not. ”


I. Remember sin in its aggravating circumstances. Sin at any time is
risky, but peculiar circumstances intensify its guilt. 1. Aggravated by the
special places in which it was committed. Even at the Red Sea (ef Ex. xiv. 11,
and Ps, cvi. 7), when starting in their pilgrimage ; also in Horeb v. 8, amid
flames of fire and awful darkness (Ex. xxxii. 8-4). At Taberah they were dis-
contented (Num. xi. 1-3) ; at Massah they murmured (Ex. xvii. 1) ; at Kibroth-
hattaavah they lusted (Num. xi. 4); and at Kadesh-barnea, on the very borders
of the land of promise, they reproached God and sought to return to Egypt
(Num. xiv. 1). The list begins with lower forms, and advances to more aggra-
vating evils. How often have we on solemn occasions and in holy places “ been
rebellious against the Lord.” 2. Aggravated by the frequency of its commission,
“ From the day thou didst depart out of the land of Egypt, uutil ye came unto
this place” (verse 7.) Time after time were they warned, and check after check
was given, but “they believed not His Word” (Ps. cvi. 24). Can we not
remember solemn vows on beds of sickness, deep impressions In the House of
God, followed up by forgetfulness and acts of wilful sm? “ All their transgres-
sions in all their sins” (Lev. xvi. 21).


II. Remember sin in bitter experience. In the light of inward feelings we
may read the guilt of sin. Outward acts make deep impressions witkin us, and
our Own memory records the fruit- of past disobedience. Israel had seen the
death of arrogant Egyptians and wicked idolators—the miraculous power and
gracious rewards of Jehovah, They knew the rewards of obedience, and the
consequences uf disobedience. They had beeu chastised and delivered, and sin
in them had impaired memory, and blotted out all remembrance of God and His
goodness. Most bitter is the fruit of sin in conscience and life. Its remnants
are corruption, shame, and death. “ What fruit (moral results) had ye in those
things whereof ye are now ashamed (self reproached), for the end of these things
is death (in its widest and most solemn sense” (Rom, vi. 21).


“Our pleasant vices make instruments to scourge us.”— Shakespeare.


III. Remember sin in its consequences before God. Sin not only brings
bitter experience, but exposes to serious consequences before God. 1. God was
provoked. “Ye provoked the Lord to wrath.” He is not insensible, does not
overlook sin. It is opposition to His nature, authority, and government, “ Oh,
do not this abominable thing that I hate.” 2. Death was threatened. “ Angry
with you to have destroyed you.” Sin kindled the fire of Jehovah against
them ; but He was slow, very slow, to destroy them. They escaped, as we must
escape, by a Mediator. ‘Had not Moses, His chosen, stood before Him in the
breech to turn away His wrath.”


Tue Sry or Hores.— Verses 8-12.


Israel continually sinned, and therefore deserved not the land into which the
were about to enter. But some sins were specially provoking and shamef
The molten calf at Horeb must never be forgotten.

168


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. It,








I, It was a violation of God’s covenant. They had solemnly pledged them-
selves to obey God, and ratified the covenant with blood. “All that the Lord
hath said will we do, and be obedient ” fee xxiv. 3-8). Feelings soon change,
and emotions die away. Men are not cultured, not spiritual enough to worship
an invisible (Rom. i. 20-25 ; Col. i. 15; Heb. xi. 27), they become sensual and
demand a visible God. When we substitute anything for God, we practically
deny Him. “They made a calf in Horeb, and worshipped the molten image,”


II. It was a provocation in most solemn ¢ircumstances. The purpose of
assembling, the scenes around them, and the reason for the absence of their
leader, lent solemnity to the occasion. Moses contrasts the levity and guilt of
the people, with his interview with God and his fasting on the mount. God
was near, but they forgot Him. They defied every barrier. Moses was fasting,
praying, and receiving the law; God was appearing in awful signs, yet they


“quickly turned aside out of the way.” “Also (even) in Horeb ye provoked
the Lord.”


III. It was most corrupting in its influence. They “ have corrupted
themselves” (verse 12), All sin debases body and mind. It is a moral
putrefaction, and offensive to God. It renders men unprofitable (i.¢. corrupt,
useless, unfit for the end of their creation), Rom. iii. 12; Ps, xiv. 1-3. Man,
once the high priest of Nature, the glorious link between the material and the
spiritual, has forsaken his Maker, thrown off his holy robes and “ corrupted
his way.” “They are all gone aside, they are all together become filthy,”


Gop Provoxep at Hores,


pone is part of Israel’s history we copy from Spurgeon’s 7’reasury of David
8. nal A

70 provoke, is an expression setting forth a peculiar and more than ordinary
degree of misbehaviour, and seems to import an insolent daring resolution to
offend. A resolution not contented with one single stroke of disobedience, but
such as multiplies and repeats the action till the offence greatens and rises into
an affront ; and as it relates to God, so I conceive it aimed at Him in a threefold
respect. 1. It rises up against the power and prerogative of God. An assault
upon God sitting upon the throne, snatching his sceptre, defiance of his royalty
-and supremacy. He that provokes God, dares Him to strike to revenge the
injury and invasion upon His honour—considers not the weight of His arm,
but puffs at all and looks the terrors of revenging justice in the face.
2. Provoking God imports an abuse of His goodness. God clothed with power
is the object of fear; but as He displays goodness, of love. By one He
commands, by the other He wins, courts our obedience. An affront on
His goodness, tenderness and love, as much exceeds an affront of His power as
a wound at the heart transcends a blow on the hand. For when God works
miracles of mercy to do good upon a people as He did upon the Israelites, was it
not a provocation, infinitely base and insufferable, a degree of ingratitude,
higher than the heavens struck at, and deeper than the sea that they passed
through. 38. Provoking God imports an affront upon His long suffering and
His patience. ‘The musings of Nature in the breast tell us how keenly, how
regretfully, every man resents the abuse of His love; how hardly any prince,
but one, can put up an offence against His mercy ; and how much more
affrontive to despise majesty ruling by the golden sceptre of pardon, than by
the iron rod of penal law. But patience is a further, a higher advance of
mercy—wmercy drawn out at length, wrestling with baseness, and ne if

1


OB AP, IX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





porible even to weary and outdo ingratitude ; therefore sin against this is the
n


ighest pitch of provocation.


For when patience is tired, let all the inventiong


of mankind find something further upon which to hope, or against which to sin.
The Israelites sinned against God’s patience, one offence following upon another,
the last rising highest, until the treasures of grace and pardon were so far
drained and exhausted, that they provoked God to swear; and what is wore
to swear in His wrath and with a full purpose of revenge, that they should


never enter tnto His rest.— Robert South,


HOMILETIO HINTS AND BUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. Goin. 1. Land to be pos-
sessed. 2. Go in and possess it—with
courage in conflict—in dependenceupon
God’s presence, not upon self-righteous-
ness and human prowess. Israel were
not casual invaders, forsaken of God,
but now emboldened, and must no
longer delay (¢f Num. xiii 25.) “ Fight
the good fight of faith and lay hold on
eternal life.”


Ver. 2. Great and tall. 1. Men of
stature physically. 2. Mentally of
gigantic mind. 3. Spiritually “the
measure of the stature of the fulness
in Christ Jesus.” (Ep. iv. 13.)


Ver. 4. Speak not. Man apt to be
proud én heart. When proud in heart
he speaks, boasts of self-righteousness
and good deeds. God seeks to check
this spirit by His Word and provi-
dence—“ Many had proved wise if
they had not thought themselves so.”
Bp. Hall,


Vers. 4-6. God doth drive them out
—in sovereign power—on account of
their constant wickedness, therefore
nothing due to you, fear lest you for-
feit possessions and God’s favour.


Ver. 7. Grievous sins, 1. Forget-
fulness of God, “forget not.” 2. Re-


bellion. “Ye have been rebellious
against the Lord, 3. Continual al
vocation. “From the day that thou


didst depart out of the land of Egypt.”


Ver. 8, The Lord was angry. God
is said to be angry when he doeth as
an angry man useth to do: vig (1)

170


chide; (2) smite; revenge being the
next effect of anger.—7rapp.

1. A charge. “ Ye provoked the
Lord,” Ly impenitence, forgetfulness,
and disobedience. 2. A consequence.
“The Lord was angry with you to
have destroyed you.” We are under
deep obligations to God as Creator,
Benefactor, and Saviour; but too
often unfaithfully forget his benefits,
ungratefully murmur against his deal-
ings and live in habitual rebellion,
(Is. i. 2, 3.)


Vers. 8-12. I. The absent Jeader.
“ T was gone up into the mount.” a
The purpose of his absence “ to receive
the tables ofstone.” 6. The length of
his absence, “forty days and forty
nights.” II. The Apostate People,
“turned aside out of the way.” (Ver.
12.) III. The sacrilegious act. “They
have made them a molten calf.” (Ex.
xxxil, 7.) IV. The fearful conse-
quences, God forsaken and self cor-
ruption. There is intimate connection
between idolatry and self corruption.

Corrupted themselves, 1. Sin self
debasing. 2. God’s service our honour
and adornment. God should be our
glory, and we should not be a shame
or dishonour to him. “ Adorn the
doctrine of God; make it trim, neat,
and lovely in the sight of others, (Tit.
ii. 10.) Let there be beautiful har
mony between profession and practice.

The sin of Horeb. L The sin re-
membered, 1. Idolatry. Not merely
forgetting, or disowning God, but
getting up an idol in his placa 2.
Idolatry of the worst kind: shane
the glory of God into the similitude


HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. CHAP. IK.





an ox. 8. The idolatry of Egypt their fathera 2. For self condemna-
under which they had suffered, and tion. “We have sinned with our
from which they had been delivered. fathers.” It was our nature in them,
4. Idolatry after many wonderful in- and it is their nature in us that has
terpositions of the true God in their committed this great sin.—Zreasury
behalf. II. The remembrance of sin. of David.

1. For humiliation, It was the sin of


Toe Great Intercession— Verses 18-20,


_ This is a second mediation on the Mount. A mediation most remarkable and
instructive. The crisis was terrible and trying to the great leader. But Moses
stood ‘‘in the breach” and warded off the danger.


I, The need of intercession. Read these verses with Ex. xxxii., and we have
the whole story. 1. Zhe people had sinned. ‘hey had openly broken the law
they solemnly vowed to keep. They had bowed toa calf in pretence of wor-
shipping Jehovah. The contagion spread. The noise in the camp was not the
noise of war, but of riot and dancing. ‘“‘ Ye have sinned a great sin.” 2. The

eople were exposed to death through sin. God was provoked to “ anger and
ie displeasure” (verse 19). Sin is no trifle; it rouses Divine wrath, and this
wrath burns sometimes like a fire. ‘“ Let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot
against them, and that I may consume them” (Ex. xxxii. 10). “It is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God.” 3. Aaron’s life was endangered.
“The Lord was angry with Aaron to have destroyed him” (verse 20). ‘Too
weak to resist, he yielded to the people, received their gifts, and helped them to
make the golden calf. He was a partaker in the guilt of idolatry, and would
have suffered the penalty but for the intercession of Moses, “ Neither be par-
taker of other men’s sin.”


II. The intercessor provided. “I fell down before the Lord.” The spirit in
which Moses pleaded, the arguments which he used, and the results which he
gained, are special features in this intercession. In Moses we have—l. Great
earnestness. “I fell down,” not in mere formal attitude, but with intense
feeling and energy. He was humble, but earnest. 2. Great sympathy. For-
merly he had chosen their lot (Heb. xi. 25), and notwithstanding their
unworthiness he does not forget them. His feeling for his people is a type of
the sympathy of Jesus, our Mediator. 38. Great disinterestedness. He wished
not for greatness at their expense, but refused an offer most tempting. His
self-sacrifice is seen—(a) In abstaining from food. “I did neither eat bread
nor drink water, because of all your sins.” (5) In his willingness to sacrifice
life itself for their sake. ‘‘ Blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book ” (Ex. xxxii. 32).
4. Great boldness. His seemed a hopeless case, and “the odds were against
him ;” yet he ventures near, and pleads with boldness at God’s feet. 5. Great

severance. Many say, “ You might as well give it up, it is all lost labour ;”

ut Moses intercedes though repelled, “ Let me alone;” intercedes though he
himself “was afraid of the anger and hot displeasure, wherewith the Lord was
wroth.” Long and perseveringly did he plead. I fell down “as at the first,
forty days and forty nights.”


III. The results of the intercession. Disheartening as were the circum-
stances, blessed results were gained. 1. God hearkened to Moses. What a
change from, “Let me alone, that my wroth may wax hot against them.”
2. The people were delivered. They were not consumed for their sins, ‘The
Lord repented of the evil which He thought to do unto His people” Cy XXxii,

A


OMAP, IX, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOM Y.


ea


14). 3, Aaron’s life was spared. “T praycd for Aaron also at the same time”
(verse 20). What encouragement for us to plead for our friends and fellow-
sinners. Never despair, for God is omnipotent and “‘delighteth in mercy.
“Ts there anything too hard for the Lord” (verse 2). If Moses prevailed, how
much more does Jesus “ who ever lives to intercede for us.





————





AARON’S SIN.—Verse 20.


While Moses was up in the Mount, Aaron was left in charge to advise, direct
and control the people. Bui how did he act? (cf. Ex. xxiv. 14; xxxii. 21-23).


I. Aaron's sin. Weak-minded, he was easily drawn into sin, aided and
abetted it, We must neither bring sin wpon others nor encourage them in it.
His excuses were insufficient and false, ‘ What did this people unto thee, that
thou has brought so great a sin upon them ?”


II. Aaron’s exposure to danger. His whole conduct so angered God that
he would have been destroyed but for the intercession of Moses. “The
Lord was angry, very angry with Aaron to have destroyed him.” No man’s
character and position can shelter him from the wrath of God.


III. Aaron’s deliverance. “TI prayed for Aaron also the same time.” The
most eminent and eloquent men sin and need an intercessor. Moses mildly
reouked his brother, but retaliates not. He prays for him and delivers him
from death. What value, what power in the prayers of God’s people. “'The
effectual fervent (in thought) prayer of a righteous man availeth (energizes)
much,” (Jas, v. 16.)

What are men better than sheep or goats,

That nourish a blind life within the brain,

If, knowing God, they lift not hands of prayer,

Both for themselves and those who call them friend 9


For so the whole round earth is, every way
Bound by gold chains about the fact of God.


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers, 18. A stiff-necked people. A
metaphor taken from a horse that
stiffens his neck against the reins and
will not be guided by the rider,
Hence it denotes a people obstinate,
rebellious, who will not submit to God
(of. Ex, xxxii. 9, xxxiii, 3; 2 Chron.
xxx. 8; Ps. Ixxv. 5; Jer. xvii. 23;
Acts vii. 51).


Vers. 14. Let me alone. 1. God’s
indignation and apparent refusal to
bless. 2. ‘The power of prayer to
change circumstances, if not the pur-
pose of God. ‘‘'l'he Lord repented of
the evil.”


“TI will make” of thee a nation.
1, The promise—a nation, mightier
172


and greater than they. 2. The con-
dition of its fulfilment. To obtain
self agerandisment at the sacrifice of
the people, 3. The refusal of this
condition, The test was severe, but
the spirit in which it was met redounds
to the honour of Moses.


Vers. 15-17. The broken tables, 1.
An expression of righteous indignation.
Perhaps a revival of the spirit which
had formerly led him astray (Ex. ii. 12).
2. A symbol of the broken covenant.
3. A witness to exclusion from Divine
favour. ‘This wasa solemn sight, which
should have deeply impressed their
hearts when they saw the blessings
which they had lost,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOM ¥, OHAP. IX.





Vers, 18-19. 1. Fear of Divine man may very grievously sin. 2. That
anger. 2. Prayer for Divine help, 8. his good deeds cannot save him from
Interposition of Divine mercy. the consequences of his sin. 3. That

there is no sin which does not require

Vers. 20. Learn.-—1, That a good atonement and mediation,


Tue Ipot Destroyep.—-Verse 21.


Israel in Egypt had some leaning towards idolatry ; but miraculous events
since the exodus had checked this tendency. Now in the absence of Moses, the
cry was raised “‘ Make us a god.” ‘The god was made and then destroyed. In
this we see—1. 7he Anger of Moses. The gospel enjoins broadest love to the
sinner, but deepest indignation against sin. Pity not only makes benevolent
and charitable, but imparts strength and zeal to resist Satan. Yet like all
other passions, “righteous indignation,” needs controlling grace and must not
be unwisely exercised. “ ‘hat anger is without sin; that is, against sin.”
(Mason). “ Be ye angry andsin not.” 2. Zhe courage of Moses. 'The meekest
man may be firm and courageous. Six hundred thousand seem paralyzed before
one man who stands up for God (Deut. xxxii. 30). When conscious of right
and our cause good we need not fear. “The righteous are bold as a lion”
(Prov. xxviii. 1; Ps. liii. 5). Virtue is bold and goodiesa never fearful.
8. The vanity of the idol. How impotent this God before Moses. How stupid
the people and how foolish their conduct! How irrational to adore idols
less valuable, less honoured than their makers! The golden idols of self, and
worldly pleasure are blind and senseless. ‘Their worship is folly, wickedness
and death “Little children, keep yourselves from idols.’


Grievous REBELiions.— Verses 22-24.


Moses here reminds them of minor sins, of other places besides Horeb, in
which they rebelled against God. These memorials of sin and punishment
should humble them and enhance God’s mercy to them. Notice—


1. The Divine Command. “Go up and possess the land.” This direction
had been given many times—given with emphasis and detail. God repeats
directions in “line upon line” to satisfy reasonable doubt and stimulate to
hearty obedience. Let us say with the prophet, “I will watch to see what he
will say unto me.”


II. Israel’s disobedience to this command. “Ye rebelled against the com-
mandment.” 1. Unbelief was the source of this rebellion. “ Ye believed Him
not.” Without faith no impression can be made upon the heart by sense,
reason, or miracle. Stones are rounded and smoothed by the friction of water ;
but the heart of unbelief is hard and insensible to Divine goodness and Divine
threatening. 2. Refusing to hear was the sign of unbelief. ‘“ Nor hearkened
to His voice.” Listless inattention to the word is sure proof of unbelief. If we
believe not the word of God, we cannot esteem His gifts nor “ possess the land.”
“When pilgrims to the celestial city begin to doubt the Lord of the way, they
soon come to think little of the rest at the journey’s end, and this is the surest
way to make them bad travellers” (Spurgeon). “They could not enter in
because of unbelief.”


III. The rebellion which resulted from this disobedience. Stubborn refusal
waa repeated, and rebellion, open and long-continued, was the sad hig Con-


OHAP IX, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





tinuance in sin and unbelief always go together. There is reflex influence upon
faith and character. First unbelief, then disobedience to the word, and, lastly,
open defiance. ‘ Man knows the beginning ef sin ; but who bounds the issues
thereof?” says one, ‘“ He addeth rebetlism unto his sin” (Job xxxiv. 37).


Protonaep Inrercussow.— Verses 25-29,


Moses retires to his mediation on account of apostasy at Sinai (¢f verses
18-20). Whether the forty days mean a second, or only describe the first
period, we see how earnest and prolonged the intercession was.


I, The intercession of Moses for his people. The sin at Horeb was most
rovoking—the climax of one long rebellion. God threatened destruction, and
Mixes goes between to intercede and save. 1. In the agony of prayer. “I fell
down” in profound humility and intense anxiety. ‘The best of men have thus
pleaded for others. Knox cried, ‘‘O Lord, give me Scotland, or I die.” It is
said that Latimer was so constant and earnest in prayer during his imprisonment,
that he was unable to rise up without help. 2. With symbols of grief (verse 18).
His soul was stirred within him, and he fasted in grief. Personal need and
personal advancement were forgotten. “I sat down and wept, and mourned
certain days, and fasted and prayed before the God of heaven” (Neh. i 4).


II. The pleas which Moses urged in this intercession. He was obliged to
own their wickedness, and could only bow his head in solemn prayer. ‘‘ Their
character was bad indeed,” says Matthew Henry, ‘“ when he that appeared an
advocate for them could not give tlem a good word, and had nothing else to
say on their behalf, but that God had done great things for them, which
really did but aggravate their crime.” 1. He pleads God's ownership
of them. “Thy people and thine inheritance.” After creating and pur-
chasing them wilt Thou destroy them! ‘Remember Thy congregation
which Thou has purchased of old.” 2. He pleads God’s goodness to them.
They were redeemed and brought out of Egypt. He knew them; had taken
great care of them and worked miracles on their behalf. How strange,
how inconsistent now to forsake them! No man is willing to lose his property
and no king will relinquish his dominions, God will, therefore, keep this own
and maintain His right over His people. 8. He pleads God’s covenant with —
their fathers. “Remember ‘Thy servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.” The
people are still the posterity of Jacob, and their rebellion does not alter Thy
purpose to give them the land. God desires to be reminded of His promise,
that a sense of His faithfulness and our unworthiness may be deepened within
us. 4. He pleads the honour of God Himself. (Ver. 28.) We should ever be
jealous for the glory of God and the interests of His people. If God destroyed

srael what would the Egyptians say! How the enemy would rejoice and
sound aloud their triumph. (c/. Ex. xxxii, 12, 13.) They would say: 1. God
was unable to help. “''he Lord was not able to bring them into the land.”
Was Divine energy spent. Had God been overcome or lost His omnipotence to
save, Oh never let this be said! That mighty hand is not shortened that it
cannot save. (Is. lix. 1.) “Is my hand shortened at all, that it cannot
redeem ? or have I no power to deliver? (Is. |. 2), or, 2. God hated His people.
“ Because He hated them.” Stiffnecked and most provoking had they been ;
but Divine love was unchangeable. God will never cast off His people. “For
the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed; but My kindness shall
not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of My peace be removed, saith
the Lord that hath mercy on thee.”

Ava


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOM Y.


OHAP, Ix,





HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS,


Ver. 21. Dust in the brook. The
dregs of sin. No other water to drink,
and this most bitter and unsatisfactory.
Sin curses our blessings and embitters
our enjoyments. (Mal. ii, 2.) As
Moses destroyed the form, calcined
the material of this idol and 1educed
it to powder, so must all idols be
destroyed. The people seemed to
swallow their own sin, so bitterness
follows indulgence. ‘“‘ The backslider
in heart shall be filled with his own
ways.” “He shall drink as he brews,”
says Mt. Henry.


Vers, 24-26. The great sin. The
terrible danger. The power of a


ILLUSTRATIONS


Vers. 1-3, DMightier. Never covet
easy paths. The Lord keep you and
me from that sin, beloved. (J. A.
vans.) A soldier in battle should
feel as if the whole battle depended
upon himself. Pass over. We are
afraid of being desperate Christians.
Oh, let us be desperate! The Church
needs extremity—a great tug out of
the world. (Lady Powerscourt.) Stand
befors. A passionate desire and un-
wearied will can perform impossibilities,
or what seem to be such to the old and
feeble. If we do but go on some un-
seen path will open up the hills. We
must not allow ourselves to be dis-
couraged by the apparent dispropor-
tion between the result of the single
efforts aud the magnitude of the
obstacles to be overcome.—sSharp.


Vers. 4-€. Jy righteousness. It is
the peculiar glory of gospel grace to
humble every believer in the dust, and
from gratitude and love to produce
the best obedience. ‘his grace will
carry us, if we do not wifully betray
our trust, victoriously through all
difficulties (2 Cor. xii. 9).

“The greatest attribute of Heav’n is mercy 3
And ’tis the crown of justice, and the glory
Where it may kill with right, to save with

pity."--Beaumont and Fletcher.


righteous man in turning away danger.
Mighty as was the sin of Israel, the
prayer of Moses was mightier, How
earnestly should we plead for a back-
sliding people and a guilty world! “1
prayed, and he had a hard tug of it ;

ut prayer is the best lever at a dead
lift.” —7rapp.


Vers. 26,27. 1. A people enslaved,
wicked and rebellious; yet chosen,
redeemed and purchased. 2. God’s
remembrance and faithfulness. “Thou
O Lord, art in the midst of us, and we
are called by Thy name; leave us not.”
(Jer. xiv. 9; of Ps. xc. 7; 1 Kings
viii, 51.)


fO CHAPTER IX.


Ver. 7. Forget. The sin of the un-
derstanding leads on to the sin of the
memory. What is not understood
will soon be forgotten. Men feel little
interest in preserving husks; if they
know nothing of the inner kernel they
will take no care of the shells, It was
an aggravation of Israel’s sm _ that
when God’s mercies were so numerous
they yet were able to forget them.
Surely some out of such a multitude
of benefits ought to have remained en-
graven upon their hearts; but if grace
does not give us understanding, nature
will soon cast out the memory of God’s
great goodness.— Spurgeon.


Vers, 8-17. Horeb. The ox image
here is sarcastically called “a calf ;”
idols are worthy of no respect, scorn
is never more ié itimately used than
when it is poured upon all attempts
to set forth the Invisible God.—
Spurgeon.

Molten image. They had given up
the true God whom it had been their
glory to adore, and had set up a rival
to Him, not a representation of Him;
for how should He be likened to a
bullock? False gods, attempts to re-
present the true God, and indeed, all
material things which are worshipped

175


CHAP, IX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOU Y.





are so much filth upon the face of the J knew you. To fall out at starting
earth, whether they be crosses, cruci- was a bad sign, Those who did not
fixes, virgins, wafers, relics, or even the begin well can hardly be expected to
Pope himself. God abhors them and end well. Israel is not quite out of
80 do we.—Spurgeon. Evypt, and yet begins to provoke the
Lord by doubting His power and
Ver. 12. Arise from off thy kneee, questioning his faithfulness to his
the petitioner’s posture. St. James, promise.—Spurgeon.
they say, had knees as hard as camels’
knees, with continual kneeling ; and Vers. 26-29. Prayed. “The gift
Hilarion was found dead in his oratory of the knees.” “The impotence of
with knees bent, eyes and hands liftod man with the omnipotence of God.” It
up.— Zrapp. is not the length but the strength of
prayer that is required, not so mueh
Ver. 17. Cast them. Drive away the labour of life, as the travail of the
nature and back it comes at a gallop heart.
(French proverb). Whosoever is out Of «Pleads he in earnest? look upon his face ;
patience is out of possession of his His eyes do drop no tears, his prayers are in





soul. Men must not turn bees and jest ; ;
kill themselves in stinging others.— His ashe oe anoie hile cecal Cae ee
Bacon. He prays but faintly, and would be denied ;
We pray with heart and soul, and all beside,”
Vers. 22-24. From the day that Shakespeare,
CHAPTER X.


Cartrcat, Notrs.—1. That time. The order for the ark was given before the apostasy of
the people, cf. Ex. xxv., and the tables were put into it after the dedication of the tabernacle.
But Moses connects events related to each other for his own purpose without strict chronological
order, Hew, cut with an axe, to shape. Tables, blocks or tablets.


8, Shittim. Acacia tree, Ex, xxv, 5.


5. There they be. “Another minute but important circumstance, the public mention of
which at the time attests the veracity of the sacred historian.”


6, Beeroth, Identical with Benejaakan of Num. xxxiii 31. Mosera and Moseroth (plu.), in
the vicinity of mount Hor (Num. xxxiii. 31); as Aaron died there, Eleazar ministered—waa in-
stalled priest, Ex. xxiii. 25 ; xxviii. 1.


7. Gudgodah. Hor-hagidgad (mount of thunder, Num. xxxlif. 82). Jothath—Jotbathah of
Nom. xxxiii, 33,


Pa 8, a oe Of poeerepeners at cnet thirty-eight years since, The tribe of Levi separated
‘om other tribes, and, Hxclusively the business of pri Num. vi. 2 -
family of Kohath carried the ark, Num, sy 16. rican * aa


8. Cf. Num. xviii. 20-24 ; Deut, xvifi. 1, 2
10. Moses resumes his address and sums up the results of his in‘ ercession,


1, “This commandment and promise was @ testimony that God now was reconciled unto
them by the intercession of Moses” ( Ainsworth ),


12. Now, 4¢., “Since all that thou hast is thus shown to be of mere grace, without desert of
thine own.” Require, etc., i.e. understand the spiritual claims of these formal regulations. Fear.
Pilial a oo reverence, existing only with love, Walk. Aocept truth, and w the course


HOMILETIC COMMENTAR Y: DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. X.
oe i ee I oe


rescribed, cf. Gen. xviii. 19; Ps. xxv. 4,5; Acts xviii. 25,26. Serve, The genuine fruit of
fove, John xiv. 15; Gal. v. 18; 1 John iii, 18.


14, Heaven of heavens imports all included under the name of heaven. Jehovah is nota
local God. His claims cannot be limited, ef. 1 Kings viii. 27; Ps. cxlviil, 4.


15. He was not bound to elect Iwrael, yet did so of His own free will


16. Circumcise, therefore be no longer stiffnecked ; be not insensible to God's love, persist
no longer in obstinate resistance to God,


17. The demand for surrender is followed by a description of the nature and acts of Jehovah.
He is not a local Deity, and though taking special interest in Israel—He is God of gods, 4.¢., the
supreme God, the essence of all that is divine, of all power and might, Ps, cxxxvi. 2. Lord of
lords, supreme Ruler of heaven and earth, regardeth, not subject to prejudice, nor perverts
justice as human judges, Ley. xix. 15 ; 2 Chron. xix. 7.


18,19, He is impartial and uncorruptible, executes, vindicates the rights of the defenceless
(orphan and widow) and manifests loving care for the helpless and oppressed (stranger).


19, Love. As they had been strangers in Egypt, and knew what it was to need help, they
were to love the stranger as God loved him, and relieve his wants, Jas ii. 15, 16 3 1 Jno. iii
10, 17.

20-22, Fear. Reverence is due to God in act and life on account of what He is and what
Hehas done. He is the ground of confidence and joy (thy praise), inspiring fear and dread by
terrible things done for them.


21. Amongst the mighty acts was one specially to be remembered.


22, Out of 70 persons, notwithstanding cruelty and oppreasion. had grown a mighty nation’
Gen. xlvi. 26; Acts vii. 14.


Tue ACHIEVEMENTS OF Prayrer.— Verses 1-11.


Through the intercession of Moses God not only spared Israel, but gave them
further pledges of His love.


I. The law was renewed. “He wrote on the tables, according to the first
writing.” (Ver. 4.) God refused not a second transcript of his will, but in
mercy renewed his covenant with them. 1. The law writien with the finger of
God. At first a supernatural “ voice” was heard, now a supernatural hand
writes and repeats the ten words, 2. The law unaltered. 'The second edition
was “like unto the first.” It needed no correction, no amendment. What
God wrote differed not from what he spoke. The written word is from God and
unchangeable, as the spoken word. 3. The law kept in the ark. “ Put the tables
in the ark.” (Ver. 5.) Thus was it perpetuated and transmitted to us. Unto
* are “committed the oracles of God.” Let us understand, keep, and spread
them,


II. The priesthood was establishea. The institution was forty years old, but
provision was made for a standing order, perpetua! succession, and settled
maintenance. 1. The high priesthood in the person of Hleazar. Aaron died,
but his son succeeded him. God will never want men to carry on His work,
The robes of office will never soil. ‘‘ Moses stripped Aaron of his garments, and
put them upon Eleazar his son.” 2. The ordinary priesthood in the tribe of
Levi. This tribe was specially chosen for the service of the sanctuary. A
settled ministry is the gift of God to the Church. (Hp. iv. 11.) The continuation
of this ministry and the preservation of religious ordinances, betoken God’s
- favour. God can remove the candlestick (Rev. ii. 4) and punish sin. Hence
need of prayer for ministers. ‘‘ Brethren, pray for us.”


ITI. The command to advance was given. Permission to march was gained
u 177


OHAP, X. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; DEUTBRONOMY.

SSS

by prayer. Moses the intercessor must be the leader (ver. 11.) Those are only
fit to lead who preserve from ruin. God gives a full and unconditional promise
of his presence. ‘There can be no guidance and advance in life without Him.
He can stop progress at any time and in any department of life, Hence
“prayer hinders no journey.” “I forgot to pray this morning,” says Philip
Henry, “and the chariot wheels drove heavily along.” The most prayerful
ministers and people are the most prosperous and progressive. Unexpected and
marvellous things may be witnessed through prayer. “Call unto Me, and I
will answer thee, and show thee great and mighty things which thou knowest
not.”


DistrnavisHED SEBvicz.— Verses 8, 9,


Moses mentions as a special favour that when Aaron died the high priest-
hood was renewed in the person of Eleazar, and that the


to minister in the tabernacle and perpetuate the ordinary priesthoud.


I. The Ministry appointed. The tribe of Levi were most zealous for the
honour of the Lord when the golden calf was worshipped at Sinai (Ex. xxxii,
26-29). Moses then charged them to consecrate themselves (lit. to fill their
hands) to the Lord (ver. 29), Independent of the fact that Moses and Aaron
belonged to this tribe, there was, therefore, special reason for its selection. 1.
It is honourable service. If it be deemed a preferment to minister to an earthly
sovereign, how much more to be servant of “the King of Kings and Lord of
Lords.” “ Happy are these Thy servants, which stand continually before Thee.”
(2 Chr, ix. 7.) 2. J¢ is holy service, separated and consecrated to the Lord.
They had to do with “the most holy things,” and had to be washed, cleansed,
and offered for an offering. (Num. viii. 15.) Holy and pure life must be seen
in the service of God. 3. It is responsible service. They had to “ minister.”
Priests are servants; not “Lords over God’s heritage.” (1 Pet. v.3.) No
toil so responsible and noble as this, Christ himself came “ not to be ministered
unto, but to minister.” 4 Jt is joyful service. “To bless His name.” Levites
sang and played on instrumenta, Gtod’s service is not irksome but Joyous,
free, and delightful.


Ii. The introduction to this ministry. Under the Gospel all believers are
called into holy service, and raised to the dignity of “sons,” “ kings,” and
“ priests.” But for the Christian ministry there must be: 1. Divine call.
“The Lord separated,” the Lord spake, not to sanction some human plan,
but to reveal his own. “No man taketh this honour unto himself, but he
that is called of God, as Aaron was.” 9. Divine direction. The office is not
only created, but its duties minutely specified. To bear the ark, to stand and
minister, and to bless the Lord and the eople. 3. Divine qualification.
Suitable gifts, inward persuasion by the Holy Spirit, and commission to draw
nigh. None are meet for holy minisiry, but by the grace of God and the
sanctification of the Holy Ghost (@f. 2 Cor. ii. 16 ; Gal. i. 15.)


HOMILETIO HINT8 AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 1-3. Yables. First utteredin our nature had broken the law, and


Levites were separated


fire, written on stone, renewed in

mercy, and preserved and portable in

the ark. Like the first. “Which

Moges had broken ; to show how we in
178


could not be saved by the keeping of
it. This Christ, our true Moses, re-
pairs again, writing the law not in
tables of stone, but in the hearts of


=


ed a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DBUTERONOMY


JHAP. X.





believers, and enabling them in some
good measure to keep it (John i, 17),
walking, as Luther phraseth it, in the
heaven of the promise, but in the
earth of the law; that in respect of
believing, this of obeying.—77rapp.


Ver. 6. The relation between the
ordinances of religion and temporal
blessings. ‘“ The earlier commentators
observed the inward connection be-
tween the continuation of the high-
priesthood and the water brooks. J.
Gerhard, for example, observes: “God
generally associates material blessings
with spiritual ; as long as the ministry
of the Word and the observance of
Divine worship flourish among us, God
will also provide for our temporal
necessities.’ —Keil.

Aaron's death and Eleazar’s succes-
sion. I. The common destiny of men.
“It is appointed unto all men once to
die.” Il. The providence of God in
the arrangement of this destiny. All
life depends upon God. Aaron died
according to a Divine purpose ~ into
Mount Hor at the commandment of
the Lord, and died there.” (Num.
xxxili. 38. III. The mercy of God in
appointing successors to the office
of the dead. Eleazar immediately,
authoritatively, and securely took the
place of Aaron. This, an evidence
of reconciliation, encouraging to faith
and humbling to pride. IV. The
pledge of perpetuity to the cause of
God. God’s servants die, but the
work goes on and ever will do. Aaron’s
death. 1. An indication of Divine dis-
pleasure. 2. A manifestation of mercy.
He was not put to death as a trans-
gressor by fire or plague from heaven ;
but dies in ease and honour. 3. A
significant type. Aaron did not enter
Canaan. ‘I'he Levitical priesthood
made nothing perfect. Christ brings
in a better hope and an eternal priest-
hood. (Heb. vii. 23-25.) Priest’s office.
Invested with awful solemnity, Divine
authority, and heavenly sanctity.
Must not be undertaken lightly, un-
worthily, but in the fear, and for the
glory of God, and the interests of men.


Ver. 8 Minister service. L The


service of God demands all Levites
Every Christian should be a priest,
ever ministering in the temple. 1.
Burden-bearing. How often Christians
murmur about their burdens, as though
they were not honoured in betag per-
mitted to bear anything for God. 2.
Singing. The Levites sang and played
on instruments. Sing the sony of

atitude and vontentment. 3. Study-
ing the law. “Search the Scriptures.”
4. Attendance on the ordinances of
the sanctuary. There is a special
blessing for thosé who worship in
God’s house. II. God demands this
service in our prime; “from twenty
and five years old.” We must give
God the best we have. III. He de-
mands this service when it can be
most easily rendered. God did not
ask of the Levites, nor does of us, im-
possibilities. ‘The very young and the
old were exem)t from the bearing of
the heavier burdans. God suits the
burden to the back. All He asks
is, that we shall do what we can.—
Rh. A. Griffin.


Ver. 9. Levi's inheritance and
lory. Not material wealth, such as
ote and land. They were not
permitted to engage in secular pur-
suits, but had to employ themselves
wholly to God’s service. God has
their inheritance in the riches of his
grace and the resources of his provi-
dence. “Iam their inheritance, and
ye shall give them no possession in


Israel. I am their possession.” (Ezek.
xliv. 28.)
Ver. 11. Arise. 1. God has pre-


ared an inheritance for his people.
oy, fruitfulness and power on earth,
through faith; rest and heaven
hereafter. 2. God’s people should
earnestly strive to attain this inherit-
ance. ‘I'he command to arise supposes
neglect, weakness and _prostration.
8. God will help His people when they
strive to obey Him. He will provide
a leader. “'I'ake thy journey before
the people.” He will pledge his word
to give success; “possess the land,
which sware I unto their fathers to give
unto them.”
179


“cmaP. X. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.«





Homan Ostication to Divine Goopness.— Verses 12-22.


God having expressed His love and care towards them in their selection,
having pardoned their apostasy, preserved their priesthood and privileges, He
seeks to persuade them to love Him in return. “ And now /srael” (“now
that thou hast everything without dessert or worthiness, purely from forgiving
grace,” Keil). ‘“ What doth the Lord require?” Under what obligation art
thou put, but to fear and obey him? We give the sketch of the remaining
shapter.


I. Divine Requirements. God’s commands are just and reasonable. Mercies
aceived require some return, ‘‘ What shall I render?” (Ps. cxvi. 12.) 1. Jo
ear and obey God. Be humble, thankful, and no longer refractory. Cherish
reverence for the name and will of God, ‘This fear must awaken love, and this
love must prompt to active service. 2. To purify the heart and life (ver. 16).
Circumcision was a symbol of purity and consecration to God. Be not insen-
sible, but holy in heart and life,. The heart and will must be renewed, and we
must “abstain from fleshly lusts.” 3. 70 love strangers and practise eis:
(ver. 19). We must defend the weak, be kind to strangers, impartial to all,
and compassionate to all.


II, The motives to enforce these Requirements. This duty is enforced from
many considerations. 1. Personal advantage should prompt it. “For thy good,”
(verse 13). Rewards of obedience are abundant in the present life. Our ease,
comfort, and happiness are concerned ; “ Godliness is profitable unto all things,
having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come.” 2. Zhe
divine nature claims it. Jehovah cannot tolerate pride and stiff-neckedness
towards Himself or towards other persons, In his nature and moral government
we find abundant reasons for loving Him. (a) God is supreme (verse 14). His
authority is not local nor circumscribed. He fills heaven and earth. (6) God
is rich tn mercy (verse 15). He chose Israel, not for what He saw in them;
of His own free will He delighted in their fathers, and in sovereign mercy He
made them “above all people.” (c) God is all powerful (verse 17). Men
fear powerful monarchs. God’s omnipotence is always exerted to deliver from
danger and do good. Hence, reverence due to His great name. (d) God ts
no respecter of persons. He is just and upright in nature, impartial and
incorruptible in His dealings. Appearances deceive Him not; nor does He
regard forms, professions and privileges without reality. ‘God accepteth no
man’s person” (Gal. ii. 6). 3. Divine goodness deserves it. Constant benefits
require constant thanks. Partial gratitude and services are worthless. We
must have “respect to all the commandments.” “ An honest soul would not
conceal any debt he was to God,” says Gurnall, “but calls upon itself to give
an account for all his benefits. The skipping over one note ina lesson may
spoil the grace of the music. Unthankfulness for one mercy disparageth our
thanks for the rest.” Reverence is due to God. (a) For His gracious acts for
His people (verse 21). Terrible deeds were done for Israel, and great things
have been shown to us. “Only fear the Lord, and serve Him in truth with all
. your heart; for consider how great things He hath done for you” (1 Sam.
xii. 24). (b) For abundant prosperity unto His people (verse 22). Israel’s
history and increase had been marvellous. From few, they had become many ;
from a weak, they had become a mighty nation. ‘They were multiplied as the
stars of heaven and blessed beyond degree! What then did they owe to God?
Why be obstinate and disobedient ?

“OQ! to grace how grest a de
Dally (e conieritaea el ea oe


180


HOMILETIC COMMENTAR Y; DEUTERONOMY. CHAP. x.





Gop’s CLams upon ovr Srrvice.— Verses 12-16.


The intercession of Moses secured new blessings. New obedience should
therefore be given to God, who bestowed them. ‘I'he service which God claims
is specified in its nature, breadth, and activity.


I. The nature of the service claimed. It is summed up and touchingly
enforced in few words. “ What doth the Lord require?” 1. Walling service.
“What require?” The word signifies to ask or request. God in the law of
Moses commianded many observances and enforced obedience when required ;
but love and veneration must be voluntary. God does not rule men like suns
and stars, nor like brutes ; but appeals to reason and conscience—solicits and
requests our service. ‘“‘ Who then is willing this day?” etc. “ Will ye be my
disciples?” What an attitude for the Omnipotent and Eternal God to assume
towards man! How lovingly and beseechingly does he request our obedience.
“But to Israel He saith, all day long (¢.e., with unwearied patience) I have
stretched forth My hands (like a mother calling back her child, in gracious,
earnest entreaty) unto a disobedient and gainsaying (refractory, or stubborn)
people.” (Rom. x. 21.) 2. Practical service. Genuine religion is always
practical, not mere feeling and form. It is fear, obedience, and love. (a) Jo
fear the Lord, not with slavish fear—a fear which hath torment, and is
opposed to love (1 Jno. iv. 18) but a filial reverence. (b) 70 love Him. Love
and fear go together. Reverence in a child begets true affection. When our
feelings, our hearts are right we naturally yield to God our profoundest reverence.
(c) To serve him. When love fills our hearts, it will express itself in life. We
shall instinctively cleave to God and “ walk in all His ways.” We shall fear to
offend Him and dread separation from Him. We shall serve God with heart
and soul. Our religion will not be in word but in deed. We may suspect our
religion, suspect our interest in Christ, if we have no delight in His service, no
love for His person. ‘The law must be written in our hearts, as a permanent
principle aud conserving force of life (Ps. xxxvii. 31.) Our service must be
spiritual ; our obedience free and hearty ; and our love fervent and sincere.

Not by the terrors of a slave
Do they perform his will ;


But with the noblest powers they have,
His sweet commands fulfil.


II, The ground on which the claim is urged. The appeal for future loyalty is
made on several grounds. Let us suggest three. 1. Jt ts rational. ‘‘ What
doth the Lord require ; anything unreasonable, impossible, or inconsistent ?
Can God ask less than what is due to him? He does not “bind heavy
burdens and grievous to be borne.” “For my yoke is easy and my
burden is light.” 2. lt is enforced by covenant. “The Lord thy God.”
Israel was ever reminded of this relationship and the duties which spring from
it. Whatever God was in Himself He was to them; all His perfections were
enlisted on their behalf. In the covenant with Christ God regards His people
as specially His own and bestows upon them greater blessings. As creatures,
as property, God has aright to claim us. But if His children, bought with
blood, we should love Him with all our heart. If He has made solemn compacts,
pledged Himself and all His resources to help, we should make no reserve what-
ever, but devote ourselves, body, soul and spirit unto Him. 3. /¢ ts due from
constant mercies. He brought us into being ; dignified us with understanding ;
sustained and redeemed our life from destruction. For us He has given His
word, sent His son and opened heaven. Some return is due and should be
rendered to Him. Mercies have been great, constant, and sae ag


OHAP. X, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY,


—--_——————————————————————— ——eeeeeeSeSeeSeeeEeeSeSeSeeSee


favours demand special service, as those who keep the largest farms pay the
most rent. ‘I beseech you, therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God (in
providence and grace) that ye present your bodies (.e. your whole selves) a
living sacrifice (in contrast to dead beasts offered under law) holy, acceptable
(well pleasing) to God, which is your reasonable (rational) service >; 9.6. & Service
befitting a rational being” (Rom. xii. 1).


III, The needful qualification to render the service. :
foreskin of your heart” (ver. 16). 1. We are naturally sinful. _ Circumcision
teaches that we are impure, and unfit for God and His service, We must
mortify our members which are upon earth (Col. iii, 5); crucify the affections
and lusts of the flesh (Gal. v. 24); renounce act of all sin and selfwill and
sever ourselves:from sensuality. Circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit,
and not in the letter” (Rom. ii, 28, 29). 2. The needed qualification is a
circumcised heart. True obedience can only spring from a renewed loving
heart. When enmity is subdued and affection planted within us, then God -
gives filial fear, or the spirit of adoption ; then service is not task work. Slavery
and selfishness pass away, and duty becomes hearty and enthusiastic. When
love reigns in the heart, the whole man will be brought under sway. All our
powers will be employed in doing the will, and promoting the glory of God
“ Love is the fulfilling of the law.”


“Circumcise the


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 12, 18. Study the clauses of
this requirement. God’s exactions, if
we be Christians, are our own free will
offerings. What God demands is what
thankful hearts should gladly give.
First. of all to fear Him. Not to be
terrified, that is the natural man’s reli-
gion. Unless taught of God men look
upon Him with terror and alarm.
Hence religion is a sepulchral and
gloomy thing to them. ‘To the Chris-
tian all is reverse. He has no alarm ;
he courts God’s presence and feels that
presence to be the inspiration of hope
and joy. Next to walk inall his ways.
All the ways proceed from one source
and terminate in the same again.
There are varieties of expression, but
one religion. A way of righteousness
a way of truth, a way of peace, and a
way of pleasantness. All are different
paths which God has prescribed for His
people; and they that are His people
are found walking in them. Walk,
not to stand still, in His ways—not
your own. Then “to dove Him.” If
the fear enjoined were terror, it would
be impossible to love. Love is the
germ in the heart that blossoms and
bursts into all the fragrant fruits de-

182


manded by God’s holy law. The law,
hke the imperious taskmaster, says,
“Give me fruit,” and you cannot ; but
love softly, progressively, originates
and develops all the fruits of the Spirit.
The absence of this love is the absence
of Christianity. ‘I'his love, lost in the
fall, regained by the cross, is the result
of seeing God’s love for us. The
measure and extent is “all your hearts.”
Not more than human strength, not
less than will fill the heart is required.
Think of the equity of the law, and of
its greatness. Not cold, calculating
preference ; but warm, cordial attach-
ment—attachment not blind and unin-
telligible, but with all the soul. Also
to serve him, service in the sense of
worship. The word liturgy strictly
means service; here service means
adore, pray, and praise ; worship out-
wardly, publicly, and privately with
all the heart. We learn the essence
of all true acceptable worship before
God. Not material glory, ritual splen-
dour ; but depth of sincerity, intensity
of love, the supremacy of God in the
heart. What is the end of all this?
First, God asks this, not for His benefit,
but for our good. Is there no benefit


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


OHAP. X





in meeting together in the house of
God, in unloading the thankful heart
in praise? When you give the greatest
glory, worship, and homage to God,
the reaction of it is showers of blessings,
mercies, and privileges upon yourselves,
God requires this in His word, in sea-
sons of affliction and prosperity. He
requires it that holy effects may be
seen, and that men may feel that re-
- ligion purifies. It is also good for the
world. The best evidence that you
are Christians is in what you feel,
suffer, sacrifice, and do; not as ser-
vants obeying for reward, but as sons
serving God out of affection.—Dr.
Cumming.


Ver. 13. Keep (shamar) signifies to
keep diligently, carefully, faithfully ;
as watchmen keep the city, soldiers
their garrisons, or Jailors their prisoners
(1 Kings xx. 39; Job xii. 12). God
would have His people thus to keep
His commandments and statutes, and
to do this on account of those high
acts of favour and grace that He had
shewed them ; and what is this but to
be a holy people, yea, a very holy
people unto the Lord.— Brooks.

Our duty towards God. Consider—
I. That we have a duty to perform
towards God. A duty of—1. Holy fear.


2. Perfect obedience. 3. Love. 4.
Willing service. II. That this duty
is enforced by many considerations.
1. Obedience to God’s commands will
be to our own advantage. 2. We have
been especially favoured by God; grati-
tude should impel us to serve Him.
3. The consequences of enmity to Him
are fearful in the highest degree.—
Li. Lockwood.


Vers. 12, 13,19. The sum of human
duty. Its nature, basis, and motives.
cf. “ What doth ‘the Lord require of
thee, but to do justly, and to love
mercy, and to walk humbly with thy
God ” (Micah vi. 8).

The reasonableness of God’s law.
Many think it stern and severe, and
impossible for man to obey. If God
required more than man can give, this
would be opposed to His word, indi-
cate tyranny in His government, and
would free man from blame. But (od
asks for service, not from angelic
powers, but service of a nature adapted
to our own. His requirements are
clear as noonday, and equal as they
can be, and the plea cannot be sus-
tained. ‘“Q, house of Israel, are not
my ways equal? are not your ways
unequal?” etc. (Ezek. xviii. 29, 30).—
A, Barnes.


Gop no Resproter or Prrsons.— Verse 17.


In this sublime description of God we have a brief phrase indicating the


impartial, incorruptible, and righteous method of His government.


“He


regardeth not persons, nor taketh reward.” He shows no favour, nor is he bribed
in judging men. “ There is no respect of persons with God” (Rom, ii. 11).


I. In the laws of Moral Government.—Natural laws make no discrimination,
no distinction in their nature, purpose, and penalties. Nature accepts no
bribes and regards no tears in her retributive dealings. ‘There is “natural law
in the spiritual world,” the same kind of procedure as in the natural world.
The Jew has no advantage over the Gentile. ‘Though His chosen people, God
will not tolerate sin in them any more than in other nations. Men everywhere
have the same wants, are subject to the same diseases, and doomed to the same
grave. “I'he small and the great are there, and the servant is free as his
master.” Spiritually “ there is no difference (in their relation to God’s righteous
government), for all have sinned and come short (failed to attain) the glory of
God ” (Rom. iii. 22, 23).


II, In the method of Salvation —If men are equally guilty, none are
deserving, and none are saved by their own good works, He “ aoe not


OHAP, X. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.








the person of princes, nor regardeth the rich more than the poor; for they all
are the work of His hands” (Job xxxiv. 19). If saved at all, they are saved
“freely by His grace.” Peter could not believe that the gospel must be offered
to the Gentiles, and that they stood on the same basis of acceptance as the
favoured people, “Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons
(Acts x. 34).


III. In the accounts of the Judgment Day.—This day will vindicate the
righteousness of God in the rewards of the just and the punishment of the
unjust. Then will the eternal principles of the Divine government be fully
asserted and vindicated. There will be one impartial award, the rigliteous
Judge “ will render to every one according to his deeds” (Rom. ii. 6-11). “For
we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ; that every one may
receive the things done in his body, according to that he hath done, whether it
be good or bad” (2 Cor. vi. 10).


Love To THE StRancER.—Verse 19.


Strangers were in danger of being treated as foreigners and aliens among the
Israelites, But many humane laws were enacted and repeated for their benefit.
They were not merely to be tolerated, but to be respected, regarded as members
of the Commonwealth—to be put on perfect equality with the Israelites. There
are two reasons given for consideration to strangers.


I. God loves the stranger. Though great and terrible, yet He is kind and
affectionate towards the helpless and oppressed. The more defenceless the
greater the claim upon His compassion. ‘‘A father of the fatherless and a
judge of the widows is God, in His holy habitation.” Kindness to the stranger

as been considered such a favourite virtue that the gods have been said to
disguise themselves to test human hospitality. The Bible and tradition seem
to ayree on this matter. “Be not forgetful to entertain strangers, for thereby
some have entertained angels unawares ” (Heb. xiii. 2). Zeus, “ the stranger's
god,” sugyests another title for Jehovah. “The poor committeth himself unto
nee thou art the helper of the fatherless,” Ps, x. 14, 17, 18 ; ¢f. Jer. xlix. 11;
OS. XIV. 3,


II. Israelites themselves have been strangers. “For ye were strangers in
the land of Egypt.” Legislation has protected the orphan and the widow, but
not always strangers. They have been considered outcasts and foreigners.
Israel had been afflicted and distressed. They knew the bitter experience of
persecution, and should therefore sympathise with others in the same condition.
Our experience should teach us to regard tenderly all reduced to slavery and
treated with inhumanity. “Thou shalt not oppress a stranger ; for ye know
the heart (the sow/, the feeling) of a stranger (by personal experience), seeing
ye were strangers in the land of Egypt” (Ex. xxiii. 9). If Cicero could say
whatever concerned humanity was not foreign to himself, what should be our
feelings, when we think of the Divine Nature, the pathetic appeals of the Word,
and the incarnation of Jesus Christ? “'The stranger that dwelleth with you
shall be unto you as one born among you, and thou shalt love him as thyself,
for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt. I am the Lord your God”
(Lev. xix. 34),


Joves special care
7 Are strangers, poor and friendleas,—Odyes,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY., OHAP. X.





A Narton’s Honourn.— Verses 20, 21.


Moses returns to his main subject, and again exhorts to reverence and
obedience. God had honoured them, and deserved to be honoured by them.
He was worthy in Himself, and worthy on account of what He had done. “He
is thy praise and He is thy God—a nation’s honour consists in God’s blessing
upon its past history and its present condition.


I. God in its past history. God is in history at all times, over-ruling all
events for the accomplishment of His purpose. But few nations were blessed as
Israel. 1. In its constant prosperity (ver. 22.) Mighty had been the increase
of the people. In number, position,and dignity they were like the stars as
heaven. 2. /n its continual defence. In their deliverance and history “ great
and terrible things” had been done for them. England should remember her
deliverances and defence in the destruction of the Jnvincible Armada, the
defeat of Popish plots, and the establishment of the Protestant religion. ‘“‘ What
one nation in the earth is like Thy people, even like Israel, whom God went
to redeem for a people to Himself, and to make Him a name, and to do for
you great things and terrible, for Thy land, before Thy people, which Thou
redeemedst to Thee from Egypt, from the nations and their Gods?” (2 Sam.
Vii. 23.)

II. God in its present condition. He must still be our God, as well as our
father’s God. He must never be forgotten nor forsaken, but abide with us
for ever. 1. As the object of worship. “He is thy praise,” the object of praise,
and regard. We must not worship our great men, nor bow down to our own
nets (Heb. i. 16). If God be not recognised in public act and private life, our
glory will depart. 2. As the ground of dependence. We must put no confidence
in the wisdom of our policy, the extent of our empire, the splendour of our
arms, and the abundance of our wealth. ‘“‘ Righteousness exalteth a nation.”
8. As the source of prosperity. Our own skill and wisdom are vain. We can
never do without God. He gives increase and success in families, churches,
and nations (Acts v. 38, 39). _‘l'o God we owe everything, and should dedicate
everything. ‘Well may we think our substance due where we owe ourselves ”
(Bp. Hall). Let us cleave to God, our shield in the past and our hope for the
future. ‘Only fear the Lord, and serve Him in truth with all your heart :
for consider how great things He hath done for you” (1 Sam. xii. 24).

“Without the help of God
All is decay, delusion all,
On which mankind rely :
The firmament itself would fall,
And even Nature die
Beneath annihilation’s nod,


Without the help of God.”— W. Hayley.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 19. Love the stranger. 1. An ness and duty tender it” (Shakespeare).
expression of God’s nature. God is “A kind action is never Jost.”
love. 2. An evidence of superior legis-
lation in Israel. 38. A duty enjoined Ver. 20. Four aspects of obedience.
upon us. It is Jove; not mere pity, Fear, serve, cleave, and swear. Our
but practical benevolence. “Never allegiance must be public, constant and


anything can be amiss, when simple- firm. If we own God as ar i God


CHAP, KX,


He will ever defend us. “Every
one that sweareth by Him shall glory.”

Ver. 21. Thy praise. Thy praised
one (Ps. xviii. 3), or thy praiseworthy
one. He is also thy chief glory and
praise among all nations, who shall ad-
. Inire thy happiness in such a God
(Trapp). The friendship of God a





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY.


ak ese ala


personal honour—a constant necessity
and an eternal sufficiency. Why be
asnamed or afraid of Him? Why not
fear Him who can increase or diminish
(ver. 22), exalt or humble by His
infinite power? “ Your God is a
God of gods, and a Lord of kings”
(Dan. ii. 47),


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER X,


Vers 1-5. Tables. God wrote the
laws upon stone, and these stones were
laid up in the ark of the testimony.
But this law He writes now upon the
hearts of His people ; and God’s will,
engraved upon the sensitive and sus-
ceptible heart of a Christian, will out-
last the Pyramids of Egypt, outlive
the stones that came down from Mount
Sinai in the hand of Moses, and en-
dure for ever. It is a nobler thing to
write the law upon human hearts, and
more miraculous, than to write it with
His own finger upon the dead and
perishing stone.—Dr. Cumming.


Vers. 6-8. Ministered. A pious
lady once amongst a party of gentle-
men, by whom the worldly circum-
stances of ministers were made the
, topic of conversation, remarks were
thrown out of which she could not
approve. For some time silent, at
last, with a dignified air and a decided
tone, she put them all to silence with
the words, “ Well, you may say what
you please concerning the situation of
ministers, but let me tell you that a
minister of the Gospel holds a more
honourable office than a minister of
state.” — W hitecross.


Vers. 12, 13. Love. The centripetal
force which keeps all the celestial


bodies in harmonious motion, each in
its appointed orbit. What would ensue
could we imagine the force to be with-
drawn ?— Bowes.


Vers. 14-17. A great God. Simo-
nides, the philosopher, being requested
to describe God, asked a week to think
of it, after that a month, and then a
year ; but, being still unprepared, he
declined the task, declaring that the
more he thought of such a Being the
less he was able to describe Him. It
is said that Sir I. Newton and Dr. 8.
Clarke never mentioned the name of
God without solemn pause. “God
has two thrones—one in the highest
heavens, the other in the lowest
hearts” (Is. lvii. 15).


Ver. 19. Love the stranger. Mercy
hath but. its name for misery, and is no
other thing than to lay another's
misery to heart (Binning). In aspiring
to the throne of power, the angels
transgressed and fell ; in presuming te
come within the oracle of knowledge,
man transgressed and fell; but in the
pursuit towards the similitude of God’s
goodness and love neither man nor
spirit ever transgressed or shall trans-
gress (Bacon). How unsuitable is it
for us, who live only by kindness (Tit,
ili, 4-7), to be unkind. —Adwarda,


————————————————————————


CHAPTER XI.
Onrrtoat, Norgs.—1-12 develope more fully tne ether features of Divine Requirements, chap,


x. 12, Love must be seen in perpetual observance of commands,


L 53.
186


Keep, Lev. viii. 35 ; Num.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY, GOHAP. XL





2. Know own, #.¢., ponder and lay to heart the chastisement, the mighty acts of God to Egypt
and to Israel; the purpose of which is to educate (discipline) by correction and instruction,
@f. lxx., with the word in Prov, i. 23 v. 12.


8-6 Instances given of discipline,
4, Waters Cf. chap iv. 34; Ex. xiv. 26 agg.
5. All acts in guidance and protection of Israel and punishment of enemies,


6. Destruction of Korah’s company specially given, cf. Num. xvi. 31-33. “ Moses
mentions Dathan and Abiram, Seems of Kora, and not Korah himself, probably from Rs
to his sons, who were not swallowed up by the earth with their father, but had lived to perpetuate
the family.” (Kei/.) Dathan and Abiram also were more determined and audacious against
Moses, All substance, /t#. everything existing, Gen. vii. 4, which was in their following (at their
feet) cf. Ex. xi. 8 ; Num xvi. 32.


7, The reason for admonition, ¢f. ver. 2. Know God’s purpose in the acts you have seen.


$, 9. This knowledge was to impel them to keep the law, that they might be spiritually
strong, enter the land and live long in it, of. chap. iv. 26; vi. 3.


10-13. Another motive for fidelity is added, viz., the entire dependence of the Promised Land
upon God for its fertility. Its richness was not like Egypt, the reward of human skill and labour
but entirely the gift of God. Egypt and Canaan are distinguished in their most remarkable
physical traits, the spiritual significance of which must not be overlooked. (¢f. Speaker's
Commentary.)

10, Wateredst. in two ways, viz., by means of tread-wheels, working sets of pumps, and by
means of artificial channels connected with reservoirs, and opened, turned, or closed by the feet.
Both methods are still in use in Egypt and other similar districts of the country. (Speaker's
Commentary.)

11. Hills mountainous. Drinketh, ée. received its watering, the main condition of all
fertility, from the rain and therefore the providence of God. (Keil.)


12, Careth for, lit, seeketh or inquireth after. ¢.¢. for which God cared. Prov. xxxi 183
Job iii. 4. LXX. Oversees, Ps. cxlii. 4; Is, xii, 12; Jer. xxx 17. Eyes ever under the
special keeping of God.


18. Thus dependent, it behoved them to fear and obey, that these blessings might continue,


14, First autumn rain, about time of sowing from October to December, latter spring rains
in March or April, which prepares ground for harvest. This rain would be given with plentiful
supply of food for man and beast.


15. If Israel would be faithful.


16-17. If not obedient, God’s anger would burn against them, heaven would shut up (“asa
womb,” Gen. xvi. 2), earth would yield no produce, and they would speedily perish, Lev. xxvi.
19, 20 ; Deut. xxviii. 23.


18-20, Almost a verbal repetition of chap. vi. 6-9, to impress the mind.
21, Above, ie, as long as heaven continues above earth, or to all eternity, cf. Ps, lxxxix, 80


Job xiv. 12. “The promise of Canaan to Israel then was a perpetual promise, but also a
conditiona one.”


23. If faithful, God would drive out all nations, Greater, chap. vii. 13 ix. 1.


24, Give them the land in ita length and breadth, every place within the land. Ful!
possession in the time of Solomon.


26, So fill Canaanites with fear, that none could stand before them.


26-28. Concluding summary. Shalt put, it, give forth, utter, proclaim upon Mount
Gerizim, the most southern of the two, and according to Jewish ideas, the region of light, life,
and blessing (¢f. Speaker’s Commentary.) bal on the north side, opposite Gerizim (cf. Stanley.

Sinai and Palestine.”


31-32. Contain a reason for the instructions and an assurance that if they observe to do, they
shall cross Jordan, enter and possess the land, chap. iv. 5, 6. ee


UHAP. XL HOMILELIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY.





Divove Discreting iy Human Lirez.—Vers. 1-9.


God frequently repeated His commands, to meet the child-like character and
condition of Israel, and to check their proneness to forget and rebel. Love to
God was to show itself in distinct perception and perpetual obedience to His
statutes. ‘I'o awaken this love they must trace God's dealings with them, and
realise that these dealings were “ chastisement,” discipline to train them in His
service.


I. Divine discipline displayed in various ways. “ All the great acts” which
God performed have a bright and a dark side—were filled with mercy or judg-
ment according to the moral condition of the spectator. 1. In acts of love to
God's people. The miracles of deliverance, guidance, and defence were in-
tended to wean from sin and awaken right feeling. ‘heir afflictions were correc-
tions, less than their rebellion deserved, which taught them to pray and depend
upon God. ‘The gem cannot be polished without friction, nor Christians perfected
without adversity. 2. /n acts of judgment to God’s enemies. The “ mighty
hand” destroyed Israel’s foes and chastised the oppressor. Proofs of God’s
power and purpose were seen on every hand. ‘The overthrow of pride and the
defence of the weak; the bestowment of good and the infliction of evil were
a process of education. God was seen the friend of His people, and the judge
of His enemies ; training by peculiar discipline, and warning by solemn visita-
tions. Thus life is a school. The great events of life are appointed and
directed by God to train us for service,


There is a Divinity that shapes our ends,
Rough hew them how we will


II. Divine discipline to be recognised in the events of life, “Know ye
this day.” Men are unable, unwilling to learn. Life to them is ordinary,
accidental, or without value. We must take note, ponder this truth, and
discern God’s purpose in our life. If we could see “the end of the Lord” in
his dealings with us and others, we should murmur less, and be more thankful
and resigned, We quench “the light of life” by our “theory of life.” It is
not the want of greater miracles, but of perception of spiritual insight, that
leads us to forget God and misinterpret His providence. Wherever the hand
of God is, there is miracle and meaning if we desire to learn, All processes of
life point to mental and moral development. It is our wisdom, our interest to
believe and co-operate. ‘I would rather do the will of God than work
miracles,” said Luther. ‘Consider (i.¢., carefully regard) the work of God”
(Ecc. vii, 13). “‘ Whoso is wise and will observe these things, even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord” (Ps, cvii. 43).


III. The recognition of this Divine discipline in life to be shown in
cheerful obedience——Because “ your eyes have seen” the mighty acts of God
and the design for which they were done. “Therefore shall ye keep all the
commandments” (verse 8). ‘I'he older generation had witnessed more than
others, enjoyed greater advantages, and were therefore put under deeper
obligation. ‘I'hose who have seen signal events, who live in remarkable times,
times of revival, judgments, and deliverances, are more indebted to God and
doubly guilty in their disobedience. Duty must be measured by privilege.
The lessons of our life must be taught to others, and embodied in our character
and conduct. If unfaithful and indifferent now great will be our punishment.
Exalted to heaven, we may be cast down to heli j

188


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY, QHAP. XI,





wm


IV. The consequences of this obedience are manifold. If Israel would
hear, rightly interpret, and obey the voice of God in the events of their histovy,
the results would be manifold. 1. Spiritual strength. “That ye may be
strong” (verse 8). As we gain strength naturally by walking, so spiritually we
become strong by obedience. God is the source of all power, and by dependence
upon Him that power is ours, Unbelief is infirmity; joyful trust gives strength
for work and welfare. 2. Possession of Canam. “And possess the land.”
Earthly possessions and distinctions are reserved for those who are trained for
them. Strength derived from obedience inspires with courage to gain new
dominions. ‘I'hose strong in the Lord are resistless, and drive before them
nations greater and mightier than they. 3. Length of life. “That ye may
prolong your days.” Long life to individuals or nations, the perpetuation of
the Church or a godly seed, depend upon God more than natural causes,
Disobedience in its nature and in the judgments of God upon it, brings to
untimely ends. Obedience contributes to the length and the enjoyment of
life. “The fear of the Lord prolongeth days; but the years of the wicked
shall be shortened.”


Toe OverTHROW oF ConsPrratTorsS.— Verse 6


This is specially mentioned as one instance of those “ acts” which had been
done to warn and instruct. The words may be compared with Num. xvi., and
the following outiine will be suggested. 1. The sin of the conspirators. Korah
sought not to abolish the distinction between Levites and the people; but to
secure the chief dignity for himself. They rebelled against Moses (Num. xvi.
2, 3) ; refused the text proposed (6 and 7); refused to leave their tents (verse 2),
and reproached Moses as if responsible for their protracted sojourn in the
wilderness. ‘‘ Ambition o’erleaps itself.” The fate of Nadab and Abihu should
have warned them. “God hath a special indignation at pride above all sins,”
says Bp. Hall. ‘“ A man’s pride shall bring him low (cf Prov. xxix. 23; xi.
2; xvii. 19. 2. The overthrow of the conspirators. Opposition to God’s
authority is highly displeasing, when determined and open. The destruction
was: 1. Sudden. ‘“‘I'he earth opened.” 2. Supernatural. This not in a
country undermined with subterranean fire, but in the sandy desert; where
earthquakes seldom happen, and are little expected. 3. Complete. ‘“Swallowed
them up and their households, tents, and all possessions.” 4. Admonitory.
“Tn the midst of all Israel.” It vindicated the rights of Moses, and is a warning
for all ages. ‘‘ My son, fear thou the Lord and the king, and meddle not with
them that are given to change; for their calamity shall rise suddenly, and whe
knoweth the ruin of them both?” (Prov. xxiv. 21, 22.)


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS,


power, acts of publicity, yet unable to


Ver. 2. Not seen. He speaks to
convert the soul.


them as to eye-witnesses, and those
that have such evidence and _ self-


experience are usually more af- Ver. 5. Did to you. <A personal


fected than those that have things


by hear-say only. “Mine eye
affects my heart.” (Lam. iii. 51.)—
Trapp.


Ver. 8 His miracles. Acta of


diary, to help our weak memory and
stir up our cold hearts, “Forget not
all His benefits.”


Ver. 6. Dathan and Abiram. Place
hunters in their object, method and
189


OwAP. XL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


ne


punishment. Their history illustrative
of the perils of bad company. “ Unity
with wicked companions is one of the
strongest chains of hell, and binds us
to a participation both of sin and
punishment.” — (Sibbs.) “ Associate
yourselves, Oye people, and ye shall
be broken in pieces.” (Is. vill. 95
of. Prov. xi. 21; Josh. ix. 1, 2.)


Vers, 4-6. Nature subservient te
God’s purposes. 1. In the destruction
of His enemies. 2. In the deliverance
of His people, ‘“ It was a marvel that
the waters opened ; it was no wonder
that they shut again; for the retiring
aud flowing was natural. It was no
less marvel that the earth opened,
but more marvel that it shut avain,


because it had no natural disposition
to meet when it was divided. Now
might Israel see they had to do with a
God that could revenge with ease.”
—(Bp. Hall.) All the elements of
nature under God’s control, hence the
folly of offending one who can easily
aiid awfully punish,


Vers. 3-9. 1. God has a people
ameng men. 2 He separates this
people from men in various ways.
8. He unites them in bonds of fellow-
ship. 4. He trains them to love Him.


5. He guides them to rest.


Eayrpt anp Canaan.— Verses 10-12.


Moses adduces another motive for obedience to God’s law founded upon the
peculiar nature of the land. It was “a land flowing with milk and honey ;”
yet its richness was not, as was that of Egypt, the reward of human skill, but
simply and entirely the gift of God, and resulted from the rain of heaven.
Hence on account of dependence upon God they should not forget Him. ‘The
two countries are—1. A proof of natural variety. In Egypt there was little
or no rain, the people depended upon the yearly overflow of the Nile. Its
waters were stored up by artificial means and its fields irrigated by human toil.
Canaan was a land of hills and natural reservoirs. It was watered by rains from
heaven and depended not on the toil and skill of man to fertilise it. In physical
beauty and natural products, in situation and configuration, territories differ and
display the wisdom and benevolence of God. 2, An indication of moral purpose.
Some countries are more suited than others to train a people. God has located
nations and fixed the habitation of individuals that they might seek and serve
Him (Acts xvii. 26-27). Canaan seems in every sense best suited to foster
dependence upon God and train Israel for their high destiny. Hence in natural
scenery, in the structure of the hill and the extent of the valley ; in the course
of the river and the climate of the sky, we have proof of Divine goodness and
elements for religious training. 3, An illustration of special providence. God
was in Egypt in every place. But Canaan was a land on which Jehovah fixed
his special attevtion and regard. He watched it with unceasing care, and
sustained it by constant favour. He gave early rain for seed time, and latter
rain for harvest. Its inhabitants had no need to slave like Eyyptians. Fidelity
to God would always secure their prosperity and happiness, Thus do we find
moral purpose, wonderful providence in natural surroundings, and the forces of
naiure employed in spiritual training.


© Read Nature; Nature is a friend to truth 3
Nature is Christian, preaches to mankind ;
And bids dead matter aid us in our creed."— Young,


189


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY, OHaP. Xi,





Tas CoNNECTION BETWEEN Morat CHARACTER AND Marertat ProspEriry.—
Verses 10-17.


If Israel would serve God and be faithful, He would give them plentiful
supplies for man and beast. But, on the other hand, if they turned away from
Him, He would withhold the rain, deprive them of harvest, and they would
utterly perish. Material blessings depended upon moral conduct.


I. There is a moral purpose in the bestowment of material prosperity.—
God in bestowing physical good designs the moral training of men. Rain from
heaven and fruitful seasons testify to His goodness, and should excite to
gratitude (Acts xiv. 17). The greater the blessing the higher is the end in
view. Canaan was given to Israel for a special purpose. The blessings of this
land and of all lands are too uniform to spring from chance; too rich and
manifold for human labour to produce, and too wisely adapted to human wants
to be given without moral purpose.


II. The continuation of material prosperity depends upon moral conduct.—
The sources of prosperity are under the control of the Creator, He can seal
the earth and shut up the heavens. The influence of imperial power and the
excellency of legislation can neither create a sunbeam nor command a shower,
Happiness, all kinds of prosperity, would accrue to the Israelites by a faithful
observance of the commands of God, but terrible were the punishments which
awaited them if they transgressed (¢f Lev. xxvi. 3-17; Am. iv. 7).


III. Material prosperity will affect moral character for good or evil
If it teaches dependence upon God, creates gratitude, and leads to consecration
to Him, it will be a blessing; but if it weans our hearts from Him, leads to

roud self-reliance, it will be acurse tous. “‘I'ake heed” (verse 16). “ Accord-
ing to their pasture so were they filled; they were filled, and their heart was
exalted : therefore have they forgotten me” (Hos. xiii. 16).


Tue Bretz tHe Famity Boox.—Verses 18-21.


These words of warning must be deeply impressed upon their own minds,
taught to their children, and perpetuated from one generation to another.
They are partly a verbal repetition of chap. vi. 6-9. The sense is, “ Keep the
covenant faithfully, and so shall your own and your children’s days be multiplied
as long as the heaven covers the earth.” —Speaker’s Commentary.


I. The words to be treasured up in the heart. “Lay up these words in

our heart.” If we forget the words, we shall neglect the things. There must

personal reception, esteem, and influence. We must weigh them over, ponder
them in our hearts. “ ‘Thy word have I hid in mine heart.”


II. The words to be taught to posterity. “Ye shall teach them your children.”
What we love and treasure up for ourselves must be communicated to others.
Children have the first claim. Parental responsibility can never be shifted on
to the Sunday school or schoolmaster, The words of God must be elements
of family instruction. ‘The home school” must be gathered together, trained,
and made an institution to preserve and spread true religion. A large portion
of the Bible is intelligible to children, and full of interest for them. Read the
Family Bible and engage in family prayer. “Train up ((it., pa ie


CHAP. XI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


as house (Num. vii. 10, 11 ;) or temple (1 King viii. 63), a child in the way (his
way) he should go; and when he is old he will not depart from it.” (Prov.
XXxli. 6.)


III, The words to result in open profession by the household. They are to be
written on doorposts and gates to be constantly before the eyes of others. The
whole family or household are interested, indoctrinated and collectively identified
with public profession. The preservation of religion and the welfare of the
community demand “a church in the house,” “Set your hearts unto all the
words which I testify among you this day, which ye shall command your
children to observe to do, all the words of this law.”


THe Four PLaces IN wHIcH A Goop Maw Keeps Gon’s Trauta.— Verse 18.


I. The first place is the heart. The heart furnishes metal for the mind. 1.
Lay them up like treasure in a chest ; for the words of God are the family plate
of believers—the heirlooms of the household of faith. 2. Like books in a
library ready for reference. 8. Like clothes in a wardrobe ready for all
weathers ; for summer’s sunshine and winter’s storms. The truth of God should
be the garment of the soul. 4. Like conserves of precious fruit, gathered in
the time of plenty, to be eaten in time of scarcity. 5. Like knowledge hidden
but not lost. 6. As guides. It is useful to have a map to consult if we desire
to know a country ; so these words are for meditation and use. 7. In the heart
not like misers’ hoards, but like bankers’ gold, wealth itself, and the means of
creating more.

II. The second place in which we are to lay up these words isin heart and soul.
Religion should have a place in our affections and in our thoughts. 1. For the
soul is the seat of thought or understanding. Some do not think and attempt
not to understand. 2, The soul is the seat and place of the mind life.
3. The soul is the seat of conviction, and conviction is mental activity and
independence.

ILL. Now the relations of the text change, and this third head brings us to
the second department. The word revealed in the heart and soul refers to moral
and mental power of man. In this third particular religion is brought into
notice ; “ therefore shall ye bind these words for a sign upon your hand.” As
much as to say, realise them in your life. If you have any religion, use it.
Christians should carry their light like the old blind man, who always carried a
bright lantern when he went out on dark nights. When laughed at and called
a foolish old fellow, “Oh,” said he, “I carry it to prevent people stumbling
over me.” Bind these words, 1. Like a glove on the hand for defence. It
would be fearful for the hedger and ditcher to grapple prickly thorns with his
ungloved hand, 2. A sign on the hand like a gauntlet. These words are signs
of the side on which we stand, and the conflict we intend to wage. 3. Fora
sign, like a tool in the hand ; something to work, to build with. 4. For a sign
like a sword in the hand. “The sword of the Spirit is the word of God.”
Remarkable have been the encounters in which this sword has been wielded
me power. None more remarkable than the temptation of our Lord in the
wiliderness,


IV. There ts yet a fourth place, where the good man keeps God’s truth. That
they may be as frontlets between the eyes. The Jews forgot the spirit, and
gave a litera] interpretation to the words. They must be before us. We must
profess, avow the words, 1. The words are to be a source of pride, for what is
worn on the head, is a thing we are proud of. Be proud not of yourself, of

192


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


OHAP, KL


[SS ee ee ee ee


your attainments, but of that which has conferred upon you the possession of


these words.
an ornament of grace about the hea
into @ coronet, diadem and crown.
Wear them as helmets are worn.


2. As frontlets, giving dignity, ornament, rank, and elevation—
, chains of gold about the neck, wreathed

3. As frontlets a source of protection.
“ For a helmet the hope of Salvation.” These


are principles of a religious life, the principles which the great Hebrew law-
giver beheld as lying at the foundation of all prosperous states and all truly
noble personal character.—7he Preacher’s Lantern, Vol. IL


THE Days oF Heaven upon Eartu.—Verse 21.


I. When may our days be said to be “as the days of heaven upon the


earth?” When—1l. We enjoy much of a


sense of the Divine presence, and


live in the contemplation of the glorious perfections of God. 2. The love of


God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost.


3. We enjoy a spirit of


atitude and praise. 4. We possess brotherly love and enjoy the happiness of
ellowship with the saints, 5. We obtain great victories over sin and have


intense love of purity. 6. We cheerfully obey God’s commands.


7. We


frequently meditate on the heavenly state.

II. What course should we take in order that our days may be as such ?
We must—1. Be partakers of vital faith in Christ, and be renewed in the spirit
of our minds. 2. Make the glory of God our highest aim. 3. Wean our


hearts from earthly things.


4. Watch against grieving the Holy Spirit.


5. Be


perpetually employed for God, and resign our wills to His—Dr Hyland,


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 10-12. The distinguished
honour of Canaan. 1. Its great natural
beauties, 2. Ita special guardianship
by Jehovah. ‘“Careth for’”—In its
preparation for the people, its wonder-
ful products and various seasons.


Vers. 13-15. Rain. 1. In its origin.
““T will give you the rain.” Not there-
fore from fixed laws, nor from idols.
Jupiter could not create dark clouds
and distil them in blessings. “‘ Are there
any among the vanities of the Gentiles
that can cause rain?” 2. In dts effects.
“Corn, wine, and oil,” Crops ripen
for the sickle. ‘I'he vine with its
clusters, and grass for cattle in due
season. All benefactions of God. 3.
In its continuance. “It tarrieth not
for man, nor waiteth for the sons of
men.” It depends upon the power and
goodness of Gud ; withheld or bestowed
in times and quantities according to
the conduct of the people (Joel, 11. 23;
Zech. x. i; Deut. xxviii. 12). “ How
easy were it for God tostarve us ail by
denying us a harvest or two,” —7rapp.


Ver. 16. A caution against decep-
tion. We notice here—I. An evil
anticipation—that of having the heart
deceived. The probability of such
deception may be inferred from the
deceitfulness: (1.) Of human know-
ledge. (2.) The heart. (3.) Sin. (4.)
The world. (5.) The devil. II. a
caution urged against it : “Take heed
to yourselves,” by (1.) Being sensible
of your extreme danger. (2.) Seeking
for the illuminating influences of the
Holy Spirit. (3.) The constant practice
of self-examination. (4,) Watching
over yourselves.— Biblical Museum.


Ver. 17. I. Dreadful evils. 1. The
Lord’s wrath kindled. 2. Heaven shut
up. “The keys of heaven, of the
heart, of the womb, and of the grave,
God keeps and carries under His own
girdle” (Trapp). II. How brought on.
By disobedience, self-deception, and
idolatry: ver. 16; of. Josh. xxiii. 16;
Jer. xvil. 9; Job xxxi. 27.


Vers, 18-21. Zhe Bible the rule o
Bu 198


OHAP. XL


human life. I. Its power over private
life. 1. In the heart, governing feeling
and affection. 2. In the soul, control-
ing thought and meditations. II. Its
power over public life. Before the eyes
to direct ; in the hand prompting to
action and service; confessed in the
family ; and avowed before the world,
in conversation by the way, and inscrip-
tion on the gates, etc. “A single book
has saved me,” said M. L. Bautin, but
that book is not of human origin.”—
“It is this belief (in the Bi the
fruits of deep meditation, which has
served me as the guide of my moral
and literary life. I have found it a
capital safely invested and richly pro-
ductive of interest, although I have


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


—w


sometimes made but a bad use of it”


(Goethe).
He alone who hath
The Bible need not stray 3
Yet he who hath and will not give
That light of life to all who live,
Himeelf shall lose the way.
J. Montgomery.
The benefits of obedience. 1. in
bracing up, engaging, and cultivating
all the powers of heart and mind. 2. In
testifying for God in the family and
before the world. 3. In securing per-
sonal advantage, national existence and
permanent possessions. These lessons
should we remember “ Write them upon
the door.” “ Write the vision and
make it plain upon tables, that he may
run that readeth it” (Hab. ii. 2).


LoyaL OBEDIENCE THE way TO NatronaL Prospserry.— Verses 22-25.


To secure God’s help in gaining and keeping the land it was needful to obey


him.


Obedience would introduce them into their inheritance, enlarge their


boundaries, and make them valiant over every foe.


I. The national advantages secured. Many great promises are given, 1
“Then will the Lord drive out all these nations.”


Conquest of enemies.


The


strongest foes, mightier and greater than ourselves will be subdued if we trust in
God. With him we can drive away rebels within or foes without our borders,
Gideon over the Medianites, Hezekiah over Sennacherib, and England over the


Armada were victorious through God.


2. Enlargement of territory. When


nations were driven out of Canaan, Israel would grow numerous, and spread


beyond it.


Every place on which the soles of their feet should tread would


be their own. Territories are not gained and ae by war, alliance of commerce,
>


and human might.


They are the gift of Go


for the welfare of which the


possessors are responsible, 3. Security of possession. It is one thing to get and


another to keep.


Nations have gained and lost their dominions,


Reliance


upon God is better than valiant soldiers and mighty ships. 4. Moral supremacy.


God would lay the dread of Israel upon


others. Nations would be afraid, be


unable to touch them if they loved him. Their conquest would be easy, and


their possession secure and permanen


power. Righteousness exalts a natio
armies and extensive wealth. Let nati


t. Moral power is better than military
» gives more influence than imperial
ons covet this, let Christian churches be


clad with this; then no enemy will dare to attack, and no traitor within can
weaken, “Salvation will God appoint for wall and bulwarks,”


II The method of securing the advantages. Nations form alliances—


co-operate in aggressive war to gain their ends.


of the Mosaic legislation.


How different the principles


In itself, Israel was a match for no warlike nation ;
in loyalty to God it was superior to all.


“Only diligently keep all these


commandments,” and then would they rise in material prosperity and moral


grandeur. 1, Diligent obedience.


“ Diligent


keep.” Excellence, individual


or national, is beyond the reach of indolence. tt is diligent, energetic obedience


to right that makes rich in self-culture, social influence and national
8. Hearty obedience. The affections must be enlisted ; no mechanic.
194


TOSTeSS,
, slavish


es ee»


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. XL


Se Ne ev a


service. “T love the service of my God; like the bird, I fly at liberty on the
wings of obedience to His holy will” (Dr. Chalmers). “ Love the Lord your
God.” 3. Constant obedience. “(leave unto Him.” We must be united—
cemented to Him in soul, mind, and strength ; never be dissolved by selfishness
or distrust. _ This therefore is the way to prosperity in nations and churches.
Cleave to right, rely upon God, and He will give valiant hearts, speed true
progress and elevate above danger. But “the nation and kingdom that will
not serve Thee shall perish ; yea, those nations shall be utterly wasted.”


Farrarun OBEDIENCE THE Way oF Progress AND SArFery.


I, This is a declaration of God’s will. It is not taught by politicans or
learned in schools of philosophy. Divine counsels excel human laws, In the
Bible we are taught that the fear of God is the surest foundation of social
happinesss and public security.


Il. This is a fact in Christian experience. We know by experience that
we can only go forward in knowledge and holiness—only conquer temptations
and sins by faithful reliance upon God and constant obedience to His commands.
The history of Israel and of all nations confirms.the truth, When God has
been forsaken and His authority defied, the bonds of society have been broken,
thrones have been shaken, and empires rift asunder.


III. This is a law of Christian effort. Without strength there can be no
effort, and without obedience there can be no strength. “I can do all things
through Christ that strengtheneth me.” In benevolent aims and evangelistic
works, we only succeed and reap the fruits of our labour by walking “in all
His ways.” Be strong all ye people of the land, saith the Lord, and work ;
for I am with you saith the Lord of Hosts.”


Tue Important CHoice.— Verses 26-80.


Moses now shows that a blessing or a curse depends upon their conduct. If
they obey a blessing will rest upon them: if they disobey a curse. From the
frowning peaks of Ebal or the sunny sides of Gerizim their condition will be
decided. Before they enter the land the choice must be made. Which shall it


be ?


I. The choice to be made. Carefully examine the words and discover. 1. J¢
ts plainly revealed. We cannot obey a rule we do not understand. There may
be mysteries in the Bible, but there is no mystery about the commandmenta,
Duties are plain and easily understood, ‘“‘I set before you.” 2. Itis practicable,
A law whose demands are impossible is a contradiction. God’s commands are
all practicable. But we must judge them not by infirmities of the flesh, but the
attainments of saints, the energy of grace and the power of God. 3. /t i
voluntary. Force makes hypocrites, never any genuine Christians, Obedience
must be free. ‘There must be no constraint in this choice, 4. Jé ts urgent.
“This day.” It must be done. The more difficult will it be the longer the
delay. ‘Choose you this day whom ye will serve.”


II, The reasons for decision. There is no reason, no excuse whatever for
indecision. 1. God demands decision. All His claims are reasonable. He is
supreme and should be obeyed ; good. perfectly good in Himself and the author
of all good in others. “Ifthe Lora be God follow Him!” 2. dene ts


GHAP. XI, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





most mischievous. If obedience be profitable, if God’s service conduces te
happiness, then indecision is unprofitable and mischievous. (a) Mischievous tn
its nature. It withholds from God the gratitude and service which are due to
him. It admits and encourages rivals with God, and therefore implies rebellion
and treason, (6) Mischievous in its tendency. Wicked men may be blind to
their own faults, but they understand what God’s servants should be; speak
reproachfully of them and become hardened in their sins through mere preten-
sions in religion. (c) Mischievous in its effects. It pays some compliment to
religion and begets hope which is delusive. Those who are not obedient, entirely
decided for God on earth, will be disowned in a future state. 3. Indecision is
most foolish. It is not acceptable to God, but exposes to his censure and wrath,
to the upbraidings of conscience and the danger of liell, Consider these things
and decide. “See I have set before thee this day life and guod, and death and
evil, (Deut, xxx, 1-15.)


Tae Sotemn ALternative.— Verses 26-30,


I. The things to be chosen. Life or death, God or sin, heaven or hell. Nos
educati~ +-ade or profession ; but a much more solemn and momentous choice,


“he gospel oiiers iife and death, One must be chosen, ‘There is no alternative
whatever.


Il. The medium through which they are given. Two mountains were selected
from which the announcement was to go forth in solemn ceremony, and ‘‘as it
were transfer them to the land to be apportioned to its inhabitants according to
their attitude towards the Lord their God.” —(Keil.) of chap. xxvii. 14.
Learn from this. 1. That nature may remind of God in its blessing or curse,
fruitfulness or barrenness, 2. That nature may be affected by the moral
character and moral conduct of a population. 3. That nature may warn men,
¢r-operate with God, and be helpful to His cause.


III, The consequences involved in the choice. 1. God served or refused and
thus insulted or honoured. 2. The people blessed or cursed. How miserable is
hfe spent under the dominion of ear the curse of God and the fear of torment !
How happy and glorious is life devoted to God and His service! “ Happy
vhile on earth you live, mightier joys ordained to know,”


THE Lanp or Promtsz.— Verses 31, 32,


Its physical features have been described. Palestine was always coveted by
surrounding nations for its excellence and beauty, its products and position, It
thus becomes a type of the inheritance reserved for the righteous.


I. The nature of its enjoyments, The land was gloriously privileged by its
exemption from evil, and its enjoyment of good. 1. Perfect security. Victory
over eneimies was complete, and God’s people are ever under His protection.
ay i stands securely high, indissolubly sure.” 2. Ondisturbed rest. “Dwell
therein,” Conflict and toil over ; unbroken, and eternal peace enjoyed. “ My
chief conception of heaven is perfect rest” said Robt, Hall. ‘The “ Saints’ ever-


lasting rest.” 8, Hverlastin Joy. In the presence, friendshi :
God. There we “shall ever be with the Lord.” ce, Iriendship, and service of


“O ye blest scenes of permanent deli ht !
Full without measure ! lasting be out bound §
198 A perpetuity of blias, is bliss.” Young. )


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


OHAP. XI.





II. The method of its possession.
faith in the Leader.


Jordan.


Lord your God giveth you.”


This is distinctly revealed. 1.
( Israel had to “ observe to do all the statutes,”
life must be a walk with God and keeping His commandments,
“ Ye shall pass over Jordan to go in to possess the land.”
home beyond,” and the river cannot be avoided.
over, and the river was very deep,” says Bunyan.
waters and give a safe passage. 3. By receiving tt as a gratuity.
We cannot buy this inheritance.

of promise, and will be given to all who believe and seek it in Christ.


By
Our daily
2. By crossing
It is “ the
“There was no bridge to go
But God can divide the

“Which the
It is the land
He is


“the way” to heaven, “the truth” to direct in the way, and “ the life” to help
us in walking in it when found. (John xiv. 6.)


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS,


Vers. 22, 23. 1. The service com-
manded, Man made to serve and can
only be happy in loyal obedience to
God. This service should be diligent,
loving, active and constant. 2. Zhe
rewards bestowed. Subjugation of
nations and secure possessions of the
land. Walk in all His ways. As
God requires in conformity to His
word. Without delay. (Job xxii. 21;
Ps. cxix. 59, 60.) Cowrageously, with-
out fear. (Ps, cxvi. 18, 19; Is. li. 7, 8.
Peseveringly, without declension. (Jo
xxiii. 11, 12; Num. xiv. 24.) Closely,
with holy fervour and joyful hope.


Vers. 26-28. 1. What is the
blessing set before us? ‘The blessing
of him whose sias are forgiven, who
lives in God’s favour and dies in peace.
The blessing is lost through sin and
the way to regain it; but revealed in
Christ, made known in scripture and
taught, illustrated and explained in
every page almost, 2. What is the
curse? Just this, “The soul that
sins shall die.” “Cursed is everyone
that continueth not in all things
written, etc.” The consequences of
sin here and the punishments of sin
hereafter. 3. What is the way to
escape the curse? It is set forth
plainly in the Bible—in Christ the
way, the truth and the life. By the
death of Christ we are delivered from
sin, redeemed from the curse, and by
His obedience entitled to a blessing.
4 Which will you choose? Some


people think they can make a com-
promise; that they need not be
intensely Christian, as they are not,
and will not be intensely worldly. If
they do so, it is not really an altera-
tion of their state, but a deception of
themselves. There is no alternative
between a blessing high as the throne
of Deity, and a curse deep and terrible
as the nethermost hell, You must
take the sunshine or the shadow—
the evil or the good—the “Come, ye
blessed, inherit the kingdom;” or
the withering sentence, “ Depart ye
cursed, into everlasting fire.’—Dr.
Cumming.


Ver. 32. The course of life urged.
1. Attentive in its object, “ observe.’
2. Divine in its origin, “I set before
you.” 3. Comprehensive in its de-
mands, “all the statutes and judg-
ments.” 4, Energetic in its nature
“to do.” 6. Prompt in its actions,
“to-day.” 6. Beneficial in its results,
“Tn matters of great concern, and
which must be done; there is no surer
argument of a weak mind than irreso-
lution, to be undetermined when tle
case is so plain and the necessity so
urgent. To be always intending to
live a new life, but never to find time
to set about it, this is ae if a man
should put off eating and drinking and
sleeping from one day to another,
until he ic starved and destroyed.”—
—(Ztllotsen.)


197


OSAP. XL





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XI.


Ver. 2. Chastisement. Happy is that
condition, which forces us to trust only
in God, and to be in the hand of His
providence. Afflictions dispose us to
pray ; and we are sure to want nothing
if we find God in prayer.—Bp. Wilson.


Ver. 3-5. His acts, To those the
eyes of whose understanding are en-
lightened, and the avenues of their
hearts opened, to discern und adore
the perfections of God, how manifold
are the instances which occur of the
providence of God in interfering to
direct the course of human events
towards a salutary end; to make
afflictions of men the bye-path to
enjoyment ; out of evils temporal and
transitory to produce substantial and
permanent good.— Bp, Mant.


Vers. 6-7, Dathan. The earth could
no longer bear up under the weight
of these rebels and ingrates. God’s
perce was exhausted when they

egan to assail his servants, for his
children are very dear to him, and he
that toucheth them toucheth the
pore of his eye.—Spurgeon. This
element was not used to such morsels,
It devours the carcases of men; but
bodies informed with living souls never
before. To have seen them struck
dead upon the earth had been fearful ;
but to see the earth at once their
executioner and grave, was more hor-
rible—Bp, Hall.


Vers. 10-15. ain. Mr. Lothian,
an English farmer, who was struck


during his journey from Joppa to


Jerusalem by not seeing a blade of
grass, where even in the poorest local-
ities of Britain some wild vegetation is
found, directed hisattention particularly
to the subject, and pursued the enquiry
during a month’s residence in Jerusa-
lem, where he learned that a miserably
quantity of milk is daily sold to the
inhabitants at a dear rate, and that
chiefly asses’ milk. “ Most clearly,”
says he, “did I perceive that the
198


barrenness of large portions of the
country was owing to the cessation of
the early and latter rain, and that the
absence of grass and flowers make it no
longer the land (v. 9) flowing with milk
and honey.”—Crit. and Hxper. Com.


Vers. 10-17. Keep my command-
ments and I will send grass. 'The
prosperity of a country depends, not
on the abundance of its revenues, nor
on the strength of its fortifications,
nor on the beauty of its public build-
ings; but it consists in the number of
its cultivated citizens, in its men of
education, enlightenment and cha-
racter ; here are to be found its true
interest, its chief strength, ita real
power.— Luther.


Ver. 16. Be not deceived. Deceit
is only a game played by small minds.—
Corneille. No real greatness can long
co-exist with deceit.—S. 7. Coleridge.


Vers. 18-21. Teach. The sacred
books of the ancient Persians say—lIf
you would be holy, instruct your chil-
dren, because all the good acts they
perform will be imputed to you.—
Montesquien. We have a thorough
belief that the great secret of training
lies in always regarding the child as
immortal. The moment we forget
this we scheme and arrange as though
the child had to live only upon
earth and then our plans not being
commensurate with the vastness of
their object will necessarily be inade-
aie to secure its good. Educate on
the principle that you educate for
eternity, otherwise it is impossible to
produce a beneficial result.—Canon
Melvill.


Ver. 21, Many days.
To be is better far than not to be.
Dr.


This life is the childhood of eternity.
Archbp. Manning.


Ver. 22. Keep. Obedience, promptly,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





fully given, is the most beautiful thing
that walks on earth—Dr. Raleigh.
It is the only satisfactory evidence of
the sincerity of our profession.—
Bridges.
The path of duty is the way to glory.
Tennyson.


Ver. 25. Stand. A man in the
right, with God on his side, is in the
majority, though he be alone, for God
18 multitudinous above all populations
of the earth.— Beecher.


Vers. 26-28. Blessing. As bliss is
happiness in the highest degree, it can
only be given by a God, and enjoyed
by asaint.—/, Davies. Curses. They
are not merely imprecations, impo-
‘tent and fruitless desires ; they carry


OWAP. Xt.


their effects with them, and are
attended with all the miseries de-
nounced by God.—Cruden. Our
actions must clothe us with an immor-
tality loathsome or glorious.—Colton.


Ver. 31. Shall possess, Possibili-
ties are as infinite as God’s power.—
Dr. South.


Ver. 32. Do this day. There is no
work on earth easier than the true
service of God.—Luther. God counts
that free service which love dictates,
and not necessity.—St. Augustine.
The carrying on the affairs of the day
that lies before us.—Goethe.


Defer not till to-morrow to be wise,
To-morrow’s sun to thee may never rise,








CHAPTER XIL


Onrrtcat Norzs.—Moses now begins an exposition of the principal laws which must govern
the people in their ecclesiastical, civil, and domestic life in Canaan, The religious life of Israel
is described firat. In this chapter a place for God’s worship is chosen, and the right method


pointed out.


2. Destroy all “places” of idolatory. Hills and elevated spots they imagined were nearer
heaven. Green trees and shades of foilage or wood inspired awe.


83. Monuments of idolatry destroyed. Altars, piles of turf, or amall stones,


Pillars, rude


blocks of coloured stone used before the art of sculpture was known. Groves, /ét, idol, pillars of
wood. (cf. chap. vii. 5, and xvi. 21.) Names, every trace of existence.


4-5. Not do, as idolators worship in what place and in what way you think fit. God chose
the places and in these places alone did He put His name, é.¢., manifest his presence, To these
appointed places must they resort (seek cf. 2 Chron. 1-5), to offer gifts and sacrifices, The
various kinds of which are given “in order to enforce the order that each and every one of them
is to be offered at the sanctuary, and nowhere else.”


6. First, two chief altar offerings, Burnt offerings and sacrifices with which meat offerings
and drink offerings were united, (Num. xv. 4.) Second, tithes and heave offerings types of field
produce and cattle (Lev. xxvii, 30-33 ; Num. xviii, 21-24), heave offerings, free gifts of love in
addition to legal offerings. Third, vows and free will offerings, in consequence of vows or
spontaneous impulse. (Lev. vii. 16; xxii, 21; Num. xv. 8; xxix, 39.) Fourth, firstlings of herds and
flocks. (¢f. Ex. xiii. 2; Num xviii, 5.)


1. Eat, many injunctions had bean allowed to lie in abeyance in their migratory condition,
now the whole ritual would be obligatory. The sacrifical feast was to accompany certain
offerings, put hand, all undertaken or acquired by activity. (cf. Gen. iii. 223; Isa, xi. 14.)


8, 9. Reason for these instructions, for up to this time every one had done what he thought
éight, because they were not in possession of the inheritance,


10, 11. But when settled in the land a certain order and a fixed locality should be determined.
Choice vows, lis, the choice of your vows, the vows of your choice, voluntary, (Lev. xxii. 21 ;


Num, 3, 8.) 199


OHAP, XIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


ET


AZ, Rejoice. Joy to be the distinctive feature of all sacrificial meals, to be shared by sens
and daughters, and by slaves (menservants and maidservants). No part. Levites at gates, te,
in towns and hamlets (Ex. xx. 10) resembled strangers, and had no share in the land as hereditary
property. “The repeated injunction to invite the Levites to the sacrificial meals is not cat
variance with Num. xviii. 21, where the tithes are assigned to the tribe of Levi for their main-
tenance.”— Keil.


18, 14. Moses sums up instructions, They must beware of offering sacrifices in every place
they thought fit, especially burnt offering, the chief offering,


1B. In the wilderness animals for food were slain at the door of the tabernacle. (Lev. xvii. 8-6.)
This prohibition, designed to gather them round one centre, and to cut off private idolatrous
rites, was now to be relaxed. When the people were scattered they might slay at their houses
(gates). Lusteth after, not in a bad sense, but means simply to will or choose. According, in
proportion to means and condition. Unelean, as no longer consecrated as sacrifices, “The
ceremonial distinctions do not apply in such cases, any more than to ‘the roebuck’ (or gazelle)
‘and hart,’ animals allowed for food but not for eacrifice,”—Speak. Com.


16. Blood forbidden to be eaten (Lev. xvii. 10) was poured as water upon the earth and
sucked in.


17-19. Sacrificial meals could only be held at the sanctuary. Servants and foreign slaves
were to participate with them ; the Levites especially were not to be forgotten.


20. These rules were to be in force when God would enlarge their border. If too far off (ver. 21)
to come, the allowance in verses 15, 16, is repeated, and the reason of it given. Be sure, (ver. 28) .
lit., be strong, steadfast, determined to resist temptation to eat blood —a temptation to which
they werz specially exposed, probably.


23-24, The law relating to blood as in ver. 16,


26, Holy things, tithes, etc., as in ver. 17 ; not tithes for Levites, but special gifts of thankful-
aess and piety to be presented as peace offerings at the sanctuary. Vows. (Gen. xxviii. 20.)


27. The flesh and blood of burnt offerings were to be put upon the altar. (Lev. i.5:9.) The
blood of sacrifices in the ritual of the peace offering was poured out. (Lev. iii. 2, 8, 13.) Hai.
(Lev. vii. 11.)


28, The closing admonition in expansion of ver. 25. (ef. chap. xi. 21.)


29-82. A reference to the beginning (ver. 2), and a warning against Canaanitish idolatry.
Heed. Be not ensnared by the worship of the local deities, the neglect of which was thought would
bring misfortune. (¢f. 2 Kings xvii. 26.) The fire. The heathens prepare all kinds of abominations
for their gods which Jehovah hates. They even burn their children to their idols, (Lev. xviii. ;
Jer. xxxii. 85.) Observe. This verse is best taken ‘as an intermediate link, closing what goes
before, and introductory to what follows.” — Keil.


Toe Laws or Divinz Worsurp.— Verses 1-82.


“ Having thus rehearsed the Decalogue and enforced its leading principles,
Moses now passes on to apply those principles to the ecclesiastical, civil, and
social life of the people. Fourteen chapters are thus occupied. Many

articulars are peculiar to the law given in Deuteronomy. The Sinaitic
egislation was nearly forty years old, and had been given under conditions
of time, place, and circumstances very different. Canaan was in sight, the
legislator himself was about to be withdrawn, and in the ripeness of his wisdom
he now completes his work by enlarging, explaining, modifying and supplementing
under Divine guidance the code which he promulgated in earlier days. Moses
fitly begins with regulations pertaining to the worship of the Israelites during
their settled life in Canaan” (¢f. Speak. Com.). Taking the whole chapter, we
get the following outline—


I. Worship as a protest to heathen iaolatry. The invasion of Canaan was

a new period in life—a period of true service and purified character. 1. Idolatry

was not to be imitated (ver. 29-31). They must shun superstitions, and take
200


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY, OHAP. Xi,
re ere ngenentesieneeneinneen


heed not to be ensnared by their prevalence and popularity. 2. Idolatry was
to be destroyed (ver. 2-4). Its monuments to be overturned, and its places
swept away that God might come down and dwell among them.


II. Worship localised in its position (ver. 4, 5). God would select a spot
to which Israel must resort, institute a worship which should appeal to the
senses, and teach the truth that where His people meet there He dwells. (1 Kings
8, 29; 2 Chron. 7, 12.)


III. Worship joyful in its nature (ver. 7). There was enough in Israel’s
past and present history to make them joyful. It is God’s will that we should
serve Him with gladness, and never cover His altar with tears. (Mal. 2, 13.)
Religion should never be a task or drudgery, but a pleasure. God commands
those who worship Him to be joyful. ‘“ Neither be ye sorry, for the joy of the
Lord is your strength.”


IV. Worship Divine in its regulations. God only knows and prescribes
what is acceptable to Him. We must not follow custom, nor devise for our-
selves. In papal ceremonies and the worship of images we have ingenuity
“graven by art and man’s device” (Acts 17, 29)—“‘a show of wisdom in will

ip” (worship arbitrarily invented, devised by self-will, not by God, and


“ers
which has a reputation of wisdom.) (Col. ii. 23.)


V. Worship obligatory in its ritual. There was room for vows, free-will
offerings and voluntary efforts; yet the worship was binding upon all. The
command was peremptory. Households and tribes must come to the appointed

lace (ver. 6). They must bring the kind of offerings specified, and no other,
t is our duty to recognise God as our protector (ver. 10) and proprietor.
Our attendance in His house should not be matter of form or custom, but of
conscience.


Return, my senses, range no more abroad;
He only finds his bliss who seeks for God.—Parnel,


Tue Cnosen Piace.— Verses 4-6.


The name of the place is not mentioned by Moses. Different places were
chosen in after times, Mizpeh, Shiloh and Jerusalem. ‘‘ This studied silence was
maintained partly lest the Canaanites, within whose territory it lay, might have
erate | their forces to frustrate all hopes of obtaining it; partly lest the
desire of possessing a place of such importance might have become a cause of
strife or rivalry amongst the Hebrew tribes, as about the appointment to the
priesthood.” (Num. xvi.)—Jamieson.


I. An assertion of God’s right to every place. All the earth belongs to God.
He has perfect right to appropriate any spot. “The Lord hath chosen Zion ;
He hath desired it for His habitation.” ow spiritual incense may be offered in
every place. (Mal.i11.) There has been divine order and gradual revelation
in the worship of God; “but the hour cometh, when ye shall neither in this
mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship the Father.” The heart, spirit and
truth are required more than place. (Jobn iv. 21-24.)


II. A Dwelling place for God. ‘To put His aame there.” God’s name is
in every place, where He specially reveals Himself (¢f 1 Kings viii. 29), and
which is therefore His habitation or dwelling place. The God of heaven will
indeed dwell with men upon earth. God is specially present in His house—a
place distinguished by His presence—detached from secular ape and


GAAP. XL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





attended by true worshippers—the most solemn and attractive oe on earth,
‘‘ How dreadful is this place! this is none other but the house of God, and this
ia the gate of heaven.” (Gen. xxviii. 17.)


III. An aid te unity. To this chosen place all the tribes were to repair
several times a year. The meeting would thus counteract local interests, tribal
jealousies, and feuds, Like the Grecian games the festivals would cultivate
national feeling and act as a bond of union. They were not merely commemo-
rations of great events, but occasions for the reunion of friends, the enjoyments
of hospitality and interchange of kindness. They opened the heart to joy and
gave a welcome to the stranger and the fatherless. The Christian Church is a
unity of many people, the centre of friendships and joys. “Jerusalem is
builded (the well built one) as a city that is compact together (in unity),
whither the tribes go up, the tribes of the Lord, unto the testimony of
Israel (i.¢., a law or custom to Israel, or a testimony to Israel’s covenant).”
(Ps. cxx. 3, 4.)


IV. A preservative of purity. “That there should be one national centre
for the religion of the people was obviously essential to the great ends of the
whole dispensation. Had fanciful varieties of worship such as Polytheism
delighted in been tolerated, the Israelites would soon have lapsed into idolatry,
and the deposit of the true faith and knowledge of God would have been,
humanly speaking hopelessly lost.” (Speak. Com.) This holy ground, sanctified
by God’s presence and consecrated to His service, demands purity of motive,
heart and life. ‘ Feigned holiness is a double evil,” says St. Jerome. “Who
shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? or who shall stand in His holy place #
He that hath clean hands and a pure heart, etc.” (Ps. xxiv. 8-5.)


Look to thy actions well,
For churches either are our heaven or hell,
(Geo. Herbert.)


Tax Bressmvas ory Pustro Worsur.—Verses 5, 6.


ne advantageous individually and socially to meet together in religious
worship.


I. It is a necessity of our moral nature. As social beings we crave for the
society of our fellowmen ; as religious creatures we depend upon God and seek
His presence. Worship is needful to satisfy our instincts and hearta—to develope
our nature and dispositions,


II. It is a bond of Christian fellowship. In this hallowed spot dearest
friends “meet and mingle into bliss.” Here is delight with the excellent of the
earth, sympathy and sweet converse with God and His people. Public prayer
and praise have a sensible tendency to unite men together and to cherish and
enlarge their generous affections,


III. It is an advantage to the nation. The national assembly to Israel was
an immense advantage. But for public worship the greater part of mankind
would have no instruction—no religion at all. ‘This diffuses knowledge among
the people, unites different classes of society and preserves real godliness in the
nation.


IV. It is a duty of Divine appointment. “Thither shalt thou come, bring
burnt offerings and eat” The apostle reproved those who deserted public
worship. “ Not forsaking the assembly of ourselves together, as the manner of

202 :


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. CHAP, XIL





some is.” (Heb. x. 25.) We are not to forget the command of God, nor dispute
the practice of apostolic churches and Christian communities in every age


“Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God.”


Tue Forvre Inaerrrance.—Verses 9, 10,


Canaan is here described in a way adapted to the condition of Israel and may
typify the future portion of the believer.


I. The description given. 1. A rest; “the rest.” “This is the scene of |
combat, not of rest.” At the end of the journey, will be peace, “quietness and
assurance for ever.” ‘‘My chief conception of heaven is perfect rest,” said
Robert Hall. 2. An inheritance not gained by hereditary succession, merit, or
human friendship ; but prepared for “the saints in light ”—an inheritance
“incorruptible and undefiled, and fadeth not away.” 3. A git. “The Lord
your God giveth you ”—a pure, munificent, and unparalled gift in Christ Jesus.
Denoting great love, freeness and blessing. 4. A dwelling. “So that ye dwell
in safety.” Beautiful in situation, secure in possessions, “it stands securely
high, indissolubly sure.” The metropolis of the universe, the abode of saints,
the palace of angels, and the residence of the Great King.


O ye blest scenes of permanent delight !

Full without measure ! Lasting beyond bound

A perpetuity of bliss, is bliss.

Could you, so rich in rapture, fear an end,

That ghastly thought would drink up all your joy,
And quite imparadise the realms of light.

II. The relation to this inheritance indicated. “Ye are not as yet come to
the rest.” God’s people are seeking it and will attain it. Many come near but
do not enter it. Hence all should take warning, be encouraged, and strive ta
enter it. “‘It is the best of all blessings,” said David Stoner, “ to die we, and
get safely home to heaven.” “ Arise ye and depart, for this is not your rest,”


HOMILETIO HINTS AND 8UGGESTIONS,


sought and worshipped gods of nature


Ver. 1. 1. The duty. “Observe to
wherever they could discern any trace


do.” Weighty and most important.


2. Method of performing it. (a) Con-
siderately “observe.” (6) Continually
“all the days ye live upon earth.”
“ A sense of duty pursues us ever. It
is omnipresent like the Deity.”—J.
Webster.


The path of duty is the way to glory.
Tennyson.


Vers. 2, 8. Destruction of idolatry.
A divine command. A prudent policy.
A good example. “ We easily fall into
idolatry ; for we are inclined there-
unto by nature, and coming to us by
inheritance, it seems pleasant.” —
Luther.


Ver. 5. 1. The place. The heathen


of Divinity. 2. The name. The name
indicates the manifestation of his pre-
sence in the place ; “ presents his per-
sonality, as comprehended in the word
Jehovah, in a visible sign, the tangible
sign of his essential presence.” (Keil.)
8. The seeking. Not merely turn in
@ certain direction ; but to inquire for
something. Hence come to God's
house for @ purpose, in anxiety to
fulfil that purpose. Not to seek enter-
tainment, for it is not a place of
amusement (Ezek. xxxiii. 22); nor to
attend with worldlimindedness ; for it
is not the house of merchandise (Luke
xix. 45, 46). We must not profane it
by sinful indulgence and Satan’s ser-
vice (Jas, i 21). Attend with serioas
208


OWAP. XII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY


KK


consideration, constant watchfulness
and deep concern to obtain God’s
blessing.


Vers. 7,12. Joyful Worship. This
joy springs—1. From Divine goodness,
past and present. 2. Great numbers,
households and tribes. 8. Reciprocal
feeling, warm hearts will create joy in
prayer and praise and vibrate like
chords in harmony. ‘There is a place
for song as well as meditation in the
sanctuary. “ Thou shalt rejoice before
the Lord thy God.”


Ver. 9. Not come to the rest. No
more are any of us indeed, till we come
to that “rest which remaineth for the
people of God.” (Heb, iv. 3, 8-10),
Ihe ark was transportive till settled in
Solomon’s temple ; so till we come to
heaven are we in continual unrest.—
(Trapp). Learn: 1. The insufficiency
of earthly bliss; both to the believer
and unbeliever. 2. The nature of
heavenly bliss. Complete, perpetual
and certain. Causes of evil and dis-
tress removed, and communications of
glory beyond description.


Tux Saorepness oF Bioop.— Verses 16, 20-23.


The prohibition to use blood is most distinct and often repeated, and that for
many reasons,


I. Blood sacred as an article of food. In Pagan and uncivilised nations it
was the custom to eat flesh whilst quivering with life and to drink blood mixed
with wine, as a right of idolatrous worship. (cf 1 Sam. xiv. 32; Ezek,
xxxili, 25; Acts 15.) But when animal food was granted to man it was for-
bidden “to eat flesh with its soul, its blood.” (Gen. ix. 4.) The body may
become food, but the blood, the life of the body which is the gift of God must
be treated with reverence and reserved for Him,


II. Blood sacred as an emblem of life. Blood is the seat, the source of life.
It contains the vital principle of all animal life, “ For it is the life of all flesh,”
(ver. 14). “Man is man only by virtue of his blood, and nature is chiefly
adinirable as supplying its ingredienta.”—(Grindon.) Blood is distinguished
from all other constituents of the human body. “It is the fountain of life, the
first to live and last to die, and the primary seat of the animal soul 3 it lives
and is nourished of itself, and by no other part of the human body.” —( Harvey.)
When the blood is shed the life is gone. Hence, man or beast guilty of this
act must be put to death.” ‘Blood of your lives will I require.” (Gen. ix, 5;
Ex, xxi. 12-28.)

Murder may pass unpunish’d for a time,
But tardy justice will o’ertake the crime.— Dryden.


IIL. Blood sacred as an element of expiation. As the blood was identical
with the life and represented the soul of the victim, God appointed it as a sub-
stitute for the sinner’s life. Thus the lite of the sacrifice was an atonement
for the life of the offerer. It was an established rabbinical maxim that “there
is no expiation except by blood,” a principle recognised in Heb. ix. 22 “ without
shedding of blood there is no remission.” Let us be thankful that Christ died,
and shed His precious blood for us—blood which cleanseth from all sin and
“which speaketh better things than that of Abel.” Never ccant the blood of the
covenant, by which we are sanctified and saved “an unholy (or common) thing”
(Heb. x. 29) and thus insult God and lose your soul |


Drexcrions Iv THE CHoIce or AnmaL Foov.— Verses 15, 16-20-26,


The instructions concerning food were given to the Israelites in a way most
aan and generally understood at the time. God separated His people
04


-_—<


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. Xil,
SL
from others and all their laws reminded them of His covenant, Even laws of


diet and regulations in the choice of food were given to teach dependence and
enforce obedience.





I, Food in its benevolent design. Life requires for its maintenance constant
supplies of food. Creatures may fast long, but can never dispense with food
altogether. We may therefore learn the goodness of God in caring for the body,
in providing sufficient and wholesome food, and in the enjoyment and strength
which it gives. Since food is necessary we are taught to labour and pray for
its continuance. “Give us this day our daily bread.” In legislating for our
lower nature God teaches what is wholesome and unwholesome—suggests His
greater care for our higher wants, food for mind, heart and soul, and reminds us
of the care which should exercise over body and soul


II. Food in its ceremonial use. In the garden of Eden vegetables were
given to man (Gen. i. 29), Animal food was granted first to Noah (Gen. ix. 25).
In patriarchal times food consisted of flesh of animals tame and wild, as well as
cereals. In the wilderness supplies came from heaven. In the promised land
special rules were given as to kind of animals to be used. (Lev. xi., Deut. xiv.)
The Israelites were not to eat animals which were unclean, which were offered
to Idols (Ex. xxxiv. 15); and which had been torn by wild beasts (Lev. xxii. 8,
ef. Ezek. iv. 14). All animals for food had formerly to be killed at the door of
the taber: acle (Lev. xvi. 1-8), but in view of entrance into the land the prohi-
bition is relaxed. More liberty was given, but the blood of the animal was
prohibited to prevent ferocity in men towards lower creatures and profanation
of a sacred element. ‘The separation of animals into clean and unclean would
remind Israel of their separation from the nations, They were not to join in
convivals feasts and social banquets of idolaters. Their ordinary meals must be
chosen with care and eaten in gratitude. We must be temperate, orderly and
obedient in the government of the table, and exercise control over appetites and
desires. Touch nothing unclean, regard the sanctity of life and let thanks-
giving be offered with daily food. (1 Tim. iv. 4, 5.) ‘ Whether, therefore, ye
eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God.”


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


2. Related to the


Ver. 16. The prohibition of blood.
To elucidate this ordinance, I shall—
I. Confirm the fact here stated. God
had from the beginning appointed the
blood of animals to be offered by man
as an atonement for his soul. This
appears throughout all the Mosaic
history and the New Testament II.
Consider the prohibition as founded on
it. It was most salutary as tending—
1. To excite reverence for sacrifices,
2. To bring continually to remembrance
the way of salvation. 3. To direct
attention to the great sacrifice.—C,

Simeon, M.A.


Vera, 20-28. Lawso/ diet. 1. Founded


upon God’s will.
health of the people. Most of animals
forbidden are unclean and unwholesome
—others injurious in warm countries,
To please the appetite is often preju-
dicial to health. 3. Designed to pro-
mote religions sanctity. We must be
separate from all uncleanness ; in reli-
gous worship and in the common acta
of life. “ Defile not ye yourselves in
any of these things ; for in all these
the nations are defiled, which I cast out
before you.”


Here's neither want of appetite no mouths 5
Pray heaven we be not ecant of meat os
mirth.—Shakespeare,


OHAP. XIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.,





Tue Levits.— Verse 19.


This frequently recurring description of the Levites (¢~ ver. 18, chap xiv.
27; xvi. 11, 14; xviii. 6; xxvi. 12), does not assume that they were homeless,
which would be at variance with the allotment of towns for them to dwell in
(Num. xxxv.); but simply implies what is frequently added in explanation
“ that the Levites had no part nor inheritance,” no share of the lend as their
hereditary property, and in this respect resembled strangers (chap. xiv 21, 29;
xvi. 11). And the repeated injunction to invite the Levites to the sacrificial
meals is not at variance with Num. xviii. 21, where the tithes are assigned to
the tribe of Levi for their maintenance, For, however ample this revenue may
have been according to the law, it was so entirely dependent upon the honesty
and conscientiousness of the people that the Levites might very easily be brought
into a straitened condition, if indifference toward the Lord and his servants
should prevail throughout the nation.—Feil.


I. The Levites, servants of the people. They were appointed to teach and
officiate for Israel before God and thus prevent the anger of God from comin
upon the people (cf Num. viii. 18-22.) They were given to the people ae
depended upon their help and generosity, designed to train them for service and
not absolve them from duty. ‘B heathen countries the priestly caste was here-
ditary, wealthy, and held much of the land (¢f. Gen. xlvii. 2), but the Levites
had no landed property, were servants of God and the people. ‘Behold I have
taken your brethren the Levites from among the children of Israel ; to you they
are given as a gift for the Lord, to do the service of the tabernacle of the con-
gregation ”” (Num. xvii. 6).


II. The Levites, servants of God. God claimed them as the first-born,
separated and cleansed them. They were dedicated to him as Israel’s
representatives in holy work. ‘They had no worldly portion in houses and land,
The avenues to wealth and power were closed to thon God alone was their
inheritance in the riches of His grace and the resources of His providence


Warnine Aqarnst Snares — Verses 29-32.


__ During the sojourn in t Israel became familiar with the customs of
idolatry. From this idolatry they were scarcely weaned. Since the forms of
licentiousness were worse in the land which they were to inherit, there was need
of caution. ‘‘ Forewarned, forearmed.”


I. The need of warning. In circumstances most favourable and secure there
is need of watchfulness and prayer. 1. The dangers were great. “Take heed ”—
Evils might be vivid, abominable, and cruel, but familiarity would weaken
resistance and ensnare. The vices of a companion and of society may be gross
and palpable to others, yet (says Shakspeare) “a friendly eye cannot see such
faults.” 2. The attractions were strong. Idol worship was ancient and prevalent,
Fashions are often popular and attractive. “Do at Rome what Rome does ” is
the rule of many. But conscience must be regarded, and the command of God
obeyed. 3, The foe was conquered, not subdued. Sins may revive, and habits
not broken say regain their dominion and tyranny. Men may cease to sweat
and forsake eee ways, and yet be afterwards ensnared. Pity for the
enemy, and dependence upon resolves, must not throw us off our guard.


II. The consequences of neglecting the warning. There must be no curiosity,


BO ele constant regard to the word of God. 1. Neglect would offend
20


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. XII.





God. Idolatry was hateful to God, and if guilty we lose His favour and protection.
We must hate what He hates, and assimilate our tastes and habits to His, We
shall never err, if we “ observe to do” His commandments, 2. Neglect would
bring ruin upon themselves, Idolatry had been the overthrow of Pharaoh, and
the destruction of surrounding nations. It will bring utter ruin to individuals
and nations who persist in it. Israel sadly fell by neglecting this caution. (Jer.
xxxli. 35; Ezek. xxiii. 37.) ‘They followed vanity and became vain, and went
after the heathen that were round about them, concerning whom the Lord had
charged them, that they should not do like them.” (2 Kings xvii. 15.)


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 25. Not eat. Who can ever
think any commandment of God to be
light or little, when this of not eating
the blood is charged with so much
strictness? The mznutula of the law,
as well as the magnalia, must be
carefully heeded and practised. —
Trapp.


Ver. 25. Cut off nations. God in
the history of nations, 1. Appointin
their lot. (Josh. xxiii, 4). 2. Rob
of their inheritance. ‘God shall cut
off the nations.” 8. Succeeding to
their possessions. ‘Thou succeedest
them.” 4. Secure in their dwelling
“and dwellest in the land.” “The life
of a nation,” says Dr. Arnold, “is to
me as distinct as that of an individual.”
“The Lord is governor among the
ayes: (Ps. xxii. 28; 1 Chron. xvi
81.


Ver. 31. Idolatry. 1. Abominable
to God. 2. Cruel to humanity.
8. Easily fallen into. “We are
inclined thereunto by nature, and


coming to us by inheritance, it seemg
pleasant.” —Luther.


Ver. 31. 1. The command a rule
of duty. ‘‘Observe to do it.” 2. A
complete rule of duty. “Thou shalt
not add, nor diminish.” Add by pre-
tending to have received similar divine
revelations and persuading men to
believe them, as Mahomet and others ;
diminish, by taking from them, denying
them to be from God, and acting
contrary to them.” From these words
it is evident that the Jews were not
to add any other rites of worship of
their own devising, or from the
idolatrous customs of those countries
nor omit any of those which God had
commanded them to use, For if they
had used any of the Gentile cere-
monies, whereby they honoured their
gods, it would easily have introduced
the worship of the gods themselves ;
and if they had omitted any of the
rites which God had ordained, some
other would have easily stepped into
their room which were used by
idolators.”— Wilson,


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XII.


Vers. 1-4. Destroy. This is a very
important law: in this world, un-
happily, names are often things; for
whenever a party wish to get power,
a party holding erroneous doctrines,
the first thing they do is to establish
titles ; and when they have got titles,
they soon follow them up by asserting
realittes. And therefore it is very
wisely provided here that not only
should the scenes, the altars, and the


oves, all be overturned, as having
a desecrated by practices that were
abomiuable in the sight of a holy God,
but that even the very names that
might remind of that superstition that
had passed away should be expunged
from their vocabularies, and not men-
tioned even in their conversation.—
Dr. Cumming.


Vers. 5-7. Place. When we re-
207


GHAP. XII.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY,





member what the policy and practice
of all the kings of Israel was, viz., to
draw off their subjects from the place
where God set His name and to deter
them from going to Judah and Jeru-
salem, by means of the calves of Bethel
and of Dan... . it is not possible
that Deuteronomy, requiring every
Israelite to bring his sacrifice to the
place which the Lord should choose to
set His name there, should ever have
been accepted as genuine and inspired
if its genuineness and inspiration had
not been incontrovertible ( Bp. Words-
worth). It is a wise, a salutary, and a
laudable provision of the Ohitahs
discipline, that she sets apart, and
consecrates, by solemn religious rites
to God’s glory, the places which she
intends for His worship ; and by out-
ward signs of decency, and reverence
of majesty and holiness, impresses
them with an appropriate character
which, whilst it redounds to the honour
of God, operates also with no mean
or trivial influence on the minds of
His people. A certain sense of holy
pleasure is diffused over the pious and
meditative mind, as soon as the feet
cross the threshold which separates the
house of God from common places,
We feel that we are on “ holy ground ;”
end a still small voice within, as we
draw near to “worship God in the
beauty of holiness,” “it is good for us
to be here.”——Bp, Mant,


Vers. 17, 18; 20-26. Eat. Some
people have a foolish way of not mind-
Ing or pretending not to mind what
they eat. For my part, I mind very
studiously ; for I tack upon it, that he
who does not mind this, will hardly
mind anything else. os Johnson.)
Moderation is absolutely required in
the lower things of life, especially in
that of eating. Health—one of the

eatest blessingsof life—depends upon
it ; so also the happy flow of spirits,
without which life is at least a perfect
blank.—#. Davies.


Ver. 26. Vows.


Unheeded vows may heedfully be broken 3

And he wants wit, that wants resolved will,

To learn his wit to exchange the bad for
better.— Shakespeare.


Vers, 30-32. Take heed. There is
a story which tells of a bell suspended
on a rock dangerous to navigation.
The waves of the ocean beating upon
it caused it to make a noise to keep off
the approaching mariner. It is said
that at one time some pirates destroyed
the bell to prevent the warning. Not
long after, these very pirates struck
upon the rock and were lost. How
many hush the voice of warning at the
point of danger, and founder upon the
rock of temptation and are lost for
ever.— Mc Cosh,








CHAPTER XIIL


Crrrtoat, Norxs,—The true modes and forms of worship have been laid down, the next step
fs to legislate against the authors and abettors of false ones. Such tempters are not to be
spared, even though (vers. 1-5) their teaching be confirmed by miracles; or (vers. 6-12) be
nearly allied by kindred or friendship ; or (vera 12-19) be supported in their apostacy by a


whole city.— Speak, Com.


1, Prophet, Received communications orally or by vision. Dreamer, Through medium of


dreams, These, the two chief media of divine revelation. (ef. Num. xii. 6.) Signs and wonders.
To accredit his mission, and apparently true, yet not wrought by God, but by the power of the


wicked one to deceive, (2 Thess. ii 9.)


2. Go after other gods and foraake Jehovah :


and impostor, and must be put to death.


therefore the prophet, a false prophet, a seduce’


8 rage ™ fast the people in loyalty. (ef. vii, 2 Gon. xxil 1)


ai De) esate


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY., OHAP. XITt,








4,5. Israel must cleave firmly to God. There must be regular judicial procedure against the
impostor The people, the whole community must take part in the stoning to show their horror
at the crime, and clear themselves of complicity in it. God only must be the object of regard
and they must not be thrust, forced from the way in which they have to walk. Thus put away
evil, an exhortation often given as an affair of importance. (¢f. chaps. xvii. 7; xix. 19; xx
21; xxii. 22, 24.)


6. A second temptation to idolatry might be from blood-relations and intimate friends.
Brother, fraternal tie. Wife, object of dearest affection. Friend, loved as much as our owy
life. (1 Sam. xviii. 1, 3.)


7, 8. The gods to be worshipped might be near or far off ; might be different to the idols of
Canaan, “or commend themselves by the charm of peculiarity and novelity.” There must be
no yielding, nor must the tempters escape. The accumulation of synonyms (pity, spare, conceal)
serves to make the passage more emphatic. Israel was to put to death without pity and stone
the offender. (Lev. xx. 2.) j


12-18, A third case when one city hears of another city which has been led astray. Worth
less, profligate men may rise up. (v. 13.) Children of Belial. Wicked, designing and lawless
men (Jud, xix. 22; 1 Sam. i. 16; xxv. 26). (Sept. perverse men.)


13. Withdrawn. Verses 5 and 10, indicating strong persuasion, a degree of force, not easy
seduction.


14, Thou. The magistrate to whom it officially belonged to investigate. If the report was
true, the inhabitants were beyond protection and smitten. Man and beast were put to death
without reserve, and all booty heaped together and burned with the city.


16. For the Lord. “As a whole offering to the Lord thy God ;” sanctified to him by destruo-
tion, (Lev. vi. 15, 16.)


17. Nothing must cleave te Israel, no spoil must be taken that the Lord may turn from His
anger.


EntTIcEMENTS OF Fatsze Propuets.— Verses 1-~8.


Former perils might spring from Canaanites, now they may arise Sone
themselves. Hence they must take care not to be drawn away if any shoul
tempt them. “It there arise,” etc.


1. The Purpose of their Enticements. “Let us go after other gods,” to
revolt from Jehovah, which is treason—a crime against the law and authority of
God, against the organisation and life of society. Strange that any should be guilty
in Israel, or in the present day, of such wickedness! But many, professedly
learned and religious, entice from God and give divine honours to saints and
images. 1. rom God whose authority is supreme and should be revered.
“The Lord your God.” Doctrines, revelations, and miracles which pretend to
be of God and are not so, vie with his law and authority ; usurp his throne
and claim absolute supremacy. 2. From God whose past favours should bind
to him. “ Which brought you out of the land of Exypt,” etc. (ver. 5). One
thing was certain, repeated to Israel a thousand times and written as with
a sunbeam in their history—that God was supreme. God, and God alone, had
redeemed them from bondage and oppression. God’s constant goodness should
touch our sensibility, excite our gratitude, and lead us to most joyful obedi-


ence.


II. The credentials by which they entice. The kingdom of lies has its
wonders as well as the kingdom of truth, and prophets of God have their
imitators. In our time we have dreamers of dreams, seers and pretenders to
inspiration. “Imitators are a servile race,” says Fontaine. 1. They dream
dreams. Pretend to have revelations from God in visions of the night. Jews
had great regard for dreams, observed them, and often consulted ae whe

1) #)


OHAP. XIIL HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





pretended to explain them. This custom was forbidden. We must look only
to God and His servants. 2. They perform wonders. The prophet gives “a
sign,” @ prediction of some future event; performs “a wonder” or feat of
power—some counterfeit appearance of the supernatural produced by human
artifice or Satanic agency. 3. Their signs and wonders come to pass. Predic-
tions and miracles are authenticated by apparent facts. But miracles alone do
not prove the truth of the doctrine and the divine mission of the performer.
‘The doctrine must commend itself to conscience before it can be sealed by
miracle. There are those “whose coming (presence) is after the working of
Satan with (three means) all power and signs and lying wonders ” (lit. of false-
hood) to attest false doctrine and lead astray. (2 Thess. ii. 9.)


III. The treatment to be shown to these false prophets. In this matter
there is no uncertainty, and there must be no hesitation, 1. They must be
rejected. “Thou shalt not hearken unto the words of that prophet.” God’s
law is the standard of truth, all that contradicts this is false. No sign nor
wonder must lead us to believe in one whose purpose falsifies his profession.
The God of truth can never lie, “I sent them not, neither have I commanded
them, neither spake unto them: they prophesy unto you a false vision and
divination, and a thing of nought, and the deceit of their heart (a wilful
fraud). (Jer. xiv. 13, 14). 2. They must be punished. ‘‘That prophet, or
that dreamer of dreams shall be put to death” (ver. 5). The risks and guilt
must be removed by putting away the guilty one ; spare him, the infection will
spread and you are responsible, “Thus must the mischief be put away.” We
are not to persecute and put to death. But we must denounce error, guard
against seducers, and brand with infamy all attempts to “go after other gods.”
‘‘ Whosoever transgresseth and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not
God.” (2 John 9, 11),


Fatse Propuets.— Verses 1-5,


“The standing rule of faith and practice had been given once for all. That
the people were to hold fast. The prophet who propounded another rule could
only be an imposter. We need not then suppose that Moses is putting an im-
possible case by way of enforcing his words, as St. Paul does (Gal. i. 6) ; nor yet
that the prophet in question is one who was originally a true prophet, and
obtained authority by his miracles as such, but was afterwards drawn away into
Ay pene (Speak. Com.) The prophet, by his teaching, plainly contradicts
the oad ee standard of truth, advocates idolatry, and therefore he is a false
prophe


I, False prophets are permitted to rise up among the people. They a ed
in Israel, in the days of Christ and in apostolic times. It is vedidtay they will
come “in the last days.” (Mt. xxiv. 11; 1 Tim. iv. 1; 2 Pet. ii, 1.) God's
people are often sorely tried, and the Christian Church sifted. Heresies,
prodigies and controversies shake the faith, and “ false prophets” work
‘great signs and wonders” to “deceive the very elect,” if it were possible.
(Mt. xxiv. 24).


II. The people are often ready to obey false prophets when they appear.
The moral condition of the people and the facts of hiliare prove this. "We ee
a love for the wonderful, a craving for novelty. We are ignorant of God, and
our hearts tend towards idolatry. The teaching of seducers is bewitching ; we
listen, believe and are drawn astray. (Gal. iii. 1). “Believe not every spirit,
but try the spirits whether they are of God.”

210


a, ae


Sl a walk


HIOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


_—


III. The consequences of this obedience will be serious.


OHAP. XL





Serious to the


teacher, the taught, and the community at larga 1. Apostasy from God.


God was the Sovereign and Supreme Ruler in Israel.
a spiritual offence, but direct rebellion against their king.


Idolatry was not simply
It was a political, a


national offence ; high treason itself, punishable by the law. 2. Utter ruin.


The offender was stoned to death, and
Apostasy will destroy character and life.


believ


erished not alone in his iniquity,
heudas was slain, and as many as


him scattered. Judas of Galilee drew many after him, but perished,


and his followers were disappointed. (Acts y, 36, 87). Watch and pray, and let


none “ thrust thee out of the way.”


WALKING AFTER THE Lorp.-—Verse 4,


“ Walk after the Lord your God.” 1. In reverent imitation, His example


is before you—follow it.


love for him by obeying his commands.


2. With affectionate fear.
with God ; He is your Lord and Maker.


: You must not be familiar
3. With all obedience. Show your


4, With holy zeal. Suffer no profaning


of His name, no desecration of His temple. (Bib. Museum).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


In this chapter we have three entice-
ments from God, False teachers (verses
1-5); intimate friends (verses 6-12;
wicked cities (verses 12-17).


Ver. 2. After other gods. Awful
guilt in the Israelite. Strong delusion


au.1 infinite risk in our day. Let us
go. 1. A dangerous pursuit. 2. In
search of an unknown object. ‘“ Gods


which thou hast not known.” 3.
Hence folly to enter the path. For-
saking God, who is known to be good
and holy.

Deceit is the false road to happiness;
and all the joys we travel to through
vice, like fairy banquets, vanish when
we touch them.—A. Hill.


Ver. 4. Distinguishing marks of
godliness. Walk, fear, keep, obey,
serve and cleave. Walk after God.


1. God the great end of life, 2. Keep-
ing this end in view will save from
manifold temptations. 8. The method
of pursuing active, affectionate and
constant obedience. One or two good
actions, a step or two, will not make a
walker, There must be continued
motion, unwearied and steady as the
stars in their orbits. ‘Enoch walked
(habitually and closely) with God.”
(Gen. v. 24). Walk with the Lord.
1. Not before Him in desire, plans and
anticipation, “If the Lord will,
we shall live, and do this or that.” -
2. Not behind Him in fear, hesitation
or reluctance. 3, But with Him in
confidence, affection and joy. Like a
child walking hand in hand with its
father.
“Mutual love, the crown of all our bliss.”
— Milton.


Tue Sepucrivs Power or Arrzcrion.— Verses 6-11.


The next danger springs from the influence of affection. If miracle 1f


supernatural fail, those near and dear may seduce.


But even they, if found


guilty after fair and formal trial, must be put to death.


‘1, Seduction may come from intimate friends. A brother, who should be
a helper; a daughter, who should be dutiful; a wife, like Job's G, 9) may


eaaP. XiLl. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





entice. An intimate and familiar friend, whom we love as ourselves, in whom
we confide our secrets, may secretly plot to draw away from God. Strongest
temptations are often from nearest friends,


II. Friends who thus seduce are guilty of the greatest crime. “They are
are not friends, but foes in a man’s own household.” A friend consults our
welfare ; but these secretly plot against character, reputation, and position,
Their design is disgraceful, a no affection, no degree of kindred must screen
their crime nor conceal their persons. “I was wounded iu the house of my
friends,”


III. The claims of God are superior to Human Affection. We must be
kindly affectionate one to another ; but we must prefer God to our best friends.
“Thou shalt not consent unto him” (ver. 8). When two claims come into
collision, the weaker must give way. Though we must not cease to love, yet
we must act as if we hated (Luke xiv. 26, 27); we must disobey, and, if need
be, desert those to whom we are naturally bound, and follow our higher calling.
God must have and deserves the whole, and not halves. ‘ He that loveth
father or mother more than me is not worthy of me: and he that loveth son
or daughter more than me is not worthy of me” (Mat. x. 37),


Guitt anp Danazrr on Departina FRom Gov.— Verses 8-11.


Consider this ordinance as—


I, Atemporary enactment, With the cessation of the theocracy it has ceased,
Though, at first sight, it may seem severe, yet it was—1l. Just, as it respected
the individual ; for he was guilty of most heinous, most ruinous offence. 2.
Merciful, with regard to the public. Most solemn were the issues to the Jews
and to mankind, which depended on national fidelity. Hence the punishment
was stern, severe, and monitory.


II. A lasting admonition. It declares to us in the strongest terms :—! The
evil of departing from God, by whom they had been delivered from vondage
and guided in their journey. 2. The danger of being accessory to any one’s
departure from Him. “Neither be partaker of other men’s sins” (1 ‘Lim. v. 22;
2 John 11. 8. The need we have of firmness and steadfastness in relizior
‘If sinners entice thee consent thou not.”—C, Simeon


HOMILETIO HINTS AND S8UGUESTIONS.


Ver. 6. 1. The nature of friend-
ship. “Thy friend as thine own soul.”
A friend is a second self. Numerous
are examples. David and Jonathan in
Scripture, Achilles and Patroclus in


Napoleon, “I know well that I have
not one true friend. As long as I con-
tinue what I am, I may have as many
pretended friends as I please.”


Homer, Nisus and Euryalus in Virgil,
and the well known story of Damon
and Pythias, 2. The abuse of friend-
skip, In betraying secrets, enticing to
evil. “Try your friend before you
chovse him.” All who assume the
name are not eutitied to the confidence
of a friend. “As to myself,” said
212


Vers. 6-8. I. The inducements of
the tempter. 1. From those least
suspected—sister, biother, parent, or
friend. 2. In secret. “Entice thee
secretly.” Wickedness dreads light
and seeks to conceal itself. 3. Plausable.
This religion is popular “ the gods of
the people,” and yours is singular and


a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


CHAP. XIII


oS Se EE ee ee eee


confined to one God. “Let us go.”
II. he spirit in which they must be
met. 1, With firmness. No, we will
not go. 2. With asense of the danger
incurred. In forsaking God he forsook


which we have been trained. Wa
degenerate in our character and rush
into danger. “He that sacrificeth
unto any god save unto the Lord only,
he shall be utterly destroyed.”


the way of our fathers, and the way in


Tse SepuctivE Power or Noumsers.— Verses 12-18,


_ The third instance of enticement is that of a whole city in revolt. If the
city was found guilty after inquiry, then all its inhabitants were to be put to
death, and it was to be reduced to a heap to avert the anger of God.


_ I. Multitudes may be disposed to evil. In the Church, in a community,
in a city, a few may affect many. ‘Children of Belial,” throw off all restraints
of conscience and law, and cry out “let us go and serve other gods.” Many
walk in the broad path to destruction, but in the narrow, only here and there
@ traveller is found.


II, Multitudes disposed to evil are not to lead us astray. ‘“ ‘Then shalt
thou inquire and make search.” We are not to be unduly influenced by
numbers. Majorities are not always right. Truth may be ridiculed and its
adherents in the minority. Luther was told by a monk to whom he was
attached, “the whole world is against you: how can you persist in the
course you have chosen?” The noble reply was—“ it the whole world be
against Luther, then Luther will be against the whole world.” We must rest
upon the rock and hold to the revealed Word. ‘Thou shalt not follow a
multitude to do evil.”


III, Vigorous means are to be used to destroy the evil. Cattle and citizens
were to be “ utterly” destroyed, and all the spoil burned in the streets. We are
not authorised to destroy by fire and sword. But by spiritual agencies we must
purify the Church, educate the country, and destroy the evils which curse
society. We must watch public sentiment, refute error, and preach “ the
truth as if in Jesus” to save men from apostacy and death.


Hasrrations Divinety Fixep.— Verse 12


The clause “ which the Lord thy God hath given thee to dwell in,” signifi-
cantly reminds them that the real ownership of their dwellings rested in the
Lord (¢f Lev. xxv. 23), and that they, the mere tenants, must not allow
His property to become a centre of rebellion against His just authority.—
Speak. Com.


I, Residence in a city, the gift of God. All the earth is God’s. In town or
country there is a providence over men; @ permission to fix their abode.
Momentous junctures in life are often fore-appointments of an unrecognised
Protector, wio settles the limits of nations, locates the residence of men,
“and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their


_ habitations.”


II. Residence in a city disturbed by wicked men. There may be splendid
buildings, noble institutions and great advantages in cities. But often dangers


and temptations outweigh privileges. Sons of Belial corrupt the ada and


OHAP. XIII.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY,








draw from allegiance to God. Lot thought Sodom was a desirable residence,
but “he was vexed with the filthy conversation (wanton behaviour, licentious
life) of the wicked (the lawless).” (2 Pet. i. 7).


III. Residence terminated by the destruction ofacity. We are only tenants
at will. Pestilence and fire may drive away. ‘The abominations of the inhabit-
ants may bring down the judgments of God. No place is secure, no abode is


permanent below. Seek, therefore,
with hands, eternal in the heavens.”


“a building of God, an house not made


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 12-18. Rumours and the repu-
tation of the Church. I. The case
supposed—a flying rumour; city talk,
etc. II. The duty enjoined. 1. Not
to be slighted or hushed up. 2, Not to
be rashly acted upon. 3. To be care-
fully sifted, 4. If found to be true,
to be followed by prompt and decisive
action, Learn—''o be jealous of re-
ports touching the integrity of God’s
people, or the institutions of religion,
—Bib. Museum.

Vers, 12-15. The duty of magis-
trates. 1. Not to judge before they
know. Many act against knowledge,
but none can act rightly without it.
We can neither teach nor give judg-
ment concerning that which we know
not, 2. To inquire that they may
know. “Here are three words—First,
they must inquire; and if upon inquiry
they got not information, then they
were to make search; and if upon
search they did not find, then they
were to ask diligently; that is, to
renew the inquiry, that by interroga-
ting all persons who possibly know
anything of the cause, they might
search out the cause which they knew
not.” (Caryl). “Twas a father to the
poor, and the cause which I knew not
I searched out.” 3, To punish justly
when they discover the guilty. They
should have respect for law, and care


for those under law. Equal and im-
partial justice must be done to all,
“ Justice proportions the smartness to
the fault ; so that we may behold the
greatness of the offence in the fitness
of the punishment.”— W. Secker.


Ver. 16. The memorial heap. “ An
heap for ever.” 1. A monument of
Divine justice against sin. 2. A beacon
warning to all posterity. ‘This day
they are a desolation, and no man
dwelleth therein, because of their
wickedness which they have committed
to provoke me to anger. (Jer. xliv. 2,3.)

A city sacrificed for the nation, or
the good of many demanding the sacri-
fice of a few. A principle of Divine
procedure, common in operation, strange
in nature, benevolent in design, and
worthy of devout regard.


Ver. 17,18. Two courses of conduct.
1. Apostacy exposing multitudes to
danger and death. 2. Obedience and
its benefits. (a) In warding off Divine
anger. (b) Securing Divine mercy. (c)
Causing increase of posterity. “Observe
and hear all these words which I com-
mand thee, that it may go woll with
thee, and with thy children after thee
for ever, when thou doest that which
is good and right in the sight of the
Lord thy God.”


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XIII.


Vers. 1-5. Go after. The question
is not whether @ doctrine is beautiful,
but whether it is true. When we want
to go to a place, we don’t ask whether

314


the road leads through a pretty country,
but whether it is the mght road, the
road pointed out by authority, the turn-
pike road.—Hare.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.
ere ees eesnnnpniomesnsesnessaunssbeisomrennesems


Vers. 6,7. Thy brother. None
of the affections have been noted to
fascinate and bewitch, but love and
envy.— Bacon,

Ver. 6. Thy friend as thine own
soul.


“ Friendship is the cement of two minds,
As of one man the soul and body is,

Of which one cannot sever but the other
Suffers a needful separation.—Chapman.


Ver. 8. Consent not. He that yields
to temptation, debases himself with a
debasement from which he can never
artse.— Mann,

“ They that fear the adder’s sting will not

come near his hissing.” —Chapman,.


Vers. 12 and 18. One of thy cities. T'o
a single teacher the hope of an entire


OHAP, XI,





numbers ; but only when they produce
proof, not when they shun enquiry.—
St. Athanasius,


Ver. 17. His anger, The wrath
of man is the rage of man; but the
wrath of God is the reason of God.—
Bp. Reynolds,


Ver. 18. Hearken to the Lord. Wa
remember the anecdote of the Roman
commander who forbadean engagement
with the enemy, and the first trans-

Tessor against whose prohibition was
fis son. He accepted the challenge of
the leader of the other host, met, slew,
spoiled him, and then in triumphant
feeling carried the spoils to his father’s
tent. But the Roman refused to recog-
nise the instinct which prompted this
as deserving of the name of love. Dis-
obedience contradicted it and deserved


city 1s often entrusted.—Scriver.
Ver. 14. Enquire.


death.—F. W. Robertson.
1 reverence





CHAPTER XIV.


Carrroat, Nores.—The people were not only to suppress idolatry, but their whole life and
senduct must be ruled according to their holy character and high culling. They must not, like
other nations, disfigure their bodies in passionate grief, nor defile themselves with unclean meat,


1, Cut. (Lev. xix. 28) as idolators in mourning. (1 Kings xviii, 28; Jer. xvi 6, xli. 5;
Ezek, vii. 18. Baldness. A space between the eyebrows left bare in honour of the dead.


(Lev. xxi. 5.)


2. Holy. A super-added motive to induce obedience and “an emphatic elucidation of the
first clause of ver. 1.”—De.


8-20 Olean and unclean amimals. (cf. Leviticus xi.) Nothing abominable or unclean to be
eaten.


4, Beasts. These, whose flesh would be excellent, mentioned here; because the Israelites
were about to be settled in the land of promise, on the mountain pastures of which a portion of
the tribes were already established, ie itech rs animals cits te (J Piped ‘ fede ae

i r (of, xii, 15.) Roebuck, the gazelle, Pyrgarg, or bison, a species of antelope, co :
haere Caelpalars hed been sali by the Israelites. Wild Ox, translated “ wild bull.’
(Is. li. 20.) Must be distinguished from the re’ em of Num. xxiii. 22. Chamois, lxx., the camel-
leopard, ¢., the giraffe, All the creatures here given are classed by Bochart, among the goat and
deer kind,


6. Hoof. Those only to be eaten which completely divide the hoof and chew the chud, The
exceptions are given here and in Lev. x. 4-7.


9,10. Fish. The rule is simple and comprehensive. Any fish from salt or fresh water might
be eaten. But shell-fish of all kinds, whether molusks or crustaceans, and cetaceous animals,
were prohibited as well as fish which appears to have no scales, like the eel.— Speak Com.


20. Birds. The same as those in Lev. xi. 18, egg. 95


CHAP. EIV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERUNOM Y¥.


13. The Glede is added. These are chiefly birds of prey; unclean feeders ; needful as
weavengers, but not good for food,


22, Dieth of itself. The arrangement is peculiar to the repetition of law in Deut. (Lev. xvii,
15; xxii. 8. Stranger. A heathen traveller or sujourner; for a proselyte was subject to the
law as well as a Jew. Seethe, a third repetition, a prohibition against a Pagan ceremony.
(Ex. xxiii. 19; xxxiv. 26.)


22, 23. Tithe. The dedication of a tenth part of the year’s produce in everything was a duty ;
to be brought to the sanctuary. The tithes and firstlings named here, to introduce certain
directions concerning sacred meals celebrated out of them.


24-29. Too Long: An agreement anticipating settlement in Canaan. Distances made it
difficult to carry produce to the sanctuary. It might be commuted or sold for money’s worth
and the proceeds go towards a social feast. Whatsoever thy soul lusteth after, not in a bad
sense, but simply preference or liking. Levite- (chap. xii. 19.) Every third year the whole
tithe of the year’s produce was set apart, not eaten before the Lord in the sanctuary, ag a portion
for the Levite, widow and stranger in different towns, This was not a third or additional
tithe, but the former, differently applied. The first and second year’s tithe, was eaten in the
sanctuary ; the tithe of the third year was for the poor and needy at home. Bless thee. As an
encouragement to carry out these instructions, God’s blessing is said to follow (chap. xv. 10.)


Conrormity to Worpiy Customs.— Verses 1-3.


As the chosen of God, Israel must not only put away idolatry, but abstain
from heathen superstitions and practices. ‘I'hey were endowed with nobler life,
called to a special position, and must not conform to the customs of nations by
whom they were surrounded.


I. Conformity is inconsistent with a Christian's position, He is called out
of the world, separated from it in habits, character and aim: he must not go
back to his old course of life. Christians are “a peculiar people,” precious to
God and to the world ; they must not lose their value and spiritual distinction,
They should live near to God and not descend to base and worldly positions,
Exalted above others they must keep their dignity, never dishonour their God,
nor forget His claims. “I have severed you trom other people, that ye should
be mine. (Lev. xx. 26).


II. Conformity is derogatory to a Christian’s character. They are “ children
@f the Lord,” and should not be slaves to fashion and habit. As sons of God
they must walk in love and free from idols. Walk worthy of the high vocation
wherewith they are called. (Ep. iv. 1). They are holy, “a holy people unto the
Lord,” and must keep themselves unspotted from the world. (Jas. i 27).
Character, rigliteous character should be the impress of God’s people. To be
like God should be their desire and aim. “ He that avoids iniquity is the best
Christian,” says Calamy. There must not be a mere outward nonconformity
but inward spiritual tranformation which makes life new and holy—new in
motive, source and end. “ Be not conformed (fashioned) to this world; be ye
transformed (transfigured, Mt, xvii. 2; changed, 2 Cor. iii 18) by the renewing
of your mind.” (Rom, xii, 2),


III. Conformity is opposed to Divine purpose in a Christian’s life. ‘“ Chosen
thee to be a peculiar people unto Himself, above all the nations.” Here we
have Divine proprietorship and wonderful exaltation. To be filled with the
spirit and fashioned with the influence of the world is to lose sight of God’a
purpose in life and duty. Christians should be consecrated to God’s service,
acquire holy habits, and foster holy desires, hey are chosen and blessed to
set forth God’s glory—“ to shew forth the praises (virtues, excellences) of Him


who hath called you out of darkness (ignorance, sin and misery) into His
marvellous light” (1 Pet. ii. 9). on , y)


216


HOMILETICG COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OHaP, XIV.
Fee te ee ee


Wor.tpiy Sorrow.— Verses 1, 2,


“Man’s days are full of trouble from one source or another” (Job v. 7.)
“Sorrow is at once the lot, the trial, and the privilege of man,” says Helps.
But how different the spirit and the method of expressing it. Israel must not
mourn like other nations for the dead. Wordly sorrow is most unbecoming
in God’s people.


I. It is excessive in its nature. It is often assumed and unnatural, noisy
and passionate in demonstration. Heathens went to excess in their wild
paroxysms of grief. It was not the grief of civilisation and softness ; but the
grief of a savage and a child.


II. It is injurious in its results. It was common among Canaanites and
Pheenicians to cut themselves, Excitable nations of the east often made
hastly incisions on their faces, and in other parts of the body, with sharp
Instruments. The Persians, Abyssinians, Bedouins, and other races, still prac-
tide this. It was deemed a token of respect for the dead, and well-pleasing
to deities who presided over the grave. ‘I'he true Israelite is created in God’s
image and must not mourn thus. Human suffering and woe are not accept-
able to God. ‘That sorrow which leads to bodily injury and drives away from
God is the sorrow of Judas who hanged himself—a sorrow which results in no
amendment. “ For godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation not to be
repented of: but the sorrow of the world worketh death ” (2 Cor. vii. 10).


III. It is hopeless in its aim. It does not propitiate God, nor does it affect
the dead. The Christian is taught that God rules all events, Departed friends
not taken by chance or accident. ‘They are in the hands of God, and, if His
children, beyond the reach of harm. Through “the shadow of death” the
believer looks by faith. The “eternal night” of classic authors is illuminated
by the resurrection of Christ, who has “become the first fruits of them that
slept.” Jesus has “abolished death” (taken away its power, made it of no
effect) “and hath brought life and immortality ” (incorruptibility) ‘“ to light
through (by means of) the gospel” (2 ‘Tim. 1. 10). We can, therefore, see
through and beyond the grave—know our own lot and the lot of dear friends.
“T would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them which are
a that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope” (1 ‘Thess.
iv. 13


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Associated with great privileges and

destined to spread great principles.
Thy God, peculiarly thine as opposed

to every other. The object of thy


Vers. 1,2. Three great blessings.
1. Election, “chosen,” 2. Adoption,
“children.” 8. Sanctification, ‘ holy
people.”


Distinguished Marks, Distinguished,
1. By the grace of God which made
them. 2. By the Providence of God.
A herd of poor slaves could not have
gained their placeand constituted them-
selves into a nation. 3. By the laws
of God. Laws wiser than any other
nation. 4. By the purpose of Goa.
Separated from the rest of the world.


affection and trust (Pe. lxxiii, 24-28).
“God bases all the prescriptions of His
law, as the Great Lawgiver, on the
ground that those that were to obey
were his own chosen, beloved, redeemed,
aud sanctified people. He begins by
declaring first of all, their grand _re-
lationship to Him as the Lord their
God the King of Israel, “ a a by


OwaP, XIV.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





adopting love, “the children of the
Lord your God,” A Covenant God ;
yours because He has given Himself to
to you ; yours because ye have delib-
erately chosen Him ; and with a solemn
oath have promised, ‘ We will serve
the Lord our God.” Well, upon this
strong ground, this sure foundation,
as affectionate as it is sure, He says,
“you shall not imitate the heathen by


mourning for the dead as they mourn; ”
or transferred from Judaism to Chris-
tianity. “ You shall not weep for your
dead as others weep, who have no hope:
having a better, surer, nobler prospect,
alike of the state of the soul, and
the emergence from the grave of the
earthly shrine it has left behind it,”—
Dr, Cumming.


Gop’s Provision ron Man’s Tasir.—Verses 3-20,


Here we have regulations concerning animal food for the Israelites, and
cautions against defilement by contact with dead flesh, which they were not
permitted to eat. Substantially the restrictions are a repetition, with a little


variation of the rules given in Lev. xi.
these rules are full of instruction and me


for man’s table.


Though minute and apparently trivial


aning. ‘They set forth God’s provision


I, Provision, Divine in its source. Israel could not have procured it and
would not have known without Divine teaching what was good for them, We
can neither catch a fish nor shoot a bird without a Providence. We are


helpless and dependent as
recognise that power
Ps. Ixxviii, 19.


II. Provision good in quality.
specified. Not anything was to


servient to


Israel was, taught to pray for daily bread and to
which can “furnish a table in the wilderness”


Nothing unclean, nothing unwholesome, was
be eaten apt to stimulate gross and sensual
passions, or to foster coarse tastes and degrading habits.
sanitary and religious ends, and the food provided was suitable
and distinct from that of idolatrous nations,
best for the purpose. They were thu


The laws were sub-


Divine wisdom decided what was


8 preserved in health and vigour, and


ceremonially kept from the taint of death.


III, Provisions abundant in quantity. There was no stint in beasts, birds


or fish. ‘The articles of food were
where.
and promote our


grateful to
(1 Tim. vi. 17). For aman ma
want nothing, “ yet God giveth


nutritious and abundant. God’s legislation
for our lower reminds of His care for our higher nature.


There is no lack any-


Temporally and spiritually, means are provided to satisfy our wants
appiness. Let us remember our Benefactor, for Henry says,
that we cannot put a morsel of food into our mouths till God
hands—discern kindness not only im


uts it into our


rescribing, but in prohibiting, and be


“the living God who giveth us richly all things to enjoy.”
be blessed with riches, wealth, and honour ;
im not power to eat thereof.” (Ecc. vi. 2).


Tovonine tHe UnctEan.— Verses 8, 21.


By eating creatures that are unclean, which are described as “ abominable,”


the people made themselves abominable
to abstain from objects of defilememen


God.
I. Defilement is easy.


and repulsive,
t which rob of holy communion with


Involuntary


Hence the admonition


or accidental contact was enough. It


was difficult, if not impossible to avoid the touch. So with the attractions


218


—


*


= ae


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ‘DEUTERONOM Y. OHAP. XIV.
eee


and sins of “this present world.” Because it is near and present, it affects
the senses, influences the mind, and directs the life. ‘Touch not, taste not,
handle not” its pleasures.


II. Defilement is serious in its consequences. It interrupted fellowship with
God and excluded from the sanctuary for a time. It prohibited the touch of
sacred things and all intercourse with the legally clean. What a type of sin
in polluting the sonl and excluding from heaven. ‘This ye know, that no
Tigo Dt tan hath any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.”

p v. 5).


III. Defilement must be avoided by strenuous effort. This rule necessitated
Israel to pay great attention to cleanliness, personal and national. “Touch
not—eat not.” If there were no touching there would be no eating, no par-
ticipation. (Eve and Achan). Daniel refused the food from the king’s table.
Entire separation is enjoined. Watch, pray and keep your garments unspotted
from the world. ‘Come out from among them, and be ye separate saith the
Lord (separated, Hos, iv. 17), and touch not the (any) unclean thing.”
(2 Cor. vi. 17).


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 4. These and these only. 1, try and vice. It kept them distinct


That ye may be at mine appointment
for your very meat, as chief Lord of
all. 2. That there may be a differ-
ence betwixt you and all other people,
8. That ye may be taught to study
purity, and know that the very crea-
tures are defiled by man’s sin. 4. That
ye may have these things as “a shadow
of things to come” (Col. ii. 16, 17).—
Trapp ; Lev. wi.


Ver. 6. Cheweth cud. In this com-
bination of parting the hoof and chew-
ing the cud, the union of two moral
and spirital qualities is supposed to
be spiritualised, viz., sure walking in
the way of God’s laws (Rom. ii. 18;
ili, 20-22 ; Gal. ii. 12-14; Ep. v. 15)
and meditation upon it (Ps. i. 2).—
Wordsworth. The hearer of God’s
word ought to be like those animals
that chew the cud; he ought not only
to feed upon it, but to ruminate upon
it (St. Aug. on Ps. 46). Clean and
unclean. 1. A Sanatary enactment.
Unclean were most unhealthy in warm
climates, and even now their flesh is
not considered wholesome and nutri-
tious. 2. An argument for separa-
tion. The distinction in meats would
prevent intercourse with heathen
nations, and contamination with idola-


and peculiar, and raised an impass-
able barrier to evil customs—a barrier
stronger than difference of creed, di-
versity of language, and system of
olity. Christians must stand and
ive apart from worldly maxims and
customs. 38. A type of holy life. The
injunction to abstain from unclean
meats was a symbol of the holiness
and purity that became them as
eople of God. It set forth that
ingdom which “is not meat and
drink ; but righteousness, and peace,
and joy in the Holy Ghost” (Rom.
xiv. 17). “'The ordinance of Moses
was for the whole nation. It was not
like the Egyptian law, intended for
priests alone; nor like the Hindoo
law, binding only on the twice-born
Brahmin ; nor like the Parsee law, to
be apprehended and obeyed only by
those disciplined in spiritual matters.
It was a law for the people, for every
man, woman, and child of the race
chosen to be “a kingdom of priests,
an holy nation” (Ex. xix. 6). It was
to be one of the foreshadows of the
higher spiritual quality, of the better
seed of Abraham, which was, in later
ages, pronounced “a chosen genera-
tion, a royal priesthood, an_ holy
nation, a peculiar people” ‘1 Pet
21


CHAP. XIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





ii.'9 3 cf. In lxi 6 1 Cor. x. 17).—
Speak. Com.


Vers. 8-20. In this provision of
food we see—l. A mark of divine
condescension. If kings levislated for
the diet of their people, is it beneath
the King of Israel to appoint the food


equal ignorance, great and weighty
things.” 2. A proof of divine bene
volence. It is kind to provide at all,
But what thought indicated, in the
choice of animals which multiplied
slowly, which were not difficult to ob-
tain, found without leaving the camp,
and without danger and contact with


heathens around them. All this in-


for bis chosen people? “All that we
: tended to reclaim and bless !


know of God,” says Dr. Cumming,
“in creation, in providence, in re-
demption, leads us to see that He
takes as much care of what the world
calls, in its ignorance, little things, as
He does of what the world thinks, in


In ev’ry way, in every sense,
Man is the care of Providence 3
And whenso’er he goeth wrong,
The errors to himself belong.

8. Burize,


SzetHinea a Krwv.— Verse 21.


This injunction is here repeated, and must therefore be of some importance
(of. Ex. xxiii. 19, xxxiv. 26). He may view it—


I, Asa protest against superstition. The repetition immediately after
directions concerning the first fruits of harvest, indicates specific reference to
heathen custom. Idolators at the end of harvest seethed a kid in its mother’s
milk and sprinkled the broth as a magical charm on fields and gardens, to make
them more productive. Israel must not imitate this custom. None of the gods
can send the shower and fertilize the earth. “He causeth the grass to grow for
cattle, and herb for the service of man.”


Il, £8 a law of humanity. There was great cruelty in making the milk of
the mother, intended for the sustenance of the kid, the means of its destruction.
Some have called this prohibition “au excess of legislative refinement,” but in
whatever light we look at this custom, it had an appearance of barbarity. “ This
was @ gross and unwholesome dish, calculated to kindle up animal and feroeious
passions, and on this account, as well as its barbarity, Moses may have forbidden
it.” “The dark places of the earth are full of the habitations of cruelty ‘unjust
vtolence,’ ‘homesteads of violence.’ ”—Kay. (Ps. lxxiv. 20.) But the religion
of the Bible is humane (¢f Lev. xxii. 28; Deut. xxii. 16 ; xxv. 4.) [ational
creatures must be treated kindly, and we must shun everything that blunts our
worst sensibilities. If God has tender care for animals so should we have. “A
righteous man regardeth the life of his beast; but the tender mercies of the
wicked are cruel.” (Prov, xii. 10.)


I would not enter on my list of friends,

(Tho’ graced with polished manners and fine sense,
Yet wauting sensibility), the man

Who needlessly seta foot upon a worm.—Cowper.


Tue Depication or Taz Tuntu.— Verses 22, 23 ; 28, 29.


A tithing of the produce of cultivated ground and the firstling of herds and
flocks were brought to the sanctuary every year. Here a sacrifice meal was
prepared for Israel and their households that they might rejoice before the Lord
and learn to fear Him always.

220


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY. CHAP. XIV.





I. To meet the claims of God. There must be devout acknowledgment of God
as the source of all mercies, without whose care the earth would not yield its
produce, nor the flocks their increase, Corn, wine and oil come from Him. In
every department of life we must recognise His rights, The seventh of our
time, the first fruits of the field and the first-born of the family, the revenues of
the family and the Church should be given to him as Owner and Proprietor of
all things. ‘Well may we think our substance due when we owe ourselves,”
gays Bp. Hall,


II. To support the works of piety. The claims of creative right have
strengthened by the infinite price of the Redeemer’s blood. Apart from what
is applied to personal, tamily and civil uses, some portion, if not a tenth, is
required for worship, evangelisation and humanity. 1. Aeligiously. he
ministers and ordinances of God’s house must be upheld. Contributions are

ut upon the principle of willing gifts, rather than of stipulated demands.

hough God commanded Israel to bring their offerings, no law compelled the
disobedient. ‘Thus we are treated with confidence and consideration. God
honours men by permitting them to expend their treasures and skill on sacred
edifices and to render solemn worship to Him. 2. Socially. “he Levite and
the stranger and the fatherless and the widow shall come and shall eat and be
satisfied.” In works of charity we gladden others. The helpless and fatherless
roust never be forgotten. Real generosity is the surest way of thriving. He
that gives shall receive, and he that scatters shall increase. The liberal soul
shall be made fat. ‘‘ Honour the Lord with thy substance, and with the first
fruits of all thine increase; so shall thy barn be filled with plenty, and thy
presses shall burst out with new wine.” (Prov. iii. 9, 10).


Systematic Provision ror BENEFICENT WORK.


On this subject we may collect and arrange a few thoughts from a pamphlet
by the Rev. John Ross. Such provision is—


I. The duty of God’s people. In Jewish law God claimed tithes and gifts for
the worship of the sanctuary and the necessities of the poor. Conspicuous
features of these demands are—the priority of God’s claim—that provision for it
be made before man’s self-enjoyment, that it bear some suitable proportion to
the Divine glory and grace, and that for fulness and power, system is esseutial ;
é.¢., that the work of God be provided for before man’s indulgence. (Lev. xix ;
Num. xviii; Deut. xiv). The New Testament has also its plan of meeting God’s
claim, containing the same elements of priority, certainty, proportion and
system. See 1 Cor. xvi. 2, sustained and illustrated by the weighty arguments
and motives of 2 Cor. chaps. viii., ix.


II. The Financial Law of Christ. Christ is sole King in His Church. The
constitution of this church is Christian, not Jewish. The apostle Paul was the
organiser of churches, and the first epistle to the Corinthians is the great Church
organising epistle. In its closing chapter the apostle institutes a system of
finance. ‘This system bears the character of an authoritative and repeated law.
“ As I have given order to the Churches of Galatia, even so do ye.” ‘Tlie method
taught by the apostle to provide the revenues of the Church is an expansion of
Jewish and Pentecostal church systems, an example for us, an implied and in-
ferential obligation sustained by cumulative and presumptive argument. New
Testament institutions are not given with Sinaitic form and severity. They
meet us as sacred provisions for urgent occasions. They appeal to a willing
heart more than to a legal mind. Christ rules in love, but His will should not
have less authority or constraining power on that account. (Jno. dy


OHAP, XIV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONONY.





III. The necessity cf the Age. The present age needs loftiness of aim,
seriousness of feeling and ardour of devotion. Faithful consecration of substance
to God, elevated by Christian love to a financial rule of life, would nourish every
moral and spiritual principle in the soul. Storing the Lord’s portion is the
necessity of the age, from its tendency. 1. To check the idolatry of money and
to strengthen the love of God in the heart. 2. To meet adequately the demands
of religion and humanity. 3. To exhibit the power and beauty of godliness.
By a warm Christian liberality—by asserting the supremacy of, and providing
for, things spiritual and eternal. By fostering simplicity of life and personal
fidelity to God. By liberally sustaining the honour ‘of Christ in the sight of
men.


Diving Consiperation or Human Crrcumstances.— Verses 24, 25,


In the land of Canaan, however, where the people would be scattered over a
great extent of country, there would be many for whom the fulfilment of this
command would be very difficult—would in fact appear almost impossible.
To meet this difficulty, permission was given for those who lived at a great
distance from the sanctuary to sell the tithes at home, provided they could
not convey them in kind, and then to spend the money so obtained in the
purchase of the things required for the sacrificial meals at the place of the
sanctuary.—Delitzsch. Here we have—


I. Divine knowledge of man’s circumstances. “If the place be too far
for thee.” God knows our distance from his house—the effort and strength
required to get there, “ if the way be too long for thee,” and the very street
aud honse in which we dwell. ‘The street called straight, and the house of
Judas.” (Acts 9,11; 10, 6). God’s knowledge of human actions and human
life in all departments is perfect. He is everywhere present to discern and
observe our physical and moral condition, His omniscience extends to all
space, and to all creatures.


II. Divine Provision for Man’s Future. This arrangement was made in
anticipation of settlement in Canaan. Thus God’s providence goes before us
in life, The real meaning of providence is to see to provide beforehand (pro
and vides). “ God’s providence is mine inheritance,” says one. He anticipates
our difficulties and wants, and makes provision beforehand for every exigency.
Pn aay preventest (goes before) him with the blessings ot goodness.”

8, Xxl, 3). i


III. Divine tenderness for Man’s welfare. God seems to consult man’s con-
venience, does not rigidly exact what he cannot give or do. He is no hard
taskmaster, but reasonable in demands (Mat. xxv. 4). We see accommodation
to circumstances in the law of sacrifice (Lev. v. 7), in rules for commutation
(Lev. 27), and in relaxation of injunctions concerning meat (Deut. xii. 21).
The spirit of the command is more important than the letter. For if there be
first a willing mind it is accepted, according “to that a man hath, and not
according to that a man hath not.” (2 Cor. viii. 12).


Cuanity at Homn.— Verses 28, 29.


Every third year the tithe was to be devoted to works of charity at home
“ Lay it up within thy gates.”
222


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY. CHAP. XIV.





I. Dispensed to the needy. Widows and orphans, helpless and forsaken, are
real objects of charity. ‘To visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction ”
isa part of New Testament religion. (Jas. i. 27). Our guests are to be invited
from the ranks of the poor. ‘ When thou makest a dinner or supper call not
thy friends, lest they bid thee again ; but the poor, the maimed, for they cannot
recompense thee,” (Lev. xiv. 12-14).


II. Dispensed in a spirit of gratitude. The rich should be thankful to be
able to give, and the poor grateful to receive. God gives no scanty measure to
us. Increase of family and of stock, corn and wine in rich abundance. We
should cherish a deep sense of our unworthiness, a constant dependence upon
the Divine bounty, and to feel that we are the stewards only of the treasures
which heaven has put into our hands. ‘“ Who amJI and what is my people,
that we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort? for all things come of
Thee, and of thine own have we given hee.”


III. Dispensed under the blessing of God. “That the Lord thy God may
bless thee.” We better enjoy what we have by sharing it with others. There
is exquisite delight in acts of kindness, That which is cordially devoted to the
cause of God and the benefit of man, lives, in its blessed influence, in human
hearts—in immortal fruits—of earthly virtues, in perpetual memorial before
God and in eternal harvest of joy. ‘‘ What I saved I lost; what I spent
I had ; what I gave I have,” said J. J. Gurney. “It is more blessed te give
than to receive.”


Man is God’s image: but a poor man is

Ci:rist’s stamp to boot. Both images regard,
God reckons for him; counts the favour His.

Write “So much given to God.” Thou shalt be heard,
Let thy alms go before, and keep heaven’s gate :
Open for thee; or both may come too late.

Hxgness,
HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS,


Ver. 21. Holy people. He hath
severed you from the mass of the pro-
fane world, and picked you out to be
jewels for Himself; He hath set you
apart for this end, that you may be
holy to Him, as the Hebrew word that
signifies holiness imports setting apart,
or fitting for a peculiar use; be not
then untrue to his design, He hath not
called you to uncleanness, but unto
holiness (1 Thes. iv. 7). Therefore be
ye holy. It is sacrilege for you to dis-
pose of yourselves after the impure
manner of the world, and to apply

ourselves to any profane use, whom
bod hath consecrated to Himself.—
Abp. Leighton.


Ver. 23. The Lord thy God. “This
is very emphatic, expressive not only
of a truth, but of a privilege, and of
@ special privilege. tt imports more


than some who have been denominated
rational divines are willing to allow—
not simply that Jehovah is our Creator,
Preserver, and Sovereign, our Pro-
tector, the object of our worship, of
our supreme love and adoration ; but
properly, that he is our portion by
a peculiar covenant relation. As an
evidence of this, it deserves to be re-
marked, that He never proclaims Him-
self nor is He ever styled in Scripture,
“the God of Angels.” It must be by
virtue of some spiritual transaction,
such as never took place with angela,
and in which they have no share, that
He proclaims Himself our God—all
that God or Deity can be to us.”


Ver. 22. The law of the tithe. 1. A
Divine apointment. 2. A rule of
Christian liberality. ‘‘ All the tithe of
the land, whether of the oe of the


OHAP. XIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


ae  ,


land, or the fruit of the tree is the
Lords; it is Holy unto the Lord.”
Lev. xxvii. 30 (cf 2 Chron. xxxi.
5, 6, 12, Neh. xiii. 12).

Consecrated Funds—how secured ;
how applied; what results from the
application.


Vers. 21, 26, 27. Social joy tn
sacrificial meals, 1. Its nature “be-
fore the Lord.” In His presence,
under His control, and bestowed by
His mercy. ‘The joy of the Lord.”
“True joy is a serious thing,” says
Bonar. 2. Its participators. Levites,
strangers, fatherless and widows (ver.
29), representatives of God. “God
hath left His poor saints to receive
His rents.”—Gurnall, 3, Lts aim.
Not for mere display nor popularity.


ILLUSTRATIONS


Ver. 1. Shall not. The Christian
must not attempt to go with the
current of a sinful world; if he does,
it will not only hinder, but end his
religious progress; but he must go
against it, and then every effort of his
soul will surely be upward, heaven-
ward, Godward.— Dr. Davies.


Ver. 2. Holy people. When courtiers
come down into the country, the com-
mon home-bred people possibly think
their habits strange; but they care
not for that. “It is the fashion at
court.” What need then have the
Godly to be so tender-foreheaded, to
be out of countenance because the
world looks on holiness as a singu-
larity? It is the only fashion in the
highest court — yea of the King of
Kings, Himself.—sSalter.


Vers. 3-20. /vat. Our nature is so
intensely symbolical, that where the
outward sign of defilement becomes
habitual, the innuer is too apt to
correspond. —(J/rs Stowe). Clean,
Not only man had become unclean,
but the irrational creation as well. Sin
struck the universe with leprosy to its
very heart. Neither four-footed beast,

224


(a) To sanctify home joy. “ That
mayest learn to fear the Lord thy
God. (6) To secure God’s favour,
“That the Lord may bless thee.” “A
kind action is never lost.” ‘Kind aess
begets kindness.” ‘He that hath pity
upon the poor lendeth unto the Lord ;
and that which he hath given will He
pay him again” (Prov. xix. 17).


The conscientious dis-
charge of religious duty. 1. God will
have no excuses for disobedience. 2.
He makes provision against difficulties
in the path of obedience. 3. The
spirit of the law may be observed
when obedience to the letter is im-
possible, ‘This is accepted as a real
and full obedience.— Lib, S/useum,


Vers. 24-29,


TO CHAPTER XIV.


nor bird, nor reptile, escaped the con-
tagion, The animal creation, therefore,
needs to be made clean. Nowa certain
portion of the human world—the
Hebrew nation—has been made clean
unto God ; but the clean nation must
have clean food. Behold, then, a small
proportion of the ratioual and ir-
rational creation made clean by the
establishinent of the kingdom of God;
the remainder of the world, however,
continues still in its impurity. But
the Gospel undertakes the task of
cleansing the whole universe.—Cynd-
dyhan Jones.


Ver. 9. Fins and scales are the
means by which the excrescences of
fish are carried oft, the same as in
animals by perspiration. I have never
known an instance of disease by eat-
ing such fish ; but those that have no
fins or scales cause, in hot climates,
the most malignant disorders when
eaten ; in many cases they prove a
mortal poison.— Whitlaw.


Ver. 20. All clean. The good things
of Providence may be considered as
having this inscription, accipe, redde,
cavé, that is, “accept us as from God


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY DEUTERONOMY


F ee


_ return us in gratitude to. him, and
take care not to abuse us.”— Wilson.


Ver. 21. Stranger in gate. We read
in our chronicles of King Oswald, that
as le sat at table when a fair silver
dish, full of regal delicacies was set
before him, and he ready to fall to,
hearing from his almoner that there
were great store of poor at his gates,
piteously crying out for some relief, he
did not fill them with words, as “‘ God
help them,” “ God relieve them !” ete.,
but commanded his steward presently
to take the dish off the table and dis-
tribute the meat, then beat the dish all
in pieces and cast it among them.—
Holdsworth.


Vers. 22-27. Tithe. It is said of
Dr. Samuel Wright that his charity
was condacted upon rule; for which
purpose he kept a purse, in which was
found this memorandum :—“ Some-


CHAP, Xv


thing from all the money I receive ta
be put into this purse for charitable
puposes. From my salary as minister,
which is uncertain, a tenth part—from
occasional and extraordinary gifts,
which are more uncertain, a twentieth
part—from copy money of things ]
print and interest of my estate, a
seventh part.”-— Buck.


Ver. 29. The Lord thy God. A
friend calling upon the Rev. Ebenezer
Erskine, during his last illness, said to
him, “Sir, you have given us many
good advices, pray what are you now
doing with your own soul?” “Tam
doing with it,” said he, “ what I did
forty years ago; I am resting on that
word, ‘J am the Lord thy God,’ and
on this I mean to die.”


Should boundless wealth increase my store,
Can wealth my cares beguile ?

I should be wretched still, and poor,
Witbout thy blissful smile,


CHAPTER XV.


Carrioat Norzs.—The rules for the relicf of the poor (Levites, strangers, widows, and
orphans) by the triennial tithe are followed by others which forbid oppression,


1. Seven years. During the last of the seven, te. Sabbatical year (Ex. xxi. 25 xxviii. 11 ;
Lev. xxv. 4; Jer. xxxiv. 14). Release, let go, let lie applied to land (Ex. xxxiii. 11), and must


be taken in the same sense here.


“The conumand of the older legislation is here amplified,


Not only is the land to have its ‘ release’ or ‘rest’ for the year, but the debt also.”


2, Manner, ef. chap. xix. 4; 1 Kings ix. 15. Creditor. Master, i.e, owuer of a loan, tha
lender, Release it, not by absolute discharge of the debt, but the payment was not to be
pressed that year, during which there was total suspension of land cultivation. Exact, dit., press


or urge his neighbour to pay. Brother.


Called, render “because proclamation has been made of the Lord’s release,’


An Israelite in opposition to a stranger or foreigner,


(Speak. Com.)


The v-rb is impersonal (“they call”), as Gen. xi 9; xvi 14. The Sabbatical year, like the
year of Jubilee, was proclaimed for Jehovah, in honour of Him, sanctified to Him, and according


to His command,


3. Foreigner.


Not one who lived among the Israelites, for whom they must have pity ; but


a stranger of another nation not related to them at all, one who was not bound by this restriction
and who could earn income in the seventh as in other years,


4. Save. The debt for the year must be released except when there would be no poor
borrower. If he was rich, the restoration of the loan might be demanded even in this year.


The murgi
distress.
specially bless the land.


5. Only if they were obedient.


n “to the end that there be no poor,” etc.—that none be reduced to poverty and
Bless, The creditor would be no loser by not exacting his debt, for God would


6, Lend. Remarkably fulfilled in Jewish history. Reign, rale, because supvrior in wealth


(of. xxviii. 1).


P 225


OHAP. XV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





7-11. The foregoing laws might operate to the disadvantage of the poor in seeking relief.
Moses exhorts them not to cherish a mean and selfish spirit, but give liberally and God will
bless them,


7%. Harden. Do not suppress natural feeling and compassion,
8, Sufficient. Whatever he needs.


9, Thought, lit. a word of Belial or worthlessness in thy heart, by saying the seventh year is
at hand; I shall not be able to demand what I lend. Evil, t.¢., thou cherishest ill feeling
(cf. xxviii. 54, 56). Lord against, brings down anger upon thee.


11. Never cease, for sin never ceases, Poverty permitted partly as punishment of sin, and
partly to exercise benevolent and charitable feelings.


12-18. Hebrew servants’ freedom. Provisions for the poor are followed naturally by rules for
the manumission of Hebrew slaves.

12, Sold. “The last extremity of an insolvent debtor when his house or land was not sufficient
to cancel his debt, was te be sold asa slave with his family ” (Lev. xxv. 39; 2 Kings iv. 13
Neh. v. 1-13; Job xxiv. 9; Matt. xviii. 25). These commands are repeated from Ex. xxi. 2-6,
with explanations characteristic of Deut.


13,14, Empty. This an addition. Liberal provision must be made to aid in regaining
original status in society. Furnish, lit, lay on his neck, é.¢., load him. For they were once
redeemed from slavery.


15,16. Ifhesay, The slave might choose to remain with his master instead of going inte
freedom ; then he was not forced to go.


17. His ear must be bored with an awl, and fastened to the door—a symbol of permanent
servitude (¢f. Ex. xxi. 4-6), If a slave determines to have freedom, it must not be considered
hard.


18. He has been worth a double-hired servant—“ earned and produced so much, that if you
had been obliged to keep a day-labourer in his place it would have cost you twice as much.”
(Kel.) He had been without wages for a fixed time, whereas hired servants were engaged
yearly (Lev. xxv. 53), at most for three years (Isa. xvi. 14).


19-23. Dedication of the firstborn of cattle. Firstling, the firstborn, was dedicated to God as
® memorial of deliverance from Egypt, virtually sanctified the whole (Rom. xi. 16), and was a
pietae to all the people of their national union with Him (Ex. xxiii. 80; Lev. xxii. 27).

o work. The injunction is added that animals thus set apart were not to be used for earthly
purposes, by shearing sheep or yoking bullocks to the plough. They were to be offered year by
year and eaten before the Lord. {f any were blemished, blind or lame they must not be
offered (ver. 21); but might, like ordinary animals, be used for food, and could be eaten in all
cities of the land.


Tae YEAR or RevEeasr.— Verses 1-7


In this legislation we have wonderful provision for the convenience ot Israel,
and striking contrast between the wisdom, equity, and mercy of the Hebrew
lawgiver and the highest pagan laws, Every seventh year was a year of release,
in which the ground rested from culture and the servants freed from debt.


I, The persons to be released. The Sabbatic year was a year of great
relief, therefore indicating great distress. The subjects requiring help are des-
cribed in various terms. 1. Foreigners not to be discharged. 'l'hey were out-
side this arrangement, A stranger from another nation, distinguished from
one who lived among them and had claim to benevolence, had no right to
remission and privileges. This gives protection to an Israelite and displays no
hatred or injustice to a foreigner. “He could earn his usual income in the
seventh as in other years, and therefore is not exonerated from liability to dis-
charge a debt any more in the one than the others.” “Of a foreigner thou


mayest Aah it,” 2. Neighbours must be released. “He shall not exact it


a ae


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY, CHAP, XV,
eee


of his neighbour or of his brother.” Fellow-Israelites were members of one
society and regarded as a “common brotherhood,” a type of “the household
of faith,” enjoying equal rights and privileges; sharing that divine love which
embraces all and offers pardon to all. 3. These neighbours are described as
debtors. ‘‘ Every creditor that lendeth to his neighbour ”—the poor borrowed
not for trade nor extravagance, but for subsistence. He could not pay without
reducing himself to poverty, or seeking relief in other countries which would
be wrong. Kindness must be shown by the lender and gratitude by the borrower,
The rich are indebted to the poor as well as the poor dependent upon the rich.
God has bound all classes into one family,


II. Tne reasons for releasing them. Several considerations urge obedience
to this law. 1. Zhe honour of God is concerned. “ Because it is the Lord’s
release.” God claims regard to His authority, and acknowledgment of His provi-
dence. We depend upon Him and hold all property from Him. Release of
debts was an act for God, the poorest sacrifice, the meanest labour offered to
Him are sacred. Purity of motive dignifies toil and renders benevolent acts
acceptable to God. 2. Lzxtreme poverty was prevented. “To the end there
shall be no more poor among you” (margin, ver. 4). Exaction of debts would
have reduced many to great straits at a time when there was no labour nor
produce. Poverty would be a reproach to the nation and the destruction of its

eople. The Great Shepherd of Israel considers the poorest of His flock, and
Bke a king protects those who dwell under His shadow. “ In the multitude of
people is the king’s honour ; but in the want of people is the destruction of the
prince” (Prov. xiv. 28). 3. The favour of God was secured. “ For the Lord
shall bless thee” (ver. 4). They would lose nothing by obedience, God would
grant a special blessing on the land. Selfishness evades obligation under cover
of prudence. But what we give is a loan to the Lord, who pays again with
interest. He gives security in His word which can never fail. ‘lhough He is
indebted to none, but has a right to all, yet He condescends to be surety for the
poor and debtor to His true Helper. “ He that hath pity upon the poor, lendeth
unto the Lord; and that which he hath given will He pay him again” (Prov.
xix. 17).


Tae RestRaints o” Orpression.— Verses 7-11.


The previous injunctions might prevent the poor from getting loans.
Creditors might take advantage and become exacting towards the borrower.
Moses admonishes them not to be hard-hearted and oppressive, but to cherish
a spirit of charity and act with liberality. We have safeguards against
oppression, checks upon selfishness and rapacity.


I. By Providential Interpesition. “The Lord’s release,” which no authority


could prevent. In this seventh year there was rest for the soil, pause in the


race for wealth, and protection for the poor. In national and domestic affairs
God often interferes. ‘Tyrants upon the throne, and tormentors in the cottage,
are restrained, delayed and frustrated in their design. In the ambition of Lot
and the aggressions of Nebuchadnezzar, in the bondage of Egypt, and the
revolutions of France, we had sad warnings against covetousness and haste to
be rich. Grasping by unjust means will end in shame and fill with the curse of
an avenging God.
The cries of orphans and the oppressor’s eye


Doth reach the stars.—Dryden.
227


CHAP, XV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


es,


II. By the enforcement of liberality. ‘Thou shalt open thine hand wide
unto him” (verse 8). The claims of poorer brethren were to be generously
and gladly met. The evasion of this duty was a sinful violation of the spirit of the
law (verse 9). It was designed to restrain the selfishness of the creditor aud
prevent him from pressing too hard upon the weak. ‘“ The rich ruleth over the
poor” too often in harshness (Prov. xxii. 7), Man becomes an alien to his
brother, the victim of his meanness, not the object of his sympathy. The
warnings of God’s word and providence are loud and repeated. “ Whoso
atoppeth his ears at the ery of the poor, he shall also cry himself but shall not
be heard ” (Prov. xxi. 13).


III. By the cultivation of kindly feelings. “Beware that there be not a
thought in thy wicked heart” (verse 9). We must not only bestow the gift, but .
cherish right feeling. It is possible to “give all our goods to feed the poor,”
without one atom of true charity of heart (1 Cor. xiii. 3). “ Bowels of mercies
and kindness ” must be the mark and source of our liberality (express yearnings
which touch our inward parts—Gen xiii. 30; Jer. xxxi. 20 ; Luke i. 78)
(Col. iii. 12). We should think, feel, and act as God does, who is “ pitiful and
of tender mercy.”


Wilt thou draw near the nature of the gods?
Draw near them, then, in being merciful :
Sweet mercy is nobility’s true badge.—Shakspeare.


CONSIDERATION OF THE Poor.— Verses 9-11.


Society is separated into distinct classes, yet bound together into one
harmonious whole. If rich and poor would each do their duty in their stations,
they would become reciprocally a blessing and support to the other. Special
consideration must be given to the poor. For—


I. The oppression of the poor is offensive to God. “And he cry unto the
Lord against thee, and it be a sin unto thee.” God identifies Himself with their
condition and cause, and sets infinite value upon every man. All are equal
before Him. “There is no respect of persons before God.” Rigorous measures
and harshness were distinctly forbidden, and grievously offensive to God
(Lev. xxv. 39-43).


II, The ery of the poor is heard by God. “He cry unto the Lord.” The
sufferings of the distressed have a thousand tongues and appeal direct to God.
The law condemned robbery for a single night (Lev. xix. 13), uttered woe
against him “ that useth his neighbour’s service without wages ” (Jer. xxii. 13) ;
and fearful judgement fell upon those who “ oppressed the hireling in his wages’
(Mal. iii. 5). “Lhe hire of labourers kept back by fraud crieth, aud the cries —
enter the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth” (Jas, v. 4).


III. Liberality to the poor will be rewarded by God. “For this thing the
Lord will bless thee in all thy works ” (verse 10). Whatsover is done to poor
disciples is done to their Master—“ Ye have done it unto me” and will in no
wise loose its reward. “ Liberality,” Says one, ‘is the most beneficial traffic
that can be—it is bringing our wares to the best market—it is letting out our
money into the best hands, we thereby lend our money to God, who repays with
vast usury; an hundred to one is the rate He allows at present, and above a
hundred millions to one He will render hereafter (Luke 18-30). “ Blessed is he
that considereth the poor.”

228


i.
*


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


OHAP. XV.





HOMILETIC HINTS AND 8UGGESTIONS.


Ver. 2. The Lord’s release. 1.
Devised by His wisdom. 2. Revealing
his goodness and grace. 3. 'I'ypifying
“the acceptable year of the Lord”
(Luke iv. 19).


Ver. 6. Lending and borrowing.
1. Some borrow and are never able to
lend. 2. Others borrow and forget to
pay back. 3. He that borrows is ser-
vant to him that lends (Prov. xxii. 7).
He must be dependent and often, too,
servile. Try not to borrow at all.
“He that goes a borrowing goes a
sorrowing.” Owe no man anything
butlove. “Guard against that poverty
which is the result of carelessness or
extravagance. Pray earnestly, labour
diligently. Should you come to poverty
by the misfortunes of the times, submit
to your lot humbly, bear it patiently,
cast yourself in childlike dependence
upon your God.’—(Geier on Prov.
xxii. 7).


Vers. 7,8. Hand and heart. The
heart hardened shuts the hand and the
poor suffer. ‘he heart smpathethic
opens the hands and the poor are
relieved. The hand the expression of
the heart. “My hand of iron,” said
Napoleon, “was not at the extremity
of my arm, it was imme:liately con-
nected with my head.” “He becometh
poor that dealeth with a slack (a deceit-
ful) hand” (Prov. x. 4).


Vers. 7-10. The claims of the poor
upon the rich. 1. Claims of help in
their poverty. 2. Claims of sympathy
in distress. Triple Almoners—the
feeling heart, the helping hand, the
pure eye. “He can never keep his
covenant with his God that makes not
® covenantwithhis eyes,”"—Bp. Hall.


Ver. 11. Poor shall never cease out
of the land. 1. The inequalities of
life. Physically we have a thousand
varieties, and all possible contrasts.
Mentally there are feevle-minded and
strong-minded giants and dwarfs,
Socially one lives in luxury and
clothed with fine linen, another is
covered with sores and clad in rags.
2. The appointment of Providence.
We have the poor, notwithstanding our
legislation, “ poor laws,” and “ alms-
houses.” ‘Ye have the poor always
with you.” 3. Te bond to unite
men together. Inequalities serve to
bind men one to another. The man
of labour needs the man of capital,
and the man of capital the man of
labour. ‘The man who sets class
against class and teaches them to
regard each other with suspicion and
ill-will is an enemy to society. “The
Lord,” says Bp. Sanderson, “in His
wise providence, hath so disposed the
kings of the world that there should
ever be some rich to relieve the neces-
sities of the poor, and some poor to
exercise the charity of the rich.”
“There were two men in one city,
the one rich and the other poor”
(2 Sam. xii. 1)


Duty of the Church towards the poor,
Consider—I. That poverty is a real
evil, which without any impeachment
of the goodness or wisdom of Provi-
dence, the constitution of the world
actually admits. II. That providential
appointment of this evil, is subservience
to the general good, brings a particular
obligation upon men in civilised society,
to concur for the immediate extinction
of the evil wherever it appears.—Bp.
Horsley.


Tur LIBERATION OF SLaves.— Verses 12-17.


Slavery existed among the Hebrews in a totally distinct spirit aud method
from modern slavery. Human traffic and human cruelty were punished and
forbidden (cf. Ex. xxi. 26; Lev. xxv. 39-43), servitude was limited in time


229


OHAP. XV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


PRS ee


and relieved by a spirit of generosity. Beyond six years’ service a Jewish
bondman need not go. The Sabbatic year brought liberty, if he thought fit
to claim it. Provision was not only made for the forgiveness of debts, but
for the freedom of debtors. There was personal release, hence learn—


I. The infinite value God sets upon man. Kidnapping was a most atrocious
crime in the time of Moses. In Egypt, bloody wars were carried on for that
purpose, and in heathen countries slaves offered for sale were obtained in this
way. Kidnapping is a crime against the person only a little short of murder,
since it deprives of liberty, which makes life dear. Many would prefer death
to slavery, It is a calamity most terrible, inflicting misery for life. “The
sum of all villainies,” says Wesley. God has made man in His own image, and
exalted him above the brutes. The poorest and most enslaved are stamped
with divine value. He that diminishes this value and looks upon his fellow
men as “goods and chattels,” he that mutilates or injures them will be
amenable to “the Judge of all.”


II. The wonderful provision God has made for man’s freedom. Freedom is
the birthright of man; it should neither be bartered nor taken away by violence,
If lost at any time through temporary causes, it must not be forgotten nor
destroyed. In these demands for the rights of slaves we see the wisdom of the
Divine Lawgiver, the rectitude of His laws, and the natural rights of His
creatures, We are reminded also of provision in Jesus Christ, not from
temporal but spiritual bondage—a provision (1) universal, (2) free, and (3)
divine, “He hath anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor, deliverance
to the captives,” etc. (Luke iv. 18, 19).


III. The true spirit with which this freedom must be granted. The value
of a gift often depends upon the spirit in which it is bestowed. 1. The spirit
of love. “'Thy brother.” We must forgive, love, and help as brethren. “ All
things are easy to love,” says Augustine. When Achilles was asked what
works he found most easy, he answered, “Those which ] undertake for my
friends.” 2. The spirit of forgiveness. However great the loan or debt, it
must be forgiven. “'I'he highest exercise of charity is charity towards the
uncharitable, (Buckminster.) 8. The spirit of liberality. Liberality
ungrudging. “'lhine heart shall not be grieved” (verse 10); disinterested, “open
thine hand wide ;” extensive, “lend him sufficient for his need ” (verse 8),
“The liberal deviseth liberal things; and by liberal things shall he stand,”
4. The spirit of gratitude. “Thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman
in the land of Egypt” (verse 15.) God delivered them from bondage and
enriched them with spoils. What base ingratitude to be insensible for mercies
received! What sin not to acknowledge or repay them! As Giod treats us so
we must treat one another. Forgive without reluctance and request ; help
liberally and cheerfully and God’s blessing will rest upon us and upon our
posterity.


PrrPetuat Sgrvics Onosen.— Verses 16-18.


The Hebrew slave was kindly treated, might actually love his master and
value the security which he enjoyed in his service more than freedom. He
might be unwilling to break up the family, and wish to remain for ever in his
servitude, “If he say, I will not go away from thee,” etc. Then a formal act
was necessary to seal the covenant.


I. The spirit in which the servitude was chosen, 1. It was a voluntary


choice. ae will not go.” The master did not compel the slave to stay. God


HOMILETIC COMMENTAR?: DEU1ERONOMY. OHAP, XV.








does not rule us by force and physical law, like stars and seas. There is no true
service where there is compulsion. Jesus appeals to the will. “Wall ye be my
disciples?” 2. It was a choice of love. “He loveth thee and thine house.”
Affection may grow up between slaves and masters. The Roman slaves would
endure severest tortures rather than betray or accuse their owners. If the law
of love ruled more in domestic affairs, between masters and servants, employers
and employed, it would sweeten toil and secure peace and prosperity. “God
counts that free service which love dictates and not necessity.” —(A ugustine.)
“ Lovest thou me.”


What love can do, that dares love attempt.—Shakspeare.


II, The badge by which it was distinguished. Voluntary sacrifice of
freedom was ratified by a significant ceremony and distinguished by a certain
mark. The servant’s ear was put to the door-post and bored through with an
awl, by the sanctions of the judges (¢f. Ex. xxi. 5, 6). If the process was not
painful, there was a manifest dishonour willingly endured. We have to bear
the cross to endure shame and reproach, if not bodily sufferings, for our
Divine Master. Slaves were branded by their owners, Paul gloried in the
marks (stigmas, brands) of the Lord Jesus” (Gal. vi. 17), Let us give
ourselves to Him, delight in His service, and never be afraid nor ashamed to
confess Him before men.


Tue Sappatio YEAR.— Verses 1-18.


This year, like the Jubilee, was a memorable time. Regarding it in ita
evangelical aspects, notice—


I, The method of introducing it. A solemn, loud and universal proclama-
tion was made, A type of the earnest and importunate call of the gospel—the
“glad tidings of great joy.” ‘The priests, not civil magistrates, were to make
the proclamation. They acted by the authority of God. Ministers must
preach the gospel in God’s name to every creature,


II, The blessings which it brought. These symbolise the blessings of re-
demption in Christ Jesus. 1. Helease from debt. “In whom we have forgive-
ness of sins.” 2. Removal from bondage. Introduction to a new condition, a
fresh start in life. ‘“ Liberty wherewith Christ makes us free.” 3. Checks to evil.
By extirpating evil from the “heart” and “eye,” by cultivating kindly feeling
and uniting into one common brotherhood. 4, Hstablishment of peace and
repose. Peace among men; repose amidst agitation and revolution im society,
amidst pressure of population, unequal distribution of wealth and the selfish-
ness of mankind, Christianity allies itself with everything that is free,
generous and just. Let it shed its own glorious light on home and work-
shop, in social customs and civil laws. Then truth and righteousness will
advance, and angels again may sing “ Glory to God in the highest, peace on
earth, good will amoagst men.


DepicatTion oF THE FimstBoRN.— Verses 19-23.


“First fruits” seem to be the offerings of natural piety among all nations.
God demanded from Israel the setting apart (Ex. xiii. 11) and the consecra-
tion of the firstborn of man and beast.


I, As a divine claim upon all. The first and choicest of all we have—
property, time, intellect, wealth and affections must be given to pet ei


OHAP. XV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY








No bullock did servile work. Nothing must be given to the world. God has
a perfect right to all redeemed life. This life should be without blemish and
offence. “Ye are not your own, for ye are bouzht with a price: therefore
glorify God in your body and in your spirit which are God’s,”


II. As a representative of entire consecration. he first represents the
whole. Only a whole or perfect creature could represent the offering of »
wan’s heart and life to God (Mat. i. 8). Nothing must be kept back—‘“ All
for Jesus.” “Present your bodies (i.e, yourselves, your persons) a living
sacrifice, holy and acceptable” (Rom. xii. 1).





Tif, As an indication of the spirit of the worshipper. References te
passages will show the frequency of these injunctions, and the danger there was
of disregarding them. 1. A spirit of holiness. There must be no legal defect,
no blemish in the offerings. God demands rectitude of heart and life. 2. 4
spirit of readiness. There must be no forgetfulness, no unwillingness, but


readiness to offer,
(Ex. xxii, 29).

brought them into God’s
weans of intercourse with God.


IV. As a type of the perfect offering of Jesus.


“Thou shalt not delay to offer the first of thy ripe fruits ”
3. A spirit of fellowship. The offering of the firstborn
presence, taught dependence upon Him, and was a


Christ was the firstborn


of all creatures—a sacrifice, a substitute for us, without spot or blemish.  ‘I'o


Him all firstlings and firstborn pointed.


He offered Himself to God in life and


death, and with Him was God well pleased. “This is my beloved son, in whom


I am well pleased,”


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 12-15. Freedom, I. Condi-
tion from which released. Debt,
bondage and degradation. A picture
of helpless sinners, sold under sin, and
indebted to law. II. Method of
release by divine appointment and
proclamation. ‘The Lord’s release.”
The release of bond-servants. In this
ordinance we may see—I. An en-
couraging emblem. It represents—1.
The redemption which God vouchsafes
to His people. 2. The mercy which
He exercises towards His redeemed.
II. An instructive lesson. We are to
regard God’s mercies as—1. A pattern
for our imitation. 2. A notice for
our exertion.— Lev. C. Simeon, M.A,


Vers. 14,15. Poverty. 1. A test
of civility and kindness. 2. A touch-
stone of friendship and sympathy.
3. A reminder of life’s changes. ‘He
travels safe and not unpleasantly, who
is guarded by poverty and guided by
love." —Sir P, Sidney.

232


Vers. 16, 17. Voluntary servirude
1. ‘I'he Master loved. ‘He loveth
thee,” good, lenient and kind. When
we enter the service of any master
we enquire after his character, the
nature of his employment, the support
which he affords, and the rewards
which he offers. Jesus is our Master,
our only Master, good and powerful.
2. The service entered. Reasonable,
cheerlul, and life-long. God’s service is
pertect freedom, holy and satisfactory.
Enter this service now. Continue in
it “unto the end.”


Vers. 19-23. Dedications of first-
lings. 1. Inremembrance of deliver-
ance from the house of bondage. That
which is spared by special providence
should be solemnly dedicated to God.
Hence—2. his claim of the firstborn
rests upon divine goodness and grace.
Not upon the natural proprietors.ip
of God as Creator of all things; but
upon the grace of the call. Terael was


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


OHAP. XV





a@ consecrated because a redeemed
people. Because Jehovah had delivered
their firstborn, they were to be sancti-
fied to Him.” “It is mine.”


Ver. 21. Blemished life. 1. God
only accepts the perfect. 2. God has
given the perfect, through which He
will bless man. Man is guilty before
God. Cannot offer the fruit of his
be dy, the firstlings of his flocks, for the
sia of his soul. But in Jesus “ our


ILLUSTRATIONS


Ver. 1. Release. It remains with
you then to decide whether that
freedom, at whose voice the kingdoms
of Europe awoke from the sleep of
ages, to run a career of virtuous
emulation in everything great and
good; the freedom which dispelled
the mists of superstition, and invited
the nations to behold their God;
whose magic touch kindled the rays of
genius, the enthusiasm of poetry, and
the flame of eloquence; the freedom
which poured into our lap opulence
and arta, and embellished life with
innumerable institutions and improve-
ments, till it became a theatre of
wonders; it is for you to decide
whether this freedom shall yet survive,
or be covered with a funeral pall, and
wrapt in eternal gloom.— 2. //all.


Vers. 2-4. Creditor. There is
greatness in being generous, and there
is only simple justice in satisfying
creditors. Generosity is the part of
the soul raised above the vulgar.—
Goldsmith,


Ver. 4. Bless thee. If then we will
needs lay up, wkere should we rather
repose it, than in the Christian’s
treasury ? ‘The poor man’s hand is the
treasury of Christ, All wy superfluity
shall be hoarded up, where I know it
will be safely kept.— Bp. Hall.


Vers. 7-11. Not a thought in thy
wicked heart. Extreme vigour is sure
to arm everything against it, and at


righteousness,” we are accepted and
blessed.


Ver. 23. Blood. 1. Blood spilt,
life lost, death deserved through guilt,
2. The animal offered, atonement made
for guilt. ‘For the life of the flesh
is in the blood, and IJ have given it to
you upon the altar to make an atone-
ment for your souls; for it is the blood
that maketh an atonement for the
soul (Lev. xvii. 10, 11).


TO CHAPTER XV.


length to relax into supreme neglect.
(Burke). A desire to resist oppres-
sion is implanted in the nature of man
— Tacitus.


Let not ambition mock their useful toil,
Their homely joys and destiny obscure ;
Nor grandeur hear with a disdainful smile
The short and simple annals of the poor.
T. Gray.


Ver. 8. Open thine hand. Howard’s
rule—so nobly expounded by his own
self-denying devotedness— i a fine
comment on this. “That our own
superfluities give way to other men’s
convenience; that our ’ conveniences
give way to other men’s necessaries ;
and that our necessaries give way to
other men’s extremities.” (Quoted by
Bridge). Thy poor brother. Why
should I for a little difference in this
one particular, of worldly wealth,
despise my poor brother? When so
many and great things unite us, shall
wealth only disunite us? One sun
shines on both, one blood bought us
both ; one heaven will receive us both ;
only he hath not so much of earth as
I, and possibly much more »f Christ.
And why should I disdain him on
earth, whom haply the Lord will
advance above me in heaven.—Z&p.
Reynolds,


Ver. 10. Give him. There cannot
be a more glorious object in creation
than a human being, replete with hene-
veience, meditating in what manner he
might render himself most acceptable

233


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


to his Creator, by doing most good to
His creatures. (Mielding.) Nothing
is more conformable to God’s nature,
or renders us more like Him than
beneficence.— Barrow.


Vers. 16-18. Not go away. Ser-
vitude seizes on few, but many seize
on her.—Seneca.


DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. XV.





James II., on his death-bed, thus
addressed his son, “'I'here is no
slavery like sin, and no liberty like
God’s service.” “A good servant,”
says Luther, “is a real God-send ;
but truly, it is a rare bird in the
land.” “IfIhad served my God as
faithfully as my king, He would not
have thus forsaken me,”


CHAPTER XVL


Carrioat, Norzs.—The religious ordinances to be observed n Canaan are continued. Three
great festivals are prominently mentioned—Feast of Passover, Pentecost and Tabernacles,
Former regulations concerning them are presupposed (Ex. xii, Lev. xxiii., Num. xxviii, and


xxix.), and attention is drawn to certain additional particulars,


1-8. The Feast of Passover.
April (Ex. xii. 2; xiii, 4),


Abib, first month of the ecclesiastical year, corresponds with our
Passover, prepare, t.¢. keep the Passover in its widest sense,


including not only the paschal lamb, but sacrifices and offerings during the seven days.


2. Sacrifice, ¢.¢., offer sacrifices proper to the feast (Num. xxviii. 19-26).


8. Affliction. Israel had to leave in anxious
This reminds them of oppression and deliverance


4. Leavened. A repetition of two points in the observance,
days (Ex. xiii. 7) ; and none of the flesh of the


(Ex. xxiii. 18), Coasts, borders, districts,


flight and were unable to leaven the dough.
from it,


No leaven to be seen for the seven


paschal lamb was to be left till the next morning


5. Gates. The place is fixed. The slaughtering, sacrificing, roasting and eating were ts take
place at the sanctuary, not as formerly, in different houses.


6. Thy tents, not to their homes in the country but their lodgings near the sanctuary
“ Other paschal offerings were yet to be offered day by day for seven days, and the people would
remain to share them, and especially to take part in the holy convocation on the first and seventh
days. The expression, ‘unto thy tents,’ means simply ‘to thy dwellings,’ as in 1 Kings viii. 66.
The use of ‘tents’ as a synonym for ‘ dwellings,’ (cf. Is, xvi. 5) is a trace of the original


nomadic life of the people.” (Speak. Com.)


9-13, Feast of weeks—Seven weeks, called feast of weeks, week of weeks (Ex. xxxiv. 22;
Lev. xxiii. 10 ; Acts ii, 1-4), Begin, dit. “from the beginning of the sickle to the corn ”_4.¢., from


beginning of corn harvest.


Corn harvest began by the presentation of the sheaf of first-fruite


on the second day of the Passover, which agrees with the time in Lev. xxiii. 15.


10, Tribute.


A word which is only used here, and signifies sufficiency, need. ‘Israel was


to keep this feast with sacrificial gifts, which everyone was able to bring accurding to the extent


to which the Lord had blessed him, and—


ll. To rejoice before the Lord at the place where His name dwelt with sacrificial meals,
to which the needy were to be invited (cf. xiv. 29), in remembrance of the fact that they also
were bondsmen in Egypt.” (Del.) Rejoice, ic, honour the Lord with sacred songs.


13-15. Feast of Tabernacles,


been gathered in. Nothing fresh is added


This was observed at the end of harvest after the corn had
except the appointment of the place and the


attendance of domestics, portionless Levites, the stranger, fatherless and widow.


16. Three times a year the males were to attend.


“ Women were not commanded te


undertake the journey, partly from natural weakness of their sex, and partly on account of
domestic cares.” None must appear empty. Gifts must be offered according to God’s blessing


upon each.


234


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. CHAP, XVI,





18-20. Officers formerly appointed to aid Moses in settlement of disputes were sufficient while
*hey were in the willerness. In Canaan a different arrangement will be required, Judges—
the Shotertm, officers (lit. writers, see Ex. v. 6) who were associated with the judges, according
to chap. i. 15, even under the previous arrangement, were not merely messengers and servants of
the courts, but secretaries and advisers of the judges, who derived their title from the fact that
they had to draw up and keep the geneaological lists, and who are mentioned as already existing
in Egypt as overseers of the people and their work. (Keil), Gates. The place of public resort
and court-house of Eastern cities, No rule is given for the number. They were to be just in
their decisions ; not to respect persons, nor take gifts. Grove, a group of trees, adorned with
altars, and dedicated to a particular deity, or a wooden image in a grove (Jud. vi. 253
2 Kings xxiii. 4-6). These places were strong allurements to idolatry, Image, Statue, pillar, or
acta Bae dedicated to Baal. See Ex. xxiii, 24; Lev. xxvi. 13 2 Kings x. 26; Hos, x. 1

v.


Tae Passover.— Verses 1-8,


The Passover is one of the most important of all feasts. In its design and
circumstances it is most impressive, solemn, and full of instruction to the
Christian. Its lessons are repeated in the New Testament and embodied in
the great work of the Redeemer.


I. The feast in its design. Hearers are supposed to be well informed
concerning these ordinances. But “a re-inforcement of this ordinance was
the more necessary because its observance had clearly been intermitted for
thirty-nine years. One passover only had been kept in the wilderness, that
recorded in Num. ix.” (Speak. Com.) 1. 70 commemorate wonderful deliverance,
For “the Lord thy God brought thee out of Egypt.” Deliverance from
bondage, from Pharaoh, cruel task masters, from scenes of horror and ghastly
death which no imagination can depict. God is in history, working death for
the sinner and life for the believer. ‘ He can create and He destroy.” 2. To
celebrate a new birth. The deliverance marks a new era in Jewish history.
“ History herself was born on that night when Moses led forth his countrymen
from the land of Goschen,” says Bunsen, Hence the month of its occurrence
is the beginning of the sacred year. “This month shall be to you the
beginning (the head) of months” (Ex. xii. 1). The day of deliverence was the
beginning of national life, and its observance was “the celebration of the
day of independence.” Men only begin to live when they are converted to
God, and redeemed from sin. Then they are new creatures, one people under
Jehovah their King. No longer enslaved, they are led forth to victory, and
to a land which God gives for an heritage for ever.


II. The feast in its circumstances of time and place. These are specific.
1. The time. “In the month Abib,” (Ex. xiii. 4), from March to April in the
spring of the year, when barley ripens and nature assumes its beauty, a fit

icture of that new life bestowed in redemption, a striking proof of harmony
sates the works of God and the wonders of grace. God in wisdom connects
the celebration of the nation’s birth with the regeneration of nature (1s. xlili.
1, 15-17). 2. The place. “In the place which the Lord shall choose.” The
place was chosen aud sanctified by God Himself. Formerly they met and
partook of sacrifice in their own homes. Now all males had to appear in the
sanctuary. ‘They were thus confined to appoint places kept from self-will and
foolish devices, and governed by one law of worship. We must ever recognise
God in the solemnity of the place where He puts His name. No sacrifice is
accepted unless presented on the altar which sacrifices it. 3. Its duration,
Seven days, and the last, the seventh, was a day of solemn assembly in which
no servile work was done. ‘A holy convocation,” a special season of social


intercourse and devotion.
235


OHAP, XVI HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





III. The feast in its typienl meaning. Asa sacred memorial to be continually
observed, it reminds of many events and sets forth many truths. 1. It was a
type of Christ—the lamb slain for us, by whose blood we are sprinkled (Heb. xii.
24; 1 Pet. i 2), andin whom wehave redemption. In Him is created a people,
a uation of kings and priests to God, to whom belong freedom, holiness, and
hononr. “ Christ, our pxssover, is sacrificed for us” (1 Gor. v. 7). 2. [¢ wasa
symbol of Christian fellowship. The lamb was not eaten alone, but in families
and by companies at first. In later times it was slain at the altar, yet eaten at
the table. In the Christian Church we have a fellowship of redeemed souls,
bought with a price and translated into the kingdom of God’s dear Son. In
Christ we have one faith, one baptism, one hope,and one home. At His table
we should keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, and cultivate that
feeling which is a furetaste of the joys of heaven. “ Ye are all one in Christ
Jesus,”


Tur REDEMPTION or Gop’s ProPLr


In the deliverance of Israel from bondage, we have a type of greater deliver-
ance in Christ’s redemption through His blood.


I. Redemption by great sacrifice. Evypt lost her firstborn—firstborn of
man and beast. What a ghastly scene, death everywhere! What a loss, what
a sacrifice for the freedom of the oppressed! “I gave Ezypt for thy ransom”
(Isa, xliii. 3). But how great the price of our redemption! Paul obtained his
Roman privileges “with a great sum” (Acts xxii. 28). Our deliverance cost
the life of the Son of God. “ Who gave Himself a ransoun for all.”


II Redemption by great power. In the great deliverance which made
Israel free, God was manifest in every step. 1, /twas timely. It was a “night”
of despair and distress, a night of thick darkness. But God never forgets His
promise ; times all events and works deliverance in His own way. ‘“ When the
tale of bricks is doubled, then comes Moses.” “Even the self-same day it
came to pass” (Ex. xii. 41). 2. /¢ was miraculous. (God accomplished
what Moses and Aaron could not. They were saved from plagues, from
death of the firstborn, from a watery grave and a mighty foe. “ Neither
hast thow delivered thy people at all. Now shalt thou see what J will do”
(Ex. v. 23; vi-1). All enemies must fall and all difficulties vanish before
Omnipotence.” ‘For by strength of hand the Lord brought you out of this
place” (Ex. xiii, 3).


III. Redemption commemorated. “Observe the month and keep the
Passover.” ‘I'his has no common event, but a special display of Divine power
towards a helpless people. “It was a memorable night—‘ a nizht of observa-
tions,’ that night of the Lord” (Ex. xii. 42). God’s mercies in providence and
grace should be remembered. 1, Gratefully, 2. Continually. 3. Socially.
As long as Jewish polity existed the Passover was to be observed. ‘“ Ye shall
keep it a feast throughout your generations ; ye shall keep it a feast by an
ordinance for ever” (Ex, xii. 14; Lev. xxiii. 4)


IV. Redemption a motive to consecrated life. Israel were bought and
claimed by God for Himself and no other. “I will redeem you, and I will
take you to me for a people.” If we have been delivered from the captivity of
Satan, the bondage and corruption of sin, we must live to God. No longer in
Egypt, no loner our own, but a new life—a life of righteousness, faith, and
ebedience in Christ. Life through Christ is a redemptive torce, the motive


236


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. CHAP. XVL





power, the Divine impulse to a higher destiny. Moral suasion, moral stimulants,
mural laws, can never work out moral freedom and beget moral character.
“ Being made free from sin, ye became the servants of righteousness,”


UNLEAVENED BreEaD.


What does this unleavened bread mean? Two things, I think. First,
Christ ; for He is the believer’s food. The unleavened bread sets forth Christ
in one aspect, as much as the lamb sets Him forth in another. The main portion
of the feast was the flesh of the lamb, for which the life of the redeemed was
derived. In the Israelite feeding upon unleavened bread, we have presented
to us the believer drawing his strength from Jesus, the spotless and holy one—
the unleavened bread. “‘I am the bread of life.” But there is another meaning
of the unleavened bread, and that is holiness, uprightness, singleness of eye.
Just as the bread was not the main staple of the passover feast, but the lamb,
so holiness is the accompaniment rather than the principal portion of the
Christian feast. In the case of every believer the unleavened bread must
Seria feeding upon Christ as the lamb. God has joined these two things
together, let us not put them asunder. If we are redeemed by the blood of
the lamb, let us live upon the unleavened bread; let us show forth the
rincerity and truth which God requires in our life. “Purge out the old
leaven, that ye may be a new lump as ye are unleavened. ao even Christ
our passover was sacrificed for us; therefore let us keep the feast, not with old
leaven, neither with leaven of malice and wickeduess, but with the unleavened
bread of sincerity and truth” (1 Cor. v. 7.)\—Hrom Step. A. Blackwood,


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


visions of the atonement must be


Vers. 1, 2. The appointed ordi-
applied to the need of the soul. “By


nance. 1. Obligatory, appointed by


direct authority of God. ‘“‘ Observe,
thou shalt sacrifice.” It should always
be a privilege, but God makes it a
duty to remember providential deliver-
ances. ‘The observance is not optional,
a@ matter of convenience, but a neces-
sity. 2, Universal. Offspring reap
benefits given to ancestors. Ordin-
ances bind families to each other and


to God. 38. Perpetual in Jewish
Church. Not only in the night of
deliverance, but annually in the


journeys of the wilderness, and “for
ever” in Canaan. Christians will thus
celebrate the Lord’s supper to the end
of time, and in heaven for ever will
they praise their edeemer.


Ver. 2. Of the flock. 1. The lamb
slain. 2. The blood sprinkled. 3. The
flesh eaten. Deliverance possible
through it, the Lamb of God. But
the blood must be sprinkled and
spiritual strength sustained. The pro-


one we enter into the divine covenant,
and by the other are made partakers
of the divine nature.”


Ver. 4.  Unleavened bread, 1.
Affliction. “The bread of affliction.
2. Haste. “For thou camest forth
out of the land of Egypt in haste.”
8. Purity. No decay, no corruption,
the purity of new life. No leaven in
heart, home and assembly. ‘“ Watch
carefully against corruption in life and
doctrine, be punctual in your prepara-
tion to and participation of the
Christian passover.”—7rapp.

“At the going down of the sun
(ver. 6), between three and six o’clock
in the evening. ‘I'his corresponds with
the ninth hour of the great atonement
day, when Jesus, the Lamb of God,
cried with a loud voice and gave up
the ghost.”

Ver. 8. A solemn assembly. Ob-
237


CAP. XVI.





served personally, publicly and socially.
Those who violate the Sabbath and
neglect religious ordinances disobey
God and endanger the welfare of the
nation.


Vers. 1-8. We may learn—1. That
there is no service without separation
from the world. 2. That separation


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


from the world is only accomplished by
God’s help. 8. That the consequences
of separation must be sanctification
to God. (1) By self surrender. (2)
By continual obedience. Or—t1.
Christian life ig of divine origin.
2. Christian life is social in its nature.
8. Christian life is supreme in our
conduct,


THe Feast or Weexs.— Verses 9-19,


Pentecost signifies fiftieth. This feast was held seven weeks (a week of weeks)
after the Passover, counting from the second day of that feast. It is called
“the feast of harvest” (Ex. xxiii. 16). On this fiftieth day the second festival
commenced by the offer of two loaves of fine flour, “ which were the first fruits
of the wheat harvest” (Lev. xxiii, 17). The feast was to be kept by sacrificial
gifts and joy.


I. A festival of joy. “Thou shalt rejoice before the Lord thy God.’, 1. The
toy of harvest. Joy after severe toil and long patience—joy in reaping the
results of labour and enjoying the bounty of God—the joy of public thanks
giving. “ They joy before thee according to the joy of harvest” (Isa. ix. 3).


Now o’er the corn the sturdy farmer looks,
And swells with satisfaction to behold

The pienteous harvest which repays his tod.
We, too, are gratified, and feel a joy

Inferior but to his, partakers all

Of the rich bounty Providence bas strew’d

In plentiful profusion o’er the fleld— Hurdia,


2. Joy of social intercourse. Thou, thy son aud daughter, thy domestics,
strangers, and fatherless (verse 11). Goodwill and kindness to men were mani-
fested in these festivals. Our joys are increased by letting others share them.
“ Happiness was born a twin,” says Byron. The blessings of God upon us,
should create a glad heart, a radiant countenance, and a liberal hand.


IZ. An acknowledgement of dependence upon God» This festival was a
national and devout expression of their dependence upon God for the fruits of
the earth and the possession of their privileges, ‘I'he Jew was not permitted to
touch his crop until he had presented the first fruits, “ This,” says a writer,
“was a beautiful institution, to teach the Israelites that it was not the soil, nor
the raindrops, nor the sunbeams, nor the dews, nor the skill of their agriculturists,
that they had tothank for their bounteous produce, but that they must rise
above the sower and reaper, and see God, the giver of the golden harvest, and
make His praise the key-note to their harvest home.”


III. A memorial of great events. Two grand events seem to be referred to.

1. Deliverance from bondage. “Thou shalt remember that thou wast a bond-
man in Egypt.” ‘To stimulate gratitude to God and liberality to men. 2. The
iving of the law. The law was given from Sinai on the fiftieth day from
gypt- These stated celebrations would commemorate and authenticate ancient
events. Written records are not always safe; get corrupted or lost, and only
impress the few who read them. But general celebrations of a nation’s birth
and history recall to gratitule and keep alive a conscious dependence upon
Divine aoc The exodus of Israel is not a matter of curious antiquity.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. XVI.





but of world interest. The giving of the law and the miracles of early history
are revelations of God to man, an evidence that heaven and earth are near to
each other in government and purpose.


IV. A type of Pentecost in the Christian Church. It was on the day of
Pentecost that the Holy Spirit was poured cut and new power bestowed on the
Church. As “ the first fruits” of the earth were presented of old, so the first
fruits from heaven were gathered in by the conversion of three thousand from

‘every nation under heaven.” ‘The thunders of Sinai were hushed by the
mighty wind at Jerusalem, and the curse of the Law contrasted by the blessings
of the gospel. “The voice of words” is followed by “ the tongue of fire.”


Tue TrrevtTe or FREEwmt.— Verse 10,


In the sacrifices there must not only be devout acknowledgement of Divine
goodness, but voluntary dedication to God.


I. Our offerings must be presented with a willing mind. “A free will
offering.” The heart must be touched before the gift is taken by “the
hand.” ‘I'here must be no hesitation, no constraint. Without this, whatever
be the value of the gift, and the splendour of the altar on which it is put, thera
can be no acceptance.” Every man according as he purposeth in his heart, so
let him give; not grudgingly, or of necessity ; for God loveth a cheerful giver ”
(2 Cor. ix. 7).


II. Our offerings should be proportionate to God’s blessing upon us
This frees us from all excuse, We can give something. “For if there be first
a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man hath, and not according
to that he hath not” (2 Cor. viii. 12). Think of God’s mercies, 1. In ordinary
affairs, In our harvests and families, in prosperous trades and professions.
In the comforts and privileges of life. What shall we render to God for
these? 2. Jn special providences. Many like Israel have special deliverances
to commemorate, almost miraculous escapes from danger and death. These
should affect our hearts. ‘Where God sows plentifully he expects to reap
accordingly.” “ Every man shall give as he is able, according to the blessing
of the Lord thy God which He hath given thee” (verse 17).


III. Our offerings should be an expression of the subjection of our will
to God’s will. If we love God we shall obey Him. Our hearts and gifts will
be presented without delay. But if we hate God and forget His mercies, we
shall withhold His due. The mind is discovered by its expressions, the willing-
ness measured by the quality of the offering. Gifts full and free indicate
gratitude and readiness to please; gifts blemished and stingy prove lack of
reverence and submission to God. If we render not according to God’s blessing
upon us we may lose all we have. ‘‘ Hezekiah rendered not again according to
the benefit done unto him ; for his heart was lifted up.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vera. 10,11. Keep the feast. 1. In unity was recognised by worship to a
national union. AL the tribes, rich common Redeemer. 2. Jn national
‘and poor, were to go up to Jerusalem, joy. They must rejoice in receiving
and there proclaim in united gatherings from and giving to God, and in helping
their dependence upon God. National one another. (a) miei He lg


OHAP. XVL





before the Lord thy God.” True joy is
a ‘serious thing (Bonar). Worldly joy
is like a shallow brook, deceptive and
gliding away. (6b) Social joy. All
within the family and in the gates
were to rejoice together. Common
mercies should create common joys.
3. Jn national beneficence. Servants,
Levites and strangers, the widow
and the fatherless, must be remembered.
The wants of the needy must be sup-
plied. The law of beneficence then as
always must be “as the Lord thy God
hath blessed thee.”

east of first fruits, The ap-
pointment of these feasts may be
considered as—I. Commemorative: Of
the day on which they came out of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


—


received the law. II. Typical: Of the
Resurrection, and of the descending of
the Spirit on the Apostles. III. Jn-
structive: Of our obligations and duty
towards God.—C. Simeon, M.A.


Vers. 9-11. The feast of Pentecost
prefigured the mission of the Holy
Spirit. Zhe first fruits of the Spirit
which followed that sacred day on
which the law was given, and by which
the spirit of bondage was introduced,
as it also prefigu:ed the first fruits of
the new church (Acts ii.), and of the
Ministry of the Apostles, and of that
new bread with which the Jews first,
and then the Gentiles were to be fed.—
Spanheim, Chron. Sac.


Egypt, and of the day on which they


Tae Feast or Tapernacirs.— Verses 13-15.


This festival was instituted in grateful commemoration of the security of
Israel when dwelling in booths or tabernacles in the wilderness. It began on
the 15th day of the month Tisri (from the end of our September and beginning
of October), and lasted a week. It was celebrated only at the sanctuary.
Ufferings were presented on the altar every day and booths were used, on the
housetops, in the streets, or in the fields for the dwelling of the people.
(Lev. xxiii. 42; Neh. viii. 15, 16.)


I, A Feast of Ingathering. “ After that thou hast gathered in thy corn
and wine.” ‘There was no disappointment, no failure in the crops. In these
“harvest homes,” each season was marked with devout recognition of God’s
providence. In the Passover the sickle “was put to the corn.” In Pentecost
the cereal crops were harvested, and now in the Feast of Tabernacles, every-
thing was gathered in, securely stored, and the husbandman rewarded for his
toil. “ ‘Thou shalt keep the feast of ingathering in the end of the year when
thou hast gathered in thy labours.” (Ex. xxiii. 16.)


II, A time of universal joy. “Thou shalt rejoice in thy feast.” Gladness
was a special characteristic of this autumnal gathering, it was a standing type
of festivity, and there was a standing proverb that “ He who had never seen
the rejoicing at the pouring out of the water of Siloam (a ceremonial of the
Feast of Tabernacles) had never seen rejoicing in his life.” The joy was on
two accounts, 1. Mor the past. For God’s miraculous deliverance and guid-
ance through the wilderness. For the corn, wine and oil, and the produce of
the land. What a contrast between the land of promise and the desert draught!
2. Hor the future. God opened up a bright prospect. They were to rejoice
tn hope and expectation of further blessings. “ Because the Lord thy God shall
bless thee in all thine increase,” ete. (ver. 15). God’s people are commanded and
ae always be a cheerful people to “ rejoice evermore, to rejoice in the Lord

ways.


III. A Memorial of Pilgrim Life.


I made the children of Israel to dweil
240


“That your generations may know that
in booths when I brought them out of


is se nl


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. CHAP, XVI.





the land of Egypt” (Lev. xxiii. 43). The people left their homes and abode
in “tabernacles.” “The feast typifies this our pilgrim state, the life of simple
faith in God, for which God provides ; poor in this world’s goods but rich in
God. The church militant dwells as it were in tabernacles ; hereafter in hope
to be received into everlasting habitations in the Church triumphant. It was
the link which bound on their deliverance from Egypt to the close of their
pilgrim life, and their entrance into rest. The yearly commemoration of it was
not only a thanksgiving for God’s past mercies, it was a confession also of their
present relation to God, that here we have no continuing city; that they still
needed the guidance and support of God; and that their trust was not in
themselves nor in man, but in Him.”—Dr. Pusey.


IV. A type of Heaven. The booths on earth were frail, temporary and
easily destroyed. ‘“ For a shadow in the daytime from ‘the heat, and for a
place of refuge, and for a covert from the storm and rain” (Is, iv. 6.) But
there is “‘a tabernacle that shall not be taken down.” ‘The rest of Canaan
typified the rest of heaven, the eternal home of the Christian pilgrim ;
where there are no tents, no wanderings and no sorrows; no thirst, no pain,
no sin, no death. ‘The convocation reminds us of ‘the general assembly” in
the celestial city. In this world we are “strangers and sojourners,” let us
prepare for the final ingathering of the fruits of God’s grace.


Toe Toree AnnvaL Gatuertnes.— Verses 16, 17.


The rules concerning the three feasts are here summed up as in Ex. xxiii,
16,17; xxxiv. 23. All males must appear. None must appear empty. All
must give according to God’s blessing upon them. View these gatherings—


I, In their fixed periods. There was nothing arbitrary. The seasons
corresponded to yearly epochs natural to an agricultural people. There is,
something that may worthily bring them together. The anergy which slept
in the powers of nature, and which gradually developed in the produce of
the seasons was the same which was roused in terror to destroy their foes.
The god of nature was the moral governor of mankind. “''The great fact
of a moral government which men are pepetually forgetting, was, in the
institutions of one people, linked on to those constantly recurring periods
which man’s physical wants will not allow him to neglect, and thus challenged
their attention, and if anything could, coloured as it were, and inoculated
their whole consciousness,”


II. In promoting commercial prosperity. Facilities for buying and selling
for mutual intercourse and trade were great. ‘Such festivals,” says a writer,
‘have always been attended with this effect. The famous old fair near Hebron
arose from the congregating of pilgrims to the famous terebinth-tree of Abraham.
The yearly fairs of the Germans are said to have had a similar origin and so the
annual pilgrimage of the Mohamwedans to Mecca, in spite of many adverse
circumstances, has given birth to one of the greatest markets in the Eastern
world. ‘Thus, perhaps, more of the wealth of the Jews and of the greatness and
glory of Jerusalem is to be traced to the simple laws of this one chapter than to
all the wisdom and power of either or all of their kings.”


III. In cementing national unity. Three times a year did rich and poor
meet in one place and on one common ground. Great multitudes would see each
other and have opportunity of knowing each other. ‘They woula become in-
terested in one auother’s welfare and a bond of brotherhood would be formed two

Qq 241


OHAP, XVI.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


NS ,


counteract schism and rebellion.


Union gave: firmness and solidity to the


nation, One spirit cemented and animated all the tribes. Community of prin-
ciples, fellowship in festivals and privileges bound all in one compact family,


“ Behold, how good and how
unity 1”


IV. In preserving the religious sentiment.


pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in


They were reminded of God


in every feast, sacrifice, and offering. Faith, gratitude, love, and all the religious
feelings, would be quickened and rightly centred. In their annual worship,


God, the one supreme object, was kept before them.
they recognised the claims of the poor. ofold | t

their religion was strengthened to govern individual, social, and
Our religion must be the sovereign of the soul, ruling all life and


God and man,
national life.
controlling all its activities,


In their habitual charity
Thus, in its twofold aspects towards


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 13-15. National philanthropy.
1. When God blesses a nation with
rosperity He demands its liberality,
Wealth, corn and wine are given not
for selfish, but for useful purposes.
Covetousness plans for selfish ends,
benevolence should counter plan and
organize resources for objects of divine
philanthropy. 2. This liberality should
be displayed to the nation’s own poor,
(a.) In social feasts, “ Rejoice in th
feast.” (b.) In benevolence to all
cJasses. ‘I'hose related and those not
related (ver. 14). God has identified
himself with the orphans and the poor,
and delegated them to receive bounty
meant for himself (Jas. ii. 5). The
poor in our families, churches and
nation have the first claim, “ Charity
begins at home,”


Friend, parent, neighbour, first it will embrace,
His country next, and next all human race,


Pope.

Ver. 16. Three times a year, The
chief objects of the feast: 1. To re-
count God’s mercies. 2, To enhance
the piety and patriotism of the people,
8. ‘lo promote friendly intercourse
among families and sections and thus
4. To aid in preserving the society
of the Church and the nation. (S. 8.
Journal). The connection of the
feasts with the Life of Jesus. The
Passover. Jesus and the cross. The
Pentecost. Jesus and the Holy Spirit.
The Tabernacles. Jesus aud our
heavenly home.—S, S. Journal,

242


Appear before the Lord, The
journey to Jerusalem pictured in “ the
Songs of Degrees” (Ps. 120-134).

The twofold aspects of the Feasts,
1. Looking back to deliverance. 2,
Looking forward in hope of entering
the “house not made with hands,” of
being “gathered into the Lord's
garner.”


Vers, 16, 17. Not appear empty,
Viewed religiously, the festivals —
annual national thanksgivings for
mercies received, both natural and
miraculous—the first from the coms
mencement of harvest and the deliver-
ance out of Egypt; the second for the
eompletion of the grain harvest and
the passage of the Red Sea ; the third
for the final gathering in of the fruits
and the many mercies of the wilder-
ness, At such seasons we must not
“appear before God empty,” we must
give Him not only “ the salves of our
lips,” but some substantial acknows
ledgment of His goodness towards ua
(Com. for English Readers).

Not empty. 1. An offering to be
brought, 2. An offering for each indi-
vidual. 8. An offering according to
the ability of each. 4. An offering to
the Lord (a) as an acknowledement of
His mercy, (6) as an expression of
gratitude. Gifts are the natural re-
sults of gratitude and joy. “ Bring
an offering and come into His courts
(Ps. oxlv. 8).


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. CHAP, XVI.





Tue ADMINISTRATION oF Justicr.— Verses 18-20,


These words with the four next chapters give certain directions for the
administration of justice. While Moses lived, he himself specially taught of
God, was sufficient. But the people were soon to be scattered in the land and
would no longer be encamped together, hence regular and permanent provision
must be made for future order in civil and social government.


I, Right men must be chosen. The nation must select its own judges and
officers, secretaries and advisers of judges, and every place was now to have its
own administration. Imperfect sinful men were to be entrusted with solemn
duty, to represent God and train up a nation in righteousness and truth,


II. These men must judge with impartial spirit. God seeks to implant
right principles and cultivate right dispositions in men. Good laws must be
rightly administered. Corruption and tyranny must disgrace no community,
ruler, or subject. 1. No injustice. “ They shall judge the people
with just judgment.” 2. No perversion of judgment. “Thou shalt not wrest
judgment” (verse 19) in social, civil, or religious matters. 38. No partiality.
“Thou shalt not respect persons,” rich or poor. “ Hear the small as well as
the great, be not afraid of the face of man for the judgment is God’s”
(Deut. i. 16,17). 4. No bribery. “ Neither take a gift.” Pure justice was
not often administered. Corruption was prevalent in Hebrew, as well as
Oriental judges, was one of the crying evils which provoked God’s anger
against his people and led first to the Babylonian captivity, and afterwards
to the Roman conquest. 5. Nothing but right. “'That which is altogether
just shalt thou follow,” literally justice, justice; “the repetition for the sake
of emphasis and solemnity. God is just, and at the great day will give to
everyone his due. He should therefore rule and stay in fear of Him.”
“Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you; take heed and do
it: for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor
taking of gifts” (2 Chr. xix. 5-7).


“ Mercy more becomes a magistrate
Than the vindictive wrath which men call justice |"--Longfellow.


III. The blessings which follow justice rightly administered. Right
performance of duty always brings pleasure and reward. 1. Life ts relieved.
Evils are prevalent enough, without increasing them by official injustice. The
purpose of government is to remove unjust burdens, to encourage progress, and
reconcile all classes. ‘Government is a contrivance of human wisdom to
provide for human wants” says Burke. “That thou mayest live.” 2. Inheritance
is secured. Strife and emnity, robbery and injustice, create disorder and
endanger life and property. Righteous laws duly administered bring peace to
to the city, give security to the throne, and stability to the state. “ Inherit
the land which the per thy God giveth thee.” 3. Society is improved. When
vice is unchecked and virtue neglected, when judgment is perverted and
authority set at nought, there can be no improvement and progress in society.
Wealth does not christianise, change does not ameliorate society. Laws must
command good and forbid evil, punish transgression and reward obedience.
“The function of a government,” says Gladstone, “ is to wake it easy for people
to do good, and difficult for them to do evil.” “For rulers are not @ terror to
good works, but to the evil” (Rom. xiii. 3). mir


OHAP. XVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





Ipotatry Forsmpren.— Verses 21, 22.


In giving practical directions for the administration of justice, Moses begins by
denouncing idotatry, which is rebellion against supreme power. They are neither
to plant groves, nor set up pillars in the worship of God.


I. Idolatry is enticing. This on many accounts. 1. By its prevalence. In
some form or other it is the most popular religion inthe world. Men bow down
to the idols of luxury, ambition, pleasure and avarice, “ For all people will
walk every one in the name of his god” (Mic. iv. 5). 2. By its use. We
naturally forsake God and cling to sin. Evil inclination leads to wrong choice,
and men chose darkness rather than light.


II. Idolatry is treason against God. God is the sum of all mia enn
the proprietor of all resources, and the giver of all existences. at more
rational than to worship Him? We are bound, obligated to love Him. Nothing
belies God, nor degrades man like the worship of images and statues. This ig
treason against heaven, the firstborn of all folly, the total of all absurdities,
“ An idol is nothing.”


III. Idolatry must be utterly forsaken. We must neither join the worship-
pers nor sanction the worship. Plant no grove of trees, for truth loves light and
reproves dark. Set up no image by hands or in imagination. We must not
enquire for idols, transfer our affections to them, nor address our prayers to
them. God’s people are forbidden to examine or look at them. “Turn ye not
(face not) unto idols, nor make to yourselves molton gods. I am the Lord your
God.” (Lev. xix. 4.)


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 18-20. Judges and Justice.
1. The supremacy of justice and right
outweighed all personal considerations,
all private pleasures and friendships,
Right must be upheld and honoured.
2. ‘lhe method of upholding justice,
By imperfect men, chosen by the
people, acting with impartial spirit and
representing God. ‘Ye shall be as
gods.” 3. The places in which justice
was upheld. “Inallthy gates.” The
places of public resort where courts
were held and business transacted.
The Ottoman Porte derives its name
(Porta) from this custom of adminis-
tration. The word here means in every


city and town. Amid the homes and
daily affairs of men right and autho-
rity must be obeyed. Earthly courts
must be a type of heavenly ; human
tribunals remind us of the power and
jurisdiction of Him against whom
“the gates of hell shall not prevail.”


Vers. 21-22. Idolatry. 1. Its
various forms. Idolatry previously
forbidden ; but law repeated against
particular forms and places. 2. ‘I'he
people’s proneness to it. 3. The divine
prohibition. No intermixture of wor-
ship, no tampering with danger. Entire
avoidance,


ILLUSTRATIONS ON CHAPTER. XVI.


Vers. 1-4. Remember. A good
memory is the best monument. Others
are subject to casualty or time; and
we know that the pyramids themselves,

244


doting with age, have forgotten the
names of their founders, — Fuller,
‘The memory of past labours is very
sweet.— Cicero,


Sn


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


OHAP. XVI.


eee USE Oe eee


Vers. 4-8. The place. Public
worship is the nearest resemblance of
heaven.—Clarkson.


Vers. 11-14. If men lived like men
their houses would be temples —
temples which we should hardly dare to
inquire, and in which it would make
us holy to be permitted to live
(Ruskin),—Joy.

All who joy would win

Must share it—Happiness was born a twin.

Byron.


Vers. 9,13, 16. Feasts. Festivals,
when duly observed, attach men to the
civil and religious institutions of their
country: it is an evil therefore when
they fall into disuse. For the same
reason the loss of local observances is
to be regretted: who is there that
does not remember their effect upon
himself in early life. (Southey.) Those
are the rarest feasts which are graced
with the most royal guests.— W.Secker.


Vers. 18-20. Judge. Sir Mt. Hale
was very exact and impartial in the
adininistration of justice. He would
never receive any private addresses or
recommendation from the highest


privately, to acquaint him with a suit
in law to be tried before him, that he
might better understand it in open
court. Sir Mt. stopped him and told him
that he never received information of
causes, but where both parties might
be heard alike. ‘Ihe nobleman went
away, complained to the king and
declared it a rudeness that could not
be endured. His Majesty bade him
to content himself that he was
no worse used, and said “He verily
believed he would have used himself
no better if he had gone to solicit him
in any of his own causes.” —Buchk.


Vers. 21-22. Image. Idolatry has
its origin in the human heart. Men
love sin and do not want to be reproved
for it ; therefore they form themselves
a god that will not reprove them.
(J. H. Evans.) All the princes of the
earth have not had so many subjects
betrayed and made traitors by their
enemies as God hath lost souls by the
means of images. Christ saith not,
“Go preach unto the people by
images,” but “Go into all the world
and preach the gospel.”—Bp. Hooper.
“Yet man, this glorious creature, can debase


His spirit down to worship wood and stone,
And hold the very beasts which bear his yoke





ersons. One of the first peers of ‘And tremble at his eye for sacred things.
land once called upon him Landon,
CHAPTER XVIL


Crrrrcat Remarks.—Terael not only had tendency to idolatry, but inclination to offer animals
with faults and to transgress the laws of worship. Blemishes named in Lev. xxii,


Vers. 2-7. Idolaters slain. Done wickedness, lit. the wickedness, the special sin denounced,
Facts were to be enquired into, the charge substantiated. wo witnessses were needful (Num,
axv. 30) to condemn. Thy gates, where judicial proceedings took place (of. Neh. viii 1-3; Job
xxix. 7). “The sentence executed outside the town, as it had been outside the camp in the
wil.erness (Lev. xxiv. 14; Num. xv, 36), to indicate the exclusion of the criminal from the
congregation, and from fellowship with God ”—put away, lit, consume, set fire to, destroy by
burning ; hence to root out, remove, annihilate,


Vers, 8-138. The Higher Judicial Court at the Sanctuary, Zoo hard. Ver. 8. The transition ia
ebvious for enactments of capital crimes to obscure and difficult cases ; cases like that brought
before Moses (Ex. xviii. 23-27). “ In future judges of the different towns were to bring all cases
which they were unable to decide, before the priests, the Levites and the judge that shall be in
those days.” Ver. 9, “The judge would no doubt be a layman, and thus the court would contain
both an ecclesiastical and civil element.” (Speak. Com.) Ver. 10, This superior court was not
® court of appeal to adjudicate on verdicts given by another court. Its decisions ei and


OMAP, XVII, HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY, :
Sane Ee SE EE ES EES ee
authoritative ; founded on law—the suitors must obey them as the voice of Jehovah. Ver. 12


Do presumptuously. If » person was refractory and disobedient he would be put to death asa
rebel against God,


Vers. 14-20. The choice and duties of a king. The choice of a king is not like that of judgea
and officers (xvi.), enjoined, but simply permitted. The reason is obvious, Provision for due
administration of justice is essential ; that justice should be dispensed through monarchial forms
is not so ; and is accordingly only recognised as an arrangement, which might probably result
on the settlement and consolidation of the people in Canaan. (Speak. Com.)


Vers, 16-20. Three rules given for the guidance of the king. He was not to keep many horses.
and thus lead back the people to Egypt, from which God had delivered them. He must trust
in God, not in warlike preparations. Ver. 17. Nor to have many wives, lest his heart should be
turned from God. Lastly, he must not accumulate a vast treasure, by engaging in foreign
commerce. Solomon transgressed this rule (2 Chron. i. 15), and was imitated by Uzziah
(2 Chron. xxvi. 2). Ver. 18, Instead of minding earthly things he must meditate in the law ;
copy it himself or have a copy written for him ; daily consult it, to keep him from pride and
error 3 to prolong his own life and secure the crown to his posterity.


BLEeMIsHED SacriFices.— Verse 1,


Sacrifices are of divine origin, and God alone can specify what kind will be
acceptable to him. Animals perfect and uninjured were always to be offered
(Ex. xii. 5; Lev. i. 3).


I. God requires perfect sacrflices. ‘No blemish.” There must be no flaw
in character, obedience, and life. No hypocrisy in worship and profession.
Nothing ill-favoured and unsightly. Our sacrifices must befit the sacred
purpose for which they are offered, and be the symbol of the moral integrity of
those who offer them. ‘ Whatsoever hath a blemish, that shall ye not offer:
for it shall not be acceptable for you.”


II. Men offer imperfect sacrifices. Many things are withheld which God
demands, and things which are offered are lame and blind. They are blemished,
defective in spirit and measure. We keep back part of our time and the best
of our service. ‘hey are tainted with worldly influence, half-heartednesg,
selfishness, and reluctance. “Should I accept this at your hand?”


ITI, How then can our sacrifices be acceptable to God? Not through our
merits, but “the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and
without spot.” In ancient time animals were not accepted so much on account
of their perfect, physical organisation, or intrinsic excellence, as their typical
value. ‘They were selected and offered on behalf of the guilty. When offered
in penitence and faith they were received. If we come in rectitude of heart,
God will pardon and bless. “How much more shall the blood of Christ, who
through the Eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your
conscience from dead works, to serve the living God ?”


Taz Derrcrion any PounisHMENT oF Guitt.— Verses 2-7,


The duties of magistrates are again enjoined, and special forms legalised to
detect and punish idolators, :


I The detection of guilt. Actions speak louder than words. If a man or
woman served other gods it would bs ont and talked about. But crime
was discovered. 1. Not by mere report. “It be told thee.” Reports do
mischief, and must be sifted before circulated. They were not to act op
eae under prejudice and excitement. 2. Honest enquiry was mada


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. CHAP. XVII





“Inquired diligently.” Flying rumours were judicially examined. Diligent
search might substantiate the report. If not, a salutary dread would impress
the people. 3. Zhe offence proved by competent witnesses. Not by the
testimony of one, but of two or three witnesses was the guilty punished
(verse 6). This was a safeguard against a hasty and unjust verdict. “In the
mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established ” (2 Cor. xiii. 1),


II, The punishment of the guilty. ‘He that is worthy of death be put to
death” (verse 6). 1. 7he witnesses must lead (verse 7). his would check
false witness, and ensure truthfulness and sincerity. It would be a public
avowal of their testimony, and a proof that the sin had met its due punish-
ment. 2. 7he punishment was inflicted openly. “ At the gates.” Condemned
criminals were executed outside the walls, and thus put to greater shame as a
warning to others. This was a type of the rejection of Jesus, who suffered
without the camp, and bore our reproach (Heb. xiii. 12.) 3. All the people
took part. The hands of the witness first, and then the people (verse 7). All
are interested in checking crime, and all must be purified when it is detected.
God will have no rival. Idolatary of every degree and description is a capital
crime, and death is decreed as its penalty. We must detest it, uproot it in our
hearts and customs. “So thou shalt put the evil away from among you.”


IpotatRy, a GarEevous Sus.


I, It is offensive to God. ‘The wickedness in the sight of the Lord.”
1. A violation of His covenant. “In transgressing His covenant” (verse 2),
Concealed or open, cultured or gross in form, it robbed God of His due. “It
was spiritual adultery which breaks the marriage bond,” says Henry. It
rendered void the covenant, and therefore forfeited all its blessings. 2. A
defeating of His purpose. Israel was chosen to be a holy people and to preserve
purity of worship, but idolatry defeated this object.


II. It is injurious to society. ‘“ Abomination wrought in Israel” (verse 4
It extinguishes the light and impaires the moral sensibilities of the nation. It
breaks the moral bonds and creates debasing habits in society. It is the spring
of possest immorality, An act of treason and rebellion against the majesty of
Heaven,


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS,
God required that the charge should


be substantiated by most uuequivocal
facts, and most competeut witnesses.


Vers. 4, 5. Precautions in search of
the truth. old thee privately, and in
confidence ; thow hast heard of it,


therefore notorious, a public scandal
and likely to be true; enquired dilt-
ently, sought to find out the truth,
‘ careful examination of persons and
circumstances; behold tt 1s true, not
founded en vague rumour or malice ;
the thing certain, proved by the clearest
evidence ; then bring forth the man,”
etc. (verse 5). ‘The charge of idolatry
was the most solemn and awful that
could be brought against an Israelite,
because it affected his ie; therefore,


Hence all the precautions mentioned
must be carefully used, to arrive at so
affecting, and so awful a truth.—
(Ad, Clarke.)


The Sacredness of Human Life.
1. A man thought innocent until
proved guilty. 2. A fair trial to
establish the guilt. 3. ‘The method
of punishing guilt a wise procedure.
a) Interesting the people in its

tection and punishment. yw Secur-

247


GAP. XVIL


HOMILETIC COUMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





ing moral certainty in truthful verdict.
(c) Economy in judicial administration.


Witnesses inflicting punishment.
1. 'T'o deter from rash accusation. 2.
To check the evil thus punished. “A
rule which would naturally lead to the
supposition that no man would come
forward as a witness without the fullest
certainty or the greatest depravity.”


many whose tongue is so slippery, not
to say good for nothing, that they
would boldly strangle a man with their
words, when they would not dare to
touch him with one of their fingers.
It was the best remedy, therefore, that
could be tried for restraining suck
levity, to refuse to admit the testimony
of any man who was not ready to
execute judgment with his own hand.


(Keil). He assigned this part tothe —(Calvin.)


witnesses, chiefly because there are so


Decision oF ConTROVERSIES.— Verses 8-13.


In all evil and criminal cases where doubts and difficulties were involved,
local magistrates were to submit them to the supreme council for final decision.
From this decision there must be no swerving right or left.


I. Human interests often perplex. ‘A matter too hard for thee in judg-
ment.” Cases were often complicated and obscure, too hard for inferior judges
to decide. 1. They spring up in small circles, “within thy gates” (ver. 8).
In towns and villages difficult questions have to be considered—poor laws,
sanitary measures, and bitter cries in many forms. Often the smaller the circle
the more perplexing the problem. 2. They relate to civil matters. Cases of
murder or death, accidentally or wilfully, “between blood and blood” con-
tending parties in law suits, “between plea and plea.” Actions of assault or
bodily injury, “ between stroke and stroke.” Society is not perfect. Men are
selfish, cruel and disobedient. The wisest rules are often unable to solve
the on ery within the gates. “That which is crooked cannot be made
straight.”


II, The court of appeal to settle these interests. Courts of judgment were
in every city (xvi, 18), empowered to determine cases of the crown and of the
people. 1. Composed of appointed officers. “ ‘Thou shalt come unto the priests,
the Levites, and unto the judge. Representatives of God in every department
of life must be expounders of law and examples of justice. 2. Assembled in one
place. ‘Get thee up into the place which the Lord thy God shall choose”
iver. 8). ‘The sittings were held near the sanctuary, that in great emergencies
the high priest might consult the Urim (Num. xxvii. 21). ‘The house of God is
the place of righteousness and the seat of learning. We must come not only to
meditate and praise, but to “enquire” from His servants and word. “ Ask
now the priests concerning the law.”


III. The importance of the decision given by this court. This was the
highest judicial authority and its decisions were most important. 1. They were
legally right. ‘hey shall show thee the sentence of judgment ” (ver. 9). In
harmony with the will of God and the interests of the suitors. Not the result
of worldly wisdom but of divine teaching. 2. They were binding in authority.
No appeal from this judgment. It was was the law of God, not the enactment
of men. a. Obedience was enforced. “Thou shalt do.” We must receive the
truth, not as the word of man, but the word of God. »b. Disobedience was
punished, 'lhe man that would not hearken but acted presumptuously must
die. Resistance was rebellion, which was severely rebuked, condemned and
uy It was “ striving with the priest ” (Hos. iv. 4) and contending with


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OUAP. XVI.





God. “ What shall be the end of them that obey not the gospel of God?”
3. They were benevolent in their aim. “That the people might hear and fear
and do no more presumptuously ” (ver. 13). To check evil, keep humble, and
promote order and righteousness, ‘For the punishment of evil doers and the
praise of them that do well.”


Socrety’s WELFARE PRomorenp,


Mankind are associated together for something more than to eat, sleep, and
Secure protection. ‘Ihey co-exist for mutual intercourse, mutual help and the
advancement of present and eternal good. ‘This is accomplished—


I. By legal tribunals. Since society is not human in its origin, conven-
tional in its principals, and accidental in its destination, its institutions must
harmonise with its character and aim. Government is needful to its existence
and welfare. Courts of justice are tribunals to defead right, truth, and liberty.
God who lays upon mankind the necessity of appointing rulers, has laid upon
rulers the necessity of rewarding good and punishing evil. Resistance tends to
weaken government and create disorder. “ Let every good soul be subject unto
the higher powers. For there is no power but of God: the powers that be are
ordaiued (ordered) of God.”


II. By the co-operation of all ite functions. We have different classes,
different ranks and various interests among men. But in politital, ecclesiastical
and civil matters, the good of the whole should be consulted. Priests and
ministers of religion may enlighten the public conscience and expound the
law. Judges and magistrates may administer that law “for the punishment of
evil doers and for the praise of them that do well.” ‘There should be no invasion
of rights and no alienation of ranks ; no miscarriage of justice and no schism in
the body.” ‘There are many departments with one interest and end ; “ diversi-
ties of operation with the same spirit.”

Heaven forming each on other to depend
A master, or a servant, or a friend,


Bids each on other for assistance call,
Till one man’s weakness grows the strength of all,


III, By upholding the authority of God’s Word. “The law” must be
honoured and upheld. This is the only guarantee of order, prosperity and
morality. It should be the ruling principle of kings, parliaments, and people.
It should regulate the counsels of statesmen and the maxims of lawyers; reign
in the country and the colonies, in the cottage and the court. ‘I'his is the


- sweet ground on which a nation’s prosperity can rest and rise to the highest


pitch. Institutions and enterprises, thrones and empires that disregard the
word of God will fall, and great will be their fll. When the law of God is ex-
alted “ there will be security of thy times, riches of salvation, of wisdom and
knowledge, Fear of Jehovah is then the treasure of Judah ” (Isa. xxxiii. 6).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 8-13. Thereisa misconception to go to a judge, the priest to get his
of this passage. The argument built opinion and his decision, and if you
upon it by the most able Romish will not accept it, that then you are to
controversialists is, that here plainly be anathematized and expelled. But


the Bible is not enough ; that you are just mark a few distinctions BO gee


OAP. XVIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY.





in such a statement. First, it is not
to hear a controversy about doctrine,
but a controversy aboutblood, and plea,
and stroke,—civil matters, Secondly,
when there is a controversy, it is not
the high priest that is to decide it ; but
it is the priest or the Levite—a layman
—or the judge—a layman also. ‘here-
fore if they will quote this passage as a
precedent for Papal infallibility, de-
ciding doctrinal discussions and expel-
ling them that will not submit toit, they
ought to quote fully; and if they quote
fully, they will see it is not controversy
about doctrine, but about civil matters ;
and next, that the controversy is
to be appealed not to an ecclesiastio


only, but to a layman as well.—(Dr.
Cumming.)

Vers. 9, 10.—Duties of priests te
expound the law, of judges to admin-
ister it, and of the people to ascertain
it. “The law shall not perish from the
priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor
the word from the prophet.”

Vers. 12, 13. Presumptuous sins.
1. Resistanceto priests when dissatisfied
with interpretation of law. 2. Resis-
tance to judges when discontented with
sentence or decisions given. Such
refractory conduct worthy of death.
“Presumptuous are they and self-
willed.” “‘ Keep back thy servant from
presumptuous sin.”


Tue Cuoick anp Durty or a Kiwa.—Verses 14-20,


If Israel should wish for a king when they possessed the land, God gave per-


mission to choose one under His direction.


“The appointment of a king is not


commanded, like the institution of judges (chap. xvi. 18), because Israel could
exist under the government of Jehovah without an earthly king; it is simply


permitted, in case the need should arise for a regal government,”


(Keil.)


I, The choice of a king. Moses foresaw the nation’s wish to have a king,


and is taught to legislate for his choic


1. According to Divine arrangement.
Lord thy God shall choose.”


Divine approval.


me” (Hoa, viii. 4).
which is not thy brother.”


e and conduct (ef. 1 Sam. viii, 10-12).


“Set him king over thee, whom the


‘The people might select, but subject somehow to
Kings are God’s vice-regents, and He nominates when nations
elect them. God’s will should direct and determine our choice,
are reproved for acting in forgetfulness,


The people
“They have set up kings, but not by


2. Not from a strange nation. “Nota stranger over thee
Kings must own their kinship to the people and act


as brothers, not as Eastern despots nor royal castes. A gentile head for a Jewish
nation would be strange, might defeat the end in view in separating that nation
from others, and introduce strange customs and foreign alliances.


II. The duties of the king. These are specified. 1. Negatively. (a) He


is not to depend upon horses. “ Not multiply horses” (verse 16).
must not be in “horses and chariots”


His trust
and warlike preparations, but in the


living God. Egypt furnished Canaan with horses (1 Kings x. 28, 29), aud they


might be endangered by alliance, and tainted by idolatry.
that go down to Egypt for help, and stay on horses ” ete. (Is. xxxi. Th


to be seduced b


“Woe to them
(5) Not


many wives, “ Neither shall he multiply wives to himself”


No harem must be kept to gratify the love of pleasure. His heart must not
be turned away from business and works of piety. “When Solomon was old


his wives turned away his heart after other gods” (1 Kings xi, 1-4).


to accumulate riches.


(c) Not


“Neither shall he greatly mulitiply to himself silver


and gold.” Desire for wealth might lead to oppression and injustice. Riches


produce pride, and we are not “ to trust in uncertain riches.
(a) He must copy the law, or some qualified scribe must copy it for him.


2. Positively.
This


would inure himself to labour snd study, enlighten and impress his mind.
The Word of God must not only be written on parchment, but imprinted on


250


a


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. XVII,


a


the mind and heart. (6) He must read it when copied. “He shall read
therein.” It is not enough to have the Bible in the cabinet, or in the drawer :
we must read it. Read it daily, read it all through life as our guide and
companion, Alexander valued Homer most highly and Scipio Africanus would
scarcely allow Xenophon’s Cyclopedia to be put out of sight. The king of
Israel was to study God’s ein, and meditate therein day and night,


Eartuty Kings unpDes THe Power or THE HEAVENLY Kina,


I. In the method of their election. None chosen without God’s permission,
or if chosen, elected without His providence, ‘The Most High ruleth in the


kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever He will” (Dan. iv. 32 3 v. 21).


II. In the laws by which they govern. Good laws are made by good men,
and good men are the gift of God. Bad laws are often overruled for the good


of men.


“ Of law,” says Hooker, “these can be no less acknowledged than


that her seat is the bosom of God—her voice the harmony of the world.”
III. In the duration of their reign—God can lengthen or shorten their days.


He puts down one and sets up another.


“He changeth the times and the


seasons : He removeth kings and setteth up kings” (Dan. ii, 21).


HOMILETIO HINTS


Ver. 14. Anticipated provisions.

egal government not enjoined, almost
discountenanced and forbidden, but
future provision made and rules of
conduct given. So in Christian history
and Christian life,


Ver. 16. Horses. As horses appear
to have been generally furnished by
Egypt, God prohibits these. 1. Lest
these should be such commerce with
Egypt as might lead to idolatry. 2. Lest
the people might depend upon a well
appointed cavalry as a means of secu-
rity and so cease trusting in the
strength and protection of God. And
8. That they might not be tempted to
extend their dominion by means of
cavalry and so get scattered among the
surrounding idolatrous nations, and
thus cease in process of time to be that
distinct and separate people which God
intended they should be ; and without
which the prophecies relative to the
Messiah, could not be known to have
the due and full accomplishment.—
A. Clarke.


Ver. 18. Write a


LA
standard of reference. an


copy.
Probably


4ND SUGGESTIONS.


autograph kept in the tabernacle by
the priests. 2. A preventative from
error. Possibly every copy was revised
by priests and compared to the original.
8. A provision for the future. Former
copies would bear out, but new ones
were to be made. ‘Thus the Word of
God has been handed down from age
to age.


Vers. 18, 19. Observe on this pass-
age—1, That it was the surest way to
bring the Israelitish king to an
acquaintance with the divine law, to
oblige him to write out a fair copy of
it with his own hand, 2. He has to
read this law diligently and constantly ;
neither the greatness of his place nor
the height and wultitude of his
business must excuse or hinder him.
8. It is not enough to have Bibles,
but we must use them ; yea, use them
daily. Our souls must have constant
meals of that manna, which, if well
digested, will afford them true nourish-
ment and strength.—J. Wilson. The
king, even the king, was not to aT rd
an amenuensis, but was himself to
write out a copy of the law. Evidently
the reason was, what you ps ad


OHAP. XVIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





you forget rapidly, but if you sit down
and write, and that carefully and in
the best handwriting that you can,
texts from the Bible, you will recollect
them much more easily. And no
doubt the object of making the king
write it out for himself was that it
might be impressed upon his mind and
heart the more.— Dr, Cumming.


Vers. 19, 20. Proper reading of
Scripture will beget—1. A right state
of mind, “That his heart be not
lifted up.” Deep humility becomes all
students. 2. Reverence for Divine
authority. The fear of God and regard
for His statutes. 8. Conscientious
obedience to Divine law—‘“'l'o do
- them,” or daily reading of the law.
(1) ‘'o learn to fear God. (2) To be
kept from pride. (3) To prevent
apostacy, and (4) to secure the
possesion of the throne. Elevation
begets pride and pride independence,
Charles the Great set the crown upon
the Bible. The Bible is the best
support of the crown and kingdom.

With him. As his vade mecum, his
manual, his running library, the man
of his counsel. Luther said he would
not live in Paradise without the Bible,


as with it he could easily live in hell
itself.— Trapp.

That his heart be not lifted up.
Observe—1. It is here intimated that
the Scriptures diligently read are a
powerful means to keep a person
humble, because they show that,
though a king, he is subject to a
higher monarch, to whom he must
give an account of all his adminis-
trations, and receive from him his
sentence agreeably to their quality,
which is sufficient to abate the
haughtiest person in the world.
2. That the greatest monarch may
receive more benefit by the Scriptures
than by all the wealth and power of
his monarchy. An attentive, prayer-
ful, believing perusal of the Bible will
be of advantage. (1) To His person
“He shall prolong his days in his
kingdom. We find in the history of
the kings of Judah, that generally the
best reigns were the longest, except
when God shortened them for the
punishment of the people, as Josiah’s.
(2) To his family; his children shall
also prosper. ntail religion upon
posterity and God will entail a blessing
upon it.’—J, Wilson.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XVII.


Ver. 1. Blemish. Remember that
God will not be mocked ; thatit is the
heart of the worshipper which he
regards. We are never safe till we
love Him with our whole heart whom
we pretend to worship.— Bp. Henshawe.


Vers. 2-7. There is but one true God,
who made heaven and earth, and sea
and winds; but the foily and madness
of mankind brought in images as repre-
sentatives of God (Rom. i. 22, 23),
“ All the princes of the earth hath not
had so many subjects betrayed and
made traitors by their enemies as God
hath lost souls by the means of idolatry
and images.— Bp. //ooker.

Enquire diligently, ver. 4.

“ Believe not each accusing tongue,
As most weak persons do ;
But still believe that story wrong
Which ought not to be true.” —
252 Sheridan,


Vers. 8-13. Too hard. The greatest
difficulties lie where we are not look-
ing for them.—(Goethe.) Controversy,
ver. 8. Many controversies grow up
about religion, as suckers from the root
and limbs of a fruit tree, which spend
the vital sap that should make it fruit-
ful.—(Hlavel.) Sentence of judgment,
ver. 9. ‘I'he main strength and force
of a law consists in the penalty annexed
to it.— Blackstone.


“ Sovereign law, that states collected will
O’er thrones and globes elate,
Sits empress, crowning good, repressing ill,
Sir W. Jones,


Vers, 14, 15. King over thee.
Government is a contrivance of human
wisdom to provide for human wants,
(Burke.) Horses. For stateliness and
majesty what is comparable to a horse


—sir 7, More.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


OHAP. XVII.


eee


Vers. 18-20. A book. Bishop
Hooker, in a dedication to king Edward
VI., remarked, “God in heaven, and
the king on earth, hath not a greater
friend than the Bible.” “The Bible
is the foundation of all good govern-
ment, as it instructs rulers and subjects
in their respective duties. A French
lady once said to Lord Chesterfield
that she thought the Parliament of


men in the kingdom. ‘True, madam,
they are generally supposed to be so.’
‘What then, my lord, can be the reason
that they tolerate so great an absurdity
as the Christian religion ?’ ‘I suppose,
madam,’ replied his lordship, ‘ it is be-
cause they have not been able to substi-
tute anything better in its stead; when
they can, I do not doubt but in their
wisdom they will readily adopt it.’ ”—


England consisted of five or sixhundred Whitecross,


of the best informed and most sensible


CHAPTER XVIIL


Crrrtcat Norrs.—After speaking of the rulers of the people, Moses now mentions the teachers
eee Levites, and prophets ; and what their privileges and position must be in their settlement
anaan.


Vers, 3-5. Rights of priests, The tribe of Levi had no inheritance like other tribes (Num.
18-20) ; wholly consecrated to the priestly office, they were supported by tithes, first-fruits, and
portions of sacrifices, which God had expressly reserved to Himself, yet when offered bestowed
upon His servants. Priest’s due, the shoulder, two cheeks, and the maw, #.e., the front leg,
The two jaw bones, and the rough stomach of ruminants in which digestion is completed, and which
was considered a great dainty (ver, 3). First-fruits, the law repeated from Num. xviii. 12, 13, for
the purpose of adding “ the first of the fleece of thy sheep” (ver. 4). Him and his sons. Refers
ence to Aaron and his sons, in whom the priesthood was established (ver. 5).


Vers. 6-8, The Levites, i.¢, the non-priestly Levites contrasted with the priests must be
remembered. “These verses presuppose that part of the Levites only will be in residence and
Officiating at the sanctuary, the others dwelling in their homes in the Levitical cities (cf,
Num. xxxv). But if any Levite, out of love for the service, chose to resort to it when he might
reside in his own home, he was to have his share in the maintainance which was provided for
those ministering in the order of their cause.”—(Speak. Com.) Sojourned, though not homeless.
He was regarded asa sojourner only, for he had no inheritance in the land. A/inister assistant
to the priest (Num. iii. 6). Patrimony, lit. his price upon (the house) of (his) fathers, Margin,
his siles by the fathers. The Levites had no part in the land, but they might individually have
property, buy andsell houses and fields. Abiathar (1 Kings ii. 26; Jeremiah xxxii.7). A
Levite who desired to settle at the sanctuary, must have his share of the perquisites, notwith-
standing private resources. Have like portions, lit., “part like part shall they eat.” The new
comer and those already in attendance must share and share alike.


Vers, 9-14. Passing on to speak of the prophets, the Icgislator begins by enumerating and
prohibiting the various superstitions by which heathen nations of Canaan had sought to explore
the future and to test the will of the Deity.—(Sp. Com.) Through fire, t.e.. to Molech,
(cf. Lev. xviii. 21 ; xx, 2-5), a rite of doubtful character, but connected with magical arts, and
probably with unlawful lusts (2 Kings xviii. 17 ; 2 Chr. xxxiii. 6; Ezek. xxiii. 37). Divination
(cf. Ezek. xxi. 21) for different methods of it, and (Num. xxiii, 23) observance of times, mode of
dividing days into lucky and unlucky, or of drawing omens from clouds (Lev. xix. 26).
Enchanter, serpent charmer. Witch, sorcerer (Ex. vii. 11). Charmer (ver. 11), one who fascinates
noxious animals, like Hastern serpent-charmers. The word is derived from a root to bind,
referring to the custom of binding or banning by magical knots. Wizard, originally “the wise
one,” “ the knowing one,” from a verb to know. Necromancer, one who interrogates the dead
(2 Chr. xxxiii. 6), Thus all known words are grouped together, which belong to the practices
described—perfect, upright, sincere or blameless (Latin inteyer) in relation to God. For thee
emphatic, not so thou, God never allowed (Heb. given), granted thee to do such things,


Vers. 15-22. No need for Israel to turn to soothsayers; God would raise up from amongst
them a prophet time after time, a series of prophets. Like me, not in every sense, but as
intercessor for the people and revealer of God’s will. Assembly (ver. xvi. 16 of. a A 10, and


CHAP. XVIIL HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





Ex. xx. 19), To this prophet who should speak words received directly from God, reverence
and obedience must be rendered. Require it (ver. 19), t.¢., visit disobedience with punishment
(cf. Ps. x. 18; Acts iii. 23). The prophet who presumed to speak in God’s name, or utter worda
not given him, must be regarded as a blasphemer and put to death (ver 20). If his prophecy
failed, or if his words did not come to pass, he was discovered to be an imposter, Whatever
signs and wonders were performed, fulfilment of prediction was the true test of prophecy
(of. op. 12, 2 sq.)


Tux Rianrs anpD Duties or Priests.— Verses 1-5,


From the limitations of monarchy, Moses turns to the duties of the priests
and specifies their inheritance and dues.


I. The dignity of priests. They were a special tribe called to minister in the
name of the Lord (ver 5). 1. Chosen of God. ‘Thy God hath chosen him.”
This is an honour which no man taketh upon himself (Heb. v. 5), not hereditary
nor conferred by men, and which should not be despised. ‘‘Seemeth it but a
small thing unto you, that the God of Israel hath separated you . . . to
bring you nearer to Himself” (Num, xvi. 9). 2. Consecrated to holy service.
“To minister in the name of the Lord.” He was not engaged in secular
callings, nor employed in the service of an earthly monarch, but in the serivce,
by the authority and for the praise of God. A sense of this dignity should be
carefully formed, and constantly realised. Dignity of character should corres-
pond with dignity of station. Ministers should “magnify” (glorify) their
“office” (Rom. xi. 13) by a due appreciation of its nature, an earnest
endeavour to live up to its demands, and a fearless discharge of its duties.


II, The due of priests. Deprived of land and specially set apart for spiritual
functions, they had special reverences. 1. They required the sympathy of the
people. ‘The order preceded from the midst of the people (Ex. xxviii 1), was,
appointed for the benefit of the people and depended upon the people. They
were not a sacred caste, standing in proud pre-eminence above the rest of the
nation, A principle of equality was indicated in priesthood and monarch
“Taken from among men.” 2, 7hey required the support of the people. To
reward their labour, performed instead of the first-born of the people, and to
compensate their loss of material wealth, it was ordained that they should
receive tithes of produce and parts of animal sacrifices, |'The Levite, as well as
the widow and orphan, was commended to the special kindness of the people
(Deut. xiv. 27-29; xii. 19). “ He commanded the people to give the portion
of the priests and the Levites, that they might be encouraged in the law of the
Lord ” (2 Chron. xxxi. 4).


III. The inheritance of priests, ser had cities and residence that they
might exercise a refined influence upon the people, and disseminate a knowledge
of the law, but no territorial possessions. ‘The Lord is their inheritance ”
(verse 2). 'I'heirs by adopting love, personal preference, and public avowal.
An inheritance blessed, satisfactory, secure, and permanent. “I am their
inheritance and ye shall give them no possession in Israel” ‘Ezek. xliv. 28).


Tus MINIstRATION AND MAINTENANCE OF THE Priests.— Verses 1-8.


The words may be applied to the Christian ministry, though not a priesthood
in the Old 'l'estament sense. The sacred office is filled with men divinely called
and qualified, entrusted with the most responsible and enriching blessing, and
rendering the greatest service to their fellow men.

254


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. CHAP, XVIII





I, The calling of a priest is one of the highest into which a man can enter.
It eclipses earthly callings as the sun outshines the stars. 1. An office divinely
instituted. Not left to the wisdom and device of men. “'I'he ministry is a
matter of free grace and favour,” says Quesnel, “who then will dare to enter
into it without a Divine call? There is nothing in which a king would willingly
be more absolute than in the choice of his ministers, and shall we dare to con-
test, and take away this right from the King of Kings.” “Ordained of God as
was Aaron.” 2. An office spiritual in its nature. Levites were forbidden to-
become farmers and enter into commercial pursuits. ‘They were devoted to the
service of God and the ministration of His house. The work is not an ordinary
profession, conducted on the principles of commercial transactions. Ministers
“must give themselves to prayer and the ministry of the word.” 3. An office
perpetual in its duration, ‘“ Him and his sons for ever.” Aaron died but suc-
cessors entered the office. Human life is uncertain ; we must not trust to man
whose breath is in his nostrils. Ministers die, but the ministry remains a per-
petual monument, a gift of God to all generations.


II. Many priests in discharging the duties of their calling are exemplary
in their zeal. Sometimes a Levite would leave his own home, and from intense
love devote himself to the altar of the sanctuary. ‘Come with all the desire of
his mind unto the place which the Lord shall choose.” ‘This is the true spirit
of service, the spirit of the Master and of His apostles, No coldness and
formality here. We often lack zeal and spiritual fervour ; are too carnal, selfish,
and slothful, Love is wanting. ‘O that I was all heart, and soul, and spirit,”
said Rowland Hill, “to tell the glorious gospel of Christ to perishing multitudes,”
We wust sacrifice worldly pleasure, and personal convenience, and devote our-
selves with energy to our work. ‘‘I longed to be as a flame of fire continually
glowing in the Divine service,” cried Brainerd. “'T'he zeal of Thine house hath
eaten me up (devoured like a flame)” (Juno. ii. 17; Ps. lxix. 9).


III. It is the duty of the people to support the priests in their calling.
“The priests” had their “due from the people.” 1. Zhis ts reasonable. “If
we have sown unto you spiritual things, it is a great thing if we shall reap your
carnal things!” If aman gives his time aid talents for the benefit of the

eople, surely they are bound to secure his temporal comforts. “The labourer
is worthy of his hire.” 2. This is scriptural. ‘The principle laid down by our
Lord and applied by apostles in support of the ministry is confirmed by
scripture. “Do ye not know, that they which minister about holy things live
of the things of the temple? and they which wait at the altar are partakers
with the altar? Even so the Lord hath ordained that they which preach the .
gospel should live of the gospel.” This arrangement helps to secure an efficient
ministry, to promote mutual good, and to bring out energies for the spread of
the gospel,


Dezstre ror MryisterraL Service.— Verse 6


It appears that the Levites served in rotation from the earliest times ; but
from their great numbers, it was only at distant intervals they could be called
into actual service, Should any Levite, however, under the influence of eminent
piety, resolve to devote himself wholly and continually to the sacred duties of
the Sanctuary, he was allowed to realise his ardent wishes ; and as he was
admitted to the share of the work, so also to a share of the remuneration
(Jamieson), his desire for the work is a prominent feature in the character
and qualifications of the Christian minister. ae


CHAP. XVII HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





I. It is a constraining. desire. More than a general desire to be useful—a
special kindling within, like “ the burning fire shut up” in the prophet’s bosom
overcoming reluctance for God’s service (Jer. xx. 9). This constraint rises
above all difficulties, and takes pleasure in sacrifices for the work’s sake. “ This
is a true saying (note the emphasis), if a man desire (vehemently, intensely) the
office of a bishop, he desireth a good work” (1 Tim. iii. 1).


Il. It is a considerate desire. The result of matured thought. The cost ia
counted, most watchful caution exercised, and the providence of God ascertained,
Matthew Henry warns against intrusion into the sacred office. _ “We must not
be forward to put forth ourselves in the exercise of spiritual gifts. Pride often
appears under the pretence of a desire to be useful. If the motive be correct it
is good, but humility will wait for a call.” “ He that believeth shall not make
haste.”


III. it is a disinterested desire. A choice not influenced by love of literature,
respect and professional dignity. “ With all brave and and rightly-trained men,
their work is first, their fee second,” says Ruskin. It is an office in which we
“seek not great things for ourselves.” God always implants a love in the heart
for the service to which He calls, and better not enter than seek to get a name
or maintain a party. “IfIdo this thing willingly (spontaneously without
renumeration) I have a reward (verse 18), but if against my will (not spon-
taneously), a dispensation (a stewardship) is committed to me, “and so have no
special claim to reward for that which necessity is laid upon me to do.”
(I Cor. ix. 17.)


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 2. The Lord their inheritance.
True of the believer as well as the
Levite and priest. An inheritance.
1. Divinely bestowed. Not gained like
earthly possessions by favouritism,
wealth, and heriditary succession. 2.
Liver sufficient. Men of the world seek
pleasure here and there, labour for
possessions and are doomed to dis-
appointment. Charles V., Emperor of
Germany, cried out to all his honours


“ Exercise thyself.” 2, Priestly spirit.

Not selfish, but  self-sacrificing and

Christlike, which prompts to selfs

denial and readiness of mind. “ Here

Lord am I, send me.” 3. Priestly
reward. In God the object of affection

and centre of bliss. “Iam their ine

heritance,” etc. (Ezek. xliv. 28).


Vers. 6-8. Voluntary service. 1,
Devoted to the noblest purpose,


and trophies “Get you hence, no more
of you.” 3. Indissolubly sure. It never
diminishes, changes hands nor leads to
poverty. “ An everlasting portion.”
Stand to minister. 1. Priestly ser-
vice, active, energetic ministry nor
idleness, apathy nor negligent habits.


2. Rendered in the holiest place.
3. Springing from the warmest spirit.
We must offer ourselves. Self-conse-
cration, the first act of priestly service,
“Our character is our will,” says
Archbishop Manning, “for what we
will we are.”


Tue Vocation anp Duty or Gop’s Prortr.— Verses 9-18,


Israel had constantly to be warned against infection from the idolatrous


customs of the Canaanites.


The nature of such customs is described, and they


are reminded of their calling and relation to God.


I. God calls His people to be like Him,


“Be perfect with the Lord thy


God” (verse 13). Israel were to be upright in conduct, unpolluted in worship,


256


HOMILETIC COUMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. CHAP, XVIT.


MIGIMIMGI Io


and devoted entirely to Him. Likeness to God must be the aim of life. A
Christian must progress in knowledge and love of God every day ; for the less
we think of God, the greater the danger of conforming to the world. “Let ug
go on unto perfection.” This is the high calling and destiny of the believer.
“Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.”


IL In responding to this call, they must avoid worldly customs, Called
out of the world, though living in it, they must avoid its “abominations.”
charmers and “observers of times.” It has its witches, and “women of familiar
spirits.” Notions of lucky and unlucky days are not confined to heathen
countries. In this country, men observe the stars, charm diseases, and
Pence success of wars, the happiness or misfortune of marriages, and the
ength of human life. This dethrones God from the heart and supersedes the
romises and threatenings of His word. It rejects the doctrine of Divine

rovidence and is treason to the Ruler of the Universe. “Should not a people
seek unto their God ? for (on behalf of) the living (should they consult) to the
dead?” (Is. viii. 19).


III. In seeking to avoid worldly customs God alone can help- God alone
had preserved Israel in the past. ‘“'I'hy God hath not suffered thee so to do”
(ver. 14). In the future, instead of having recourse to heathen superstitions,
He would provide them with “a prophet,” with divine teaching time after
time. In Christ and the scripture we have help. If weak and sinful, God’s
gtace can renew aud strengthen. If dark and uncertain, the word is a light and
guide. Christ completes what Moses begins. He is still performing the
prophetic office, calling ministers by His Spirit, enlightening men to understand
the scriptures and making the gospel come to them, not in word only, but in
power and in the Holy Ghost and in much assurance,


HeatHew ABOMINATIONS AVOIDED.


One reason to shun the practices of idolatry springs from the nature of the
evils themselves. 1. 7hey are cruel. Children “pass through the fire.” How
inhuman that religion which requires children to be burned or thrown into
rivers, and parents in age and infirmity to be given to wild beasts! “Cruelty
is one of the highest scandals to piety,” says Secker. ‘The dark places of the
earth are full of the habitations of cruelty (homesteads of violence.) ”—Kay.
(Ps. ixxiv. 20.) 2. 7hey are enticing. Divination, enchanter and witch have
their spells. Idolatry, ‘‘a shameful creed of craft and cruelty,” delights in
what fills the sensuous imagination. Ritualistic practices attract the eyes,
fascinate the mind, and minister to self-conceit. ‘“ Who hath bewitched
(fascinated) you, that ye should not obey the truth?” (Gal. iii. 1). 3. They
are defiling “ Abowinations.” Paintings and sculptures, laws and legends,
reveal the awful corruptions of the heathen world. All sin defiles, and men
through sin “‘are together become unprofitable (corrupt, useless)” (Rom. iii. 12),
Their odour is not praise and prayer, but the poison of asps and secreted malice.
“Those things which proceed out of the mouth come forth from the heart, and
they defile the man.” 4. They are destructive. “‘ Because of these abomina-
tions the Lord doth drive them out.” Sin drives away from God here and from
heaven hereafter. The fruit of idolatry and superstitions is death. Death
spiritual and death eternal. ‘Ye shall not walk in the manners of the nation,
which I cast out before you, for they committed all these things, and therefore


I abhorred them.”
B 257





OHAP, XVIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY
HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.
Vers. 18, 14. 1. Preserving grace. Lord our God. 1. In love to His name.


God did not suffer Israel to do these
things. Other nations He “ gave up
to their own hearts’ lusts, and suffered
to walk in their own ways” (Acts
14-16). 2. High vocation. “Be per-
fect.” Every man has an ideal, some
ruling thought, some object of life.
Religion sets forth the ends of life and
supplies motives and power for striving


for them. God is the desire of our:


nature, fills the highest capacities of
the mind, and should be the aim of
our life. 3. Constant effort to reach tt.
“Thou shalt not learn to do these.”
Life is a school in which we must learn
to know God and do good.


Ver. 13. Christian perfection. <A
solemn injunction. I. Unfold its im-
port. We must be perfect with the


2. In affiance to His care. 3. In zeal
for His glory. II. Enforce its authority.
Without real integrity before God, we
can have—1. No comfort in our souls.
2. No stability in our ways. 38. No
acceptance with God. Address—(1)
Those who are unable to ascertain with
confidence their real state. (2) Those
who have an inward evidence that
their hearts are right with God.—
C. Simeon, M.A.

Perfect, i.e., whole, entire. 1. In
the elements of your character. Have
nothing defective, weak and lacking.
2. In the method of your worship. No
admixture of heathenism and error.
3. In the duties of your life. Be
blameless, innocent, and upright. Scat-
ter thy life through every part, and
sanctify the whole.


Tre PRoPHET LIKE TO Moszs,


Here Moses is not speaking of a collective body of prophets, to which Christ
is at the end incidentally annexed, as Calvin and other expositors understand
the passage ; but the whole office and station of the prophets is represented to
him as personified in Christ, as the person in whom his conception of that office
would be perfectly realised. Thus there is a concurrent reference to the other
prophets, not in their individual capacities, but only in relation to the Spirit,
who, though in a manner not yet completed, was powerfully efficient in them
and conjoined them along with their Head in one united body, They were
viewed in Christ, as they were but His instruments; His spirit constituted the
essence of their office. (Hengstenberg). Look at the principal circumstances
in the description, the likeness to Moses.


_ I. Like to Moses as a Prophet. Man has ever sought instruction and desired
light. Heathen oracles were dumb and philosophy impotent to satisty this
moral craving. Plato said “we must wait till someone shall teach us how we
ought to conduct ourselves towards the gods”—Moses was a prophet of the
highest rank who revealed and interpreted the will of God to men. Not merely
a religious man, but one supernaturally inspired. But Christ was “the teacher
sent from God.” He came from the bosom of the Father and declared (ex-
pounded) him in all his relationships to man (John i. 18). He is the manifest-
ation of God’s character, the revelation of His purpose. The manifold partial
disclosures of former messengers, have given place to one complete and final
revelation in Christ. “God who at sundry times and in divers manners spake
in times past unto the fathers by the prophets, hath in these last days spoken
unto us by His Son.”


II. Like to Moses as a Lawgiver.


Man requires law, loves ord d F
appy only in loyal obedience, q ? S order, and is
258


No Jewish prophet was legislator, no ruler had


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY, CHAP. XVILL








tight to govern supremely. David was king, inspired teacher and sweet psalmist
of Israel, but his work was merely executive. Jesus only was like Moses the
founder of a new constitution and a new period. He is the Head of the Church
and the Sovereign of men. Moses was faithful as a servant, but Christ has the
natural right “as a son over his own house.”


III. Like to Moses as an Intercessor (verse 16). When Israel sinned,
Moses interceded with God, obtained forgiveness, and delivered from temporal
punishments. Jesus is the Mediator of a better covenant, which was established
upon better promises (Heb. viii. 6). When cursed by the law, condemned by
conscience and afraid of intercourse with God, then even we find access and
receive help through “ Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant.”


IV. Like to Moses as leader of his people. Moses was the general and
leader of the nation. As chieftain of the community he administered their
affairs, and led them in the wilderness. But he could bring them only to the
borders of Canaan, and did not enter it himself. Christ guides through life
into heaven, and will for ever satisfy His people with fruits of faith and holiness.
We know not the way and could never discover it, but He leads by example
and precept. There are enemies powerful and combined, but he commands,
emboldens, and gives victory. “A leader, and commander to the people.”


Fatsz Propuets.— Vorses 20-22.


1. The presumption they display. ‘Presume to speak,” with a commission
from false gods as prophets of Baal ; or a pretended commission from the true
God. Just as there were false Christs, so were there false prophets, who imper-
sonated for popularity and gain. 2. The test by which they are known. “ If
thou say how?” It is often difficult to distinguish the true from the false, but
facts and fulfilment are the test. Whatever teaching or prediction does not
accord with history, scripture and God’s will, we may be sure, is not from God.
Samuel’s mission was proved because God “let none of His words fall to the
ground” (1 Sam. iii. 19, 20). 3. The punishment which they endure. “That
prophet shall die.” They seek to deceive, to draw away the people. ‘They have
committed high treason against the crown and authority of Jehovah, and had
to be condemned by the Sanhedrim which sat at Jerusalem. Hence the people
cautioned not to fear a false, but to obey a true prophet. The caution is
needful in our day. “ Beware of false propheta,”


HOMILETIO HINTS


Vers. 15-19. 1. Man’s craving for
light. On all the great problems of
life. God, the future and how to be
just with God. 2. Worldly wisdom un-
able to reveal light. Man has “ sought
out” many inventions ( entangled
himself with an infinity of questions,
Douay Vers) but never succeeded
(Ecc. 7. 29). 8, God in mercy has

iven light. Raised up prophets, sent
is Son and given His Spirit and


Word. “ Walk in the light,” etc.


AND 8UGGESTIONS.


Ver. 18. Christ like Moses. 1. In
coming from the people. “From
among their brethren.” 2. In the


intercourse he had with God. With
Moses God spoke “ mouth to mouth.”
3. In the attention which they demand.
We must “hear.” Some do not even
hear, but ridicule and oppose. Hearken
with attention and desire to learn. “ Jn
all” that I speak ; not some things, as
the love and mercy of God, but all
things concerning justice, poor


CHAP, XVIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


ese nto


and faith. There must be no choice,
no separation of one doctrine froin
another. Disobedience results in death
(Acts iii. 22, 23). “ Every soul” with-
out partiality, “shall be cutoff.” This
excision, not correction, not annihi-
lation, but death eternal. “From
among the people.” Intermixed now
in families and congregations, then
separated for ever.

This remarkable promise has two
great objects of reference. First, the
assurance that God would from time to
time, after Moses, send such prophets
as he was ; that is persons who should
make known to the Israelites the will
of God, stimulate them to obey His
precepts, and when it was requisite


foretel future events. These promises
God faithfully fulfilled in Moses,
Joshua, Samuel, and their successors
down to the coming of the Messiah,
who was known by the fulfilment of
prophecy to be the promised Redeemer.
The second point contained is the
obedience to Christ with willing hearts
In His capacity as lawgiver, deliverer
and guide, His people hearken unto
Him. (Seiler.) Like unto me. Both
in the participation of nature and of
office. true man, and a true
Mediator. Similes they are, but not
pares ; Christ being “ worthy of more
glory than Moses,” and why, see Het.
lii, 3 ; vii. 22; 9. 15.—Zrapp,


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XVIIl


Vers. 1-5. Priests. The priesthood
hath, in all nations and all religions,
been held highly venerable—#p. At-
terbury. ‘lhe vesture of that older
priesthood is with us an adornment of
the heart ; and the glory of them that
are chief in priesthood is to us no
longer commended by the beauty of
vestments, but by a splendour that is
of the soul.—sSt. Gregory.


Ver. 6. Desire of mind. The virtues
of the will are above the successions of
time.—A bp. J/anning. Most merciful
Father! grant me to covet with an
ardent mind those things which may
please thee ; to search them wisely, to
know them truly, and to fulfil them
perfectly ; to the praise, laud, and glory
of thy name. Order my living so that I
may do that which thou requirest of
me, and me give grace that | may
know it, and have will and power to
do it.—/dward VI.


Vers. 9-12. Witch. A border be-
tween earth and hell; her qualities
are rather those of the former than of
the latter.—G. Gilfillan. Those who
go to astrology, or wise men as they
call them, to know their fortunes and
enquire of the events of their life, they

260


forsake God, and betake themselves to
lying vanities.—A bp. Tillotson.


Submit thy fate to Heaven’s indulgent care,
Though all seems lost, ’tis impious to despair 5
The tracks of Providence, like rivers wind,
And though immerged in earth from human
eyes,
Again break forth, and more conspicuous rise,
Young,


Ver. 13. Perfect. Moral perfecti-
bility is our destiny.—G. Forster.
‘The Christian ought to know more of
God every day; otherwise he may
think of Him less, till he totally
forgets Him; and then he ig in
danger of falling into that state, out
of which men cannot be renewed by
repentance.—Jones of Nayland.


Vers. 15-19. Prophet. The mission
of the prophets was the religious educa-
tion of the Jewish people. They were
raised up according to the exigencies
of the times to preserve them from
error, and to prepare their minds
for the future development of the
kingdom of God. Their object was
twofold—to maintain the Church in
allegiance to prescribe rites, institu-
tions and ordinances, and yet to
prepare the people for a further


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. XVIIL

SS a ee

manifestation of the blessing of the doctrine, to the dictates of external

new covenant. decency. But as to the gospel, he is

; a perfect statue without life.—Bridye.

Ver. 19. Not hearken, Manis deaf “Is the sermon done?” it was asked

and blind in the things of God. of one who returned from church

“ Having ears he hears not, having sooner than usual, “ No, not yet ;”

eyes he sees not.” ‘To his need and was the answer. “ Itis preached, but ir

to his remedy he is alike insensible. His still remains to be done.’—G, S. Bowes.
ear Is open to sound advice, to moral


CHAPTER XIX.


Onrrtcat, Norrs.—This and the next two chapters contain enactments designed to protect
human life, and to impress its sanctity on Israel.—Speak. Com.


With vers, 1-10 cf, Exodus xxi. 18, and Numbers xxxv. 9-34, The laws concerning cities of
refuge are not mere repetitions, but an admonition to carry out former laws with reference to
future extension of boundaries in the land of Canaan. Cities of refuge had already been set
apart on the east of Jordan. Directions are given concerning land on the west. Three Cities
more were separated cf. Jos. xx,


Ver, 8. Prepare. The Senate made good roads two or three cubits wide—not mere tracks for
animals—bridged over rivers and removed barriers. This done generally in the month Adar.
Every facility was given to the fugitive (Is. xl, 3). Ignorantly, without premeditation—-
accidentally, as verse 5. Avenger. Whose duty it was to avenge the rights aud redeem the
property of kinsmen, Not with sudden excitement or burning desire to revenge,


Vers, 8-9. In case they should possess the whole land promised by God to the fathers for
faithful obedience 3 then they were to add three more cities and have nine altogether. This
command was not carried out because extension of country was never fully or permanently
realised.


Vers, 10-18. Innocent blood would be shed if the unintentional manslayer was not protected
Israel would be guilty. Blood upon thee, if this duty was neglected. But the cities were not
to be asylums for criminals, If a real murderer should flee for refuge, the (elders) magistrates
of his own town were to fetch him back and deliver him to the avenger to be put to death.


Ver..14. Landmarks. Not only is human life sacred, but the means of sustaining it must be
held sacred—hence this prohibition, Gardens were enclised, but fields were left open, or
marked off, by a small trench, a little cain or single stones easily removed. ’

Vers, 15-21. False witness. The rule concerning capital charges (chap. xvii. 6) is extended
to all accusations before a court of justice. A single witness was not sufficient to convict a man
of any civil or criminal offence. Wrong, lit., falling away, apostacy (xiii. 5); here any kind of
erime worthy of capital punishment (ver. 19). The accused and the witness were to come before
Jehovah, viz., before the priests and judges, at the sanctuary and not before the local court. —
Keil. If the witness had lied they were to act towards him as he intended towards his brother
(of. Prov. xix, 5-9; Dan. vi. 24, The lextalionis was applied without reserve (Ex. xxi. 23 ;
Lev. xxiv. 20).—Xeil, Observed in principle, not in letter, by the Jewish courts.—Speak, Com.


Crruzs oF Rervuar.— Verses 1 -10.


Places of refuge where the guilty and unfortunate could find shelter were
not unknown in heathen nations. Greece and Rome had their temples and
groves, ‘The jus asyli, the right of shelter was ever considered sacred. Cities
of Refuge are some of the most delightful types of O. ‘I. economy and may be
considered in many ways (ef, chan. iv. 41-43). Look at them ~— a


OHAP. XIX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOM Y.





I. As institutions promoting a spirit of humanity. They would act bene-
ficially in ages when violence and revenge predominated and when fixed habita-
tions were few. They were founded with a view to abate evils springing from
the old-established rights of the blood avenger, and thus created a mild and
gentle spirit ; gave proof of the superior wisdom and benignant design of the
Jewish laws. Impartial trial was given. Love of justice and regard for truth
were to overrule sentiment. Revenge was checked, innocent blood was not
lightly shed, and human life was considered sacred,


II. As institutions typical of Gospel truths. They exhibit the only method
of safety, into which if the sinner once enters he will be free from peril. 1. The
manslayer was in danger, He was pursued by the avenger, and might lose his
life. The sinner has broken the law, is exposed to its curse and condemnation—
Christ the refuge set before him in the gospel. Should the law reach him before
he flees for safety he is undone for ever. 2. Kefuge was casy of access. ‘The
cities were conveniently fixed, and could often be seen. Christ is not a distant
refuge, inaccessible or closed against us. ‘‘ The word is nigh thee, not in heaven
above, nor in the depth beneath” (Rom. x. 7, 8). 3. The way was prepared.
“Prepare thee a way.” Every river was bridged, every hillock levelled, and
every obstruction that might hurt or hinder taken away. Guides or posts were
fixed in every turning and cross road, with the words refuge, refuge, to direct
the unhappy man in flight. The way of salvation is simple and plain, warfaring
men, thane fools, need not err therein. Ministers of the gospel are sent to
urge, to direct the sinner to the Saviour. ‘‘ Prepare ye the way of the Lord”
(Isa. xl. 3). 4. Hestoration was made at the death of the high priest. The
fugitive remained in the city beyond the pursuer’s reach, gratuitously housed
and taught until this event happened. Then he was released, restored to his
relatives and “the land of his possession.” In Christ we are restored to the
inheritance forfeited by sin, adopted children, and made joint heirs of mansions
which He has gone to prepare for those who love Him. Our salvation depends
upon exclusive reliance in His merits and atoning death. “There is none other
name under heaven ” (Acts iv. 12).


Fuicur: wirnour Sarety.— Verses 11-18,


There was a difference between accidental and intentional murder, The
murderer might flee, but he was not protected in the city of refuge. He was
delivered up to be put to death. A fearful picture of disappointed hopé.


I. Flight through atrocious wickedness. Murder was a sin for which the
law provided no remedy. “‘ Ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer”
(Num. xxxv. 31). ‘I'o murder is to disregard the sanctity of life, resist the
claims of our neighbour and demonstrate our hatred to God. Man is encircled
by grandeur through his own immortality and his relation to the Infinite Majesty.
“ Whoso sheddeth man’s blood, by man shall his blood be shed ; for in the image
of God made He man.”


Il. Flight without safety. “The elders of the city send and fetch him, The
murderer is pursued, brought back, and suffers, ‘There is no escape from trans-
gression. 'T'he law is broad. “ exceeding broad” (Ps. cxix. 96) observes us in all
we do, and .goes where we go. God and couscience are omuipresent,
Memory is alive and retribution is certain. “ Murder will out” and “ guilt hath
no holiday,” says Bacon.

262


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY, OHAP, XIX,





III, Flight ending in ruin. “That he may die”—concealment was im-
ates The avenger, the priests and the people, were all concerned in the
etection and punishment of the criminal, 1. /uin without pity. “'Thine eye
shall not pity him.” 2. Ruin without remedy. “ He that killeth a man shall
surely be put to death” (Lev. xxiv. 17).


Murder may pass unpunished for a time,
But tardy justice will o’ertake the crime.— Dryden,


UsruLrittep Promises.— Verses 8-10.


God promised that their dominion should extend from the Nile to the
Euphrates (Gen. xv. 18 ; Ex. xxiii. 31). This promise was never really fulfilled.
Hence learn that—


I. God’s promises express benevolent purpose. “ Enlarge thy coast” (verse
Sf They reach far into our future, mark out, define and offer before-hand.
hey are accompanied by an oath and express the good pleasure of God.


II. The fulfilment of God’s promises is conditional. “If the Lord thy God
enlarge ”"—God does not work independently of means and agencies. He is
Sovereign and Absolute, but we must co-operate with Him. Nothing is left to
chance. Humanly speaking all depends upon us. “ Jf thou shalt keep.”


III. This fulfilment is not always realised. There is no change in God, but
human conditions are wanting. 1. There is delay. This strengthens and forti-
fies the enemy. When Hanibal could have taken Rome he wowld not, and when
he wished, he was unable. 2. There is sin. Disobedience hinders. Unbelief
excludes from the land. Israel’s enlargement was transient through the sins of
the people ; conquered nations regained independence, and Solomon’s empire
was dissolved,


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1-6. Cities. 1. Cities of refuge
divinely appointed. 2. Cities of refuge
@ protection for innocent blood. 3,
Cities of refuge a proof of stringent
law—original law not modified—special
provision made for accidental man-
slaughter. 4. Cities of refuge a type
of deliverance in Jesus. The atone-
ment is not a violation or suspension
of law, yet mercy and deliverance from
penalty are given to him who flees to
Christ. ‘‘ The reason of these institu-
tions seems to be this :—F*irst of all,
their appointment arose from a great
law. Secondly, they were instituted
to be an expressive foreshadow or type
of a grand and precious shelter for all
the people of God.” —Cumming.


Ver. 8. Prepare. Every facility to


flee, 1. Theword nigh, 2. Ministers
direct. 3. The Holy Spirit helps.


Ver. 5. That hedie. 1. Human life
taken by trifling accidents. What need
for preparation, The sons of men are
“ snared in an evil time, when it falls
suddenly upon them” (Ecc. ix. 12).
2, Human life safeguarded by Divine
institutions. The law forbids murder.
If this happens unintentionally cities
are built for refuge. Life is hedged
about by law, justice, humanity, and
providence.


Vers. 11-13. The cities were no
shelter for wilful murder. 1. Mark
the origin of the crime. “ Hate his
neighbour.” Cain hated his brother,
could not speak peaceably to him, and
then killed him. ‘“ Whoso hateth his

263


OMAP. XIX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


eS


brother is a murderer ” (1 Jno. iii. 15).
2. Notice the plot to carry out the
design. ‘“ Lie in wait for him.” Men
who thirst for blood hate the upright,
and seek to destroy them. Saul sought
to murder David, the Jews the Saviour
and Paul. Malice will plot. The
words and aims of the wicked “ are to


Ver. 13. Pity. 1. Without pity
lest crime should be encouraged, the
criminal protected, and society in-
jured. 2. Without pity lest the
ends of justice be frustrated and the
law of God broken. 3. Without
pity, to warn and deter others from
the danger.


lie in wait for blood ” (Prov. xii. 6).


Ancient Lawpmarxs Removep.— Verse 14


Stones indicating boundaries might easily be removed. Ditches could be
secretly levelled. This would materially affect property, and be a great evil in
a land where territory was distributed by lot. Removal would be—


I. To disregard ancient custom. ‘They of old have set,” with care and
justice. ‘‘ Custom is held as law.” Fixed law and fixed boundaries should be
respected. But many scorn ancient landmarks as relics of bygone days. Im-
patient of restraint, they seek wider range of thought and action, indulge in
novelties, and cry, down with temples, and away with creeds and the Bible!


II. To violate the law of God. Heathen nations held every landmark as
sacred ; honoured every stone and staple as a god without whose aid every field
would be subject to contention and strife. God as the proprietor of all the
earth sets bounds for Israel, allotted their lands which they held in trust, and
bound them in terms imposed by His will (Deut. xxvii. 17). Hence removal of
landmarks is violation of His command, and direct insult to His authority.


III. To defraud our neighbour. Landmarks were memorials and witnesses
of the rights of each man, Removal was selfish and unjust invasion of property.
To enlarge your own estate at the expense of your neighbour's is theft. Each
one should know his own, and not defraud another by concealment, forgery, or
robbery. “Thou shalt not defraud thy neighbour, neither rob him ” (Ley.
xix, 13 ; Mark x. 19; 1 Thess, iv. 6).


IV. To expose to a dreadful curse The execration of men is something, but
who can bear the curse of God. The field of the fatherless is under Almighty
protection, None can arm themselves against Him by entering it. The poor
may seem helpless, but special warning is given against their oppression.
“Remove not the old landmark, and enter not into the fields of the fatherless
(by acts of violence or removal of boundaries) for their Redeemer is mighty, to
vindicate outraged innocence” (Prov. xxiii. 10, 11). This in aftertimes was the
great affront of national provocation. ‘The princes of Judah were like them
that remove the bounds, therefore I will pour out my wrath upon them like
water” (Hos. v. 10).

I. Landmarks, an indication of Divine care. N othing is too insignificant
for God’s notice. The cities with their roads, the fields with their boundaries,
the minute and the vast are under his guardianship. _ He sets bounds to
sea and land and controls each element in its limit (Job xxxviii, 10, 11).
_ IL. Landmarks, a vindication of the rights of property. Fields and gardens

must be cultivated and held as personal estate. Land is not to be indiscrimi-
nately portioned out. God gives allotments to men, and personal property is
needful for daily employment and healthy life. III. Landmarks, a check to
raud and rapacity. They warned against deceitful and unjust actions. We
must Sey touch nor covet our neighbour's property. ‘Ihe avaricious and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY, OHAP, XIX,
a


envious are checked by the order of society and the laws of nature. IV. Land-
marks, a motive to neighbourly kindness. ‘lo remove them would injure our
neighbour and disturb the community. We are not to sow discord nor create
strife and law-suits, but to live peaceably together. “Strive not with a man
without cause.” V. Landmarks, symbols of fixed spiritual truths There are
certain fundamental and established doctrines which must not be removed,
which can never be shaken. Rome may remove landmarks of Scripture by her
traditions. Impatience of restraint, independence of spirit, and resistance to
Divine authority may characterise the age. But the chief landmarks of faith
aC solid and impregnable asa rock, “The foundation of God standeth


THe Triat or Caprrat Orrenors.— Verses 15-21.


“The wrong” in verse 16 is not merely falling into idolatry, but any kind of
crime worthy of capital punishment (verse 19). One witness even was tested
and punished if proved false. Judges were to investigate most carefully and
administer justice most rigidly—


I. The testimony of one witness was not enough to condemn (chap. xvii. 6)
He might be prejudiced, interested or unable to judge rightly. Individuals are
not always truthful and cannot be trusted. Hence it is wise, as proved by
history and human experience, that the life of an innocent man should not
depend upon the testimony of one witness. What a dishonour cast upon man-
amped the law! suspected of unfaithfulness ! and what a check to accusers of
men


II, The accuser and the accused were to stand before God. “Both the
men, between whom the controversy is, shall stand before the Lord” (verse 17).
All sin is committed against God. He cannot permit evil to go unpunished.
He will expose and visit it with condemnation. 1. Before “ the priests and the
judges,” who represent Him. 2. In the sanctuary, the residence of His glory.
This is a picture of future trial, when the sinner will stand before the judg-
ment seat and all iniquity be punished.


III. If the witness was false the punishment was severe. No sentimental-
ism nor misplaced compassion must be shown to a false witness. The law was
inflexible, and one guilty of perjury was doomed to suffer penalty. 1. Punish-
ment in kind. “ Do unto him as he had thought to have done unto his brother
(verse 19). The lex talionis is applied, a person receives to himself what he
gives to another ; a law of retribution, which is God’s law to warn the trans-
gressor. 2. Punishment without reserve. No indifference in the search,
“ diligent inquisition ;”—no hesitation in executing the law; no pity whatever
for the criminal. “Thine eye shall not pity ” one who had no pity for another.
“A false witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaketh lies shall not
escape” (Prov. xix. 5).


A Fase Wrrness.— Verse 16.


Society cannot exist without laws, and laws cannot be administered without
testimony. False wituess or perjury therefore is the most obnoxious of crimes,
and as such deserves the severest condemnation.


I, A false witness is offensive to God. God is represented as “a God of
truth, and without iniquity” (Deut. iii, 2, 4); “a God that cannot lie”
(Job i, 2). The perjurer takes His name in vain ; lishonours His attributes,

265


HAP, XIX, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY.
LD


and defies His law. When we prevaricate, conceal truth, or speak lies, we
insult the God of heaven, “ the faithful and true witness.”


II. A false witness is injurious to society. In his Aeart he is uncharitable
and envious towards his fellow-men. In his actions he is mischievous to society.
He destroys its contidence, breaks its bonds, and becomes an agent of the devil,
“the father of lies ” (1 Kings xxi. 13). “The slanderer,” says Archbishop
Leighton, “wounds three at once; himself, him he speaks of, and him that
lears.” His cruelty and malice are set forth by three murderous instruments—
weapons of death. ‘A man that beareth false witness against his neighbour is
a maul, and a sword, and a sharp arrow” (Prov. xxv. 18).


III. A false witness should be put down by every possible means. “So
shalt thou put the evil away” (verse 19). Everyone is interested in the
suppression of crime. Priests, judges, and people—society and the Christian
Church are concerned. All should love truth and put down deceit (Col. ii. 9;
Rom, iii. 13). ‘ That shalt not raise (marg. receive) a false report: put not
thine hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witness” (Ex. xxiii. 1).


Dare to be true, nothing can need a lie ;
The fault that needs it most grows two thereby.


Tae Law or Rerautation.— Verses 19-21,


Among the Israelites and in all nations where slavery existed, or where owners
had the power of punishment in their own hands, the exercise of absolute
authority was liable to be abused. Hence the importance and place of this law.


I. Its use in the Old Testament. It is probable that the law existed before
the time of Moses, and was accepted by him as tolerable. It would be suitable—
1. Asan elementary principle of justice. Theoretically it seems exact and
right. It was accepted by magistrates as a rule in civil law. It is found in the
code of primitive nations, recognised by the laws of Solon, by ancient Indians,
and by the 'Thurians (¢f Speak. Com. ; Ex. xxi. 22-25). It is the first lesson
of civilization and public justice. ‘Thou shalt give life for life, eye for eye,”
ete. (Ex. xxi. 23; Lev. xxiv. 20). 2. As a foundation of public morality.
Power is often abused. Men forget and break the golden rule. Human life
must be respected, wrong roctifial, and laws administered. There must be no
connivance in guilt, ‘“ Hand for hand, foot for foot.” 3. As a check to private
revenge. “ Revenge is sweet,” and men like to take law into their own hands,
The law of the eternal must be asserted and vindictive tempers subdued. “He
that studieth revenge keepeth his wounds open.”— Bacon. ‘“‘ Vengeance is
mine ; I will repay saith the Lord.”


II, Its exposition in the New Testament. The scribes took their stand on
the letter, disregarded the design and spirit of the law, and expounded in the
wrong direction, ‘lheir popular casuistry made it one of private retaliation and
not of judicial action. But the disciple of Christ, in suffering wrong, must
cherish no desire to retaliate and accuse. He must be prepared in word and
act to show the spirit of his master. The letter may not bind, but the principle
should be the law of life. We are not to revenge, but cultivate the habit of
non-resistance to evil (¢f Mat. v. 38-42). The law of the New Testament is
not contradictory to that of the Old 'l'estament. It is more than a civil enact-
ment. It is forbearance with those who wrong us, well-doing to those who hate
us, the characteristic and image of God’s children (Mat. v. 48).

And earthly power doth then show likest God’s
‘When mercy seasons justice.


266


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OHAP, XIX,





The law of requital. 1. A doctrine of scripture. ‘ As I have done, so God
hath requited me” (Jud. i. 7). The Lord of recompenses shall surely requite.”

With what measure ye mete,” etc. ‘A false witness shall not be unpunished ”
(Prov. xix. 5-9). 2. A law of providence. Men may deny and disregard it ;
but they cannot destroy, cannot escape this righteous and holy law. Be not
deceived, God is not mocked. “He that speaketh lies shall not escape.” 3. A
reason for submission to God. Indulge in no passion. Fret not because of evil
doers. It costs more to revenge injuries than to bear them. Events are not
under the control of wicked men. “Say not, then, I will recompense evil ; but
wait on the Lord and He shall save thee,”


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 11-21. Learn.—1. Great
wickedness often found among men—
murder, fraud, perjury. Oppressive
to society, insulting to God, and
abounding even in Christian countries.
2. Divine methods of overcoming this
wickedness. By religious laws and
social restraints, by functions of state
and spiritual institutions. What a
debt we owe to the gospel which renews
and controls man, elevates and purifies
society |


Vers. 16-19. False witness. 1. God
is a God of truth, promotes it in the
world and seeks it in His people. 2.
Truth should be sacred to us in all
circumstances of life. 3. The danger
of lying. 4. The necessity of grace
and prayer. ;


Ver. 19. Retribution. 1, An ap-
intment of God in social and civil,
in national and individual life. 2. -A
warning to others, Sir W. Raleigh,


challenged by a hot-headed youth,


refused to fight. The young man
spat in his face in public. ‘Thinking
of the consequences, Sir W. calmly
wiped his face and replied, “ Young
man, if I could as easily wipe your
blood from my conscience as I cau
this injury from my face, I would this
moment take away your life,”


Ver. 20. Hear. Others’ woes should
be our warnings, others’ sufferings our
sermons (1 Cor. x. 5-12). God’s house
of correction is the school of instruc-
tion.—7rapp.


Vers. 19-21. Pity and justice. 1.
Justice from the highest source of the
land. The presence and the repre-
sentatives of God. 2. Justice with-
out pity. Right better than pity.
8. Justice for public good. “Those
which remain hear and commit no
more evil.” Life often sacrificed for
the welfare of the community. True
patriotism displayed in the suppression
of crime.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XIX,


Vers, 1-10. Cities. A party of travel-
lers in the desert were overtaken by the
fierce simoon. Like blinding snow
driven by the winds of March came
the hot sands. Before the simoon had
reached its height they came suddenly
upon a rude building of stone, well
protected with roof and doors, which
the hand of charity had erected there
in the desert for shelter. With iov
they rushed into it, closed the doors,
and were safe.


“The wonders of life and gladness,
All the wonders of hope and fear ;
The wonders of death and sadness,
All the wonders of time are there.”
— Bonar.


Ver. 11. Hate. Whoever hates
kills the soul.—Vineé. A true man
hates no one-—Napoleon I, “ From
envy, hatred and malice,” ete.


Ver. 12. Deliver him. By the con-
viction and execution of a murderer,
267


OHAP, XI,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





humanity is not extinguished but
enlarged ; it is individual compassion
overcome by a regard to the general
good.— A, Fuller.


Ver. 14. Landmarks removed.
Covetousness, by a greediness of get-
ting more, deprives itself of the true
end of getting it ; it loses the enjoy-
ment of what it has got.—NSprat.
Desire of having is the sin of covetous-
ness.—Shakspeare,


Ver. 18. False witness.


Sworn on every slight pretence,

Till perjuries are common as bad pence 3

While thousands, careless of the dawning sin,

Kiss the book’s outside, who ne’er look within,
— Cowper.


Vers. 19-21. Not pity. Most just
it is that he who breweth mischief
should have the first draught of it
himself.—Jemmat.


Revenge at first, though sweet,
Bitter ere long back on itself recoils.
—Milton.





CHAPTER XX,


Cxrricat Norrs.—Reverence for life, and that which tends to preserve ft, was the motive for


laws given in last chapter.


The same is the basis of those in this chapter. Even in time of


war, forbearance was to be exercised in respect of Israelites themselves who are levied for war
(vers. 1-9) ; in respect of the enemy (vers. 10-15) ; Canaanitish nations alone excepted (vers.


16-18) ; and in respect of the property of the vanquished.


Vers, 1-9.


(Speak. Com.)


Instructions for military service. Prospective in nature, but of permanent


authority ; not a temporary arrangement in prospect of war, but standing orders in future


settlement of Israel.
Jud. iv. 8).


Horses, the chief strength of nations surrounding (Ex. xiv. 7; Josh. xvii. 6;


Ver. 2. Priest, not high priest, but one appointed ; called by Rabbins “the anointed of war,”


like Phinehas (Num. xxxi. 6),
lit., make haste, as if confused.


who exhorted the people in formula (vers. 3 and 4). Tremble,


Ver, 5-7, Officers, #.¢., the Shoterim, roll-keepers (Ex. v. 6-10) (Sept. scribes), whose duty to


muster men and announce orders of generals (2 Chr. xxvi. 11).


Exemptions given. Dedicated


the house on taking possession, by certain religious ceremonies (¢f. Neh. xii. 27; Ps, xxx.)


(title),


A yearly immunity. Faten (ver. 6), Uit., made it common.


When fruit trees were


planted (Lev. xix, 23) and vines set (Jud. xix. 24) fruit was not eaten the first four years, but set


apart from common uses, Betrothed, always considerable time before marriage.
melt, or flow down, become despondent (Gen. xvii. 15 3 Jos. vii. 5).


people, in smaller levies (vers, 10-20).
destruction of life and property.


Faint (ver. 8),
Captains at the head of the


Instructions concerning sieges, to prevent wantor


Ver. 10. If towns peaceably surrendered, armed men were not put te death. Offensive wars


not encouraged.


Tributaries conquered nations would become servants, yet receive the highest


blessings in alliance with Israel (2 Sam. xx. 18-20). If besieged cities refused to capitulate,
those found in arma, every male put to death. Women and children kindly treated (ver. 14).


Vers. 15-18. With Canaanitish towns Israel was not to act thus. These people put under the


ban must be exterminated.


were not cut down (ver. 19),


Various renderings have been given of this difficult text,


Nothing that breatheth, lit. every breath by which human beings
alone are understood (ef. Josh. x. 40 3 xi. 11, with chap xi. 14).


If the seige was long, trees
The


general sense seems to be that man’s life depends upon the fruit of the trees, in a sense he is
identified with them ; their destruction would be a sort of sacrilege, and would diminish fuel


and hinder military operations,
in seige (Ezek. iv. 2),


Trees whose fruit not edible, cut down and used for ramparts


Riautrous War.— Verses 1-5,


Israel was not a warlike nation, but they were about to enter into serious
conflict with other nations, In future yeara they might have to maintain their


268


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. Xx.








independence and defend themselves from aggression. Instructions are given to
show the spirit in which war must be undertaken, carried on and finished. If
war was inevitable the Providence of God would lead them into it. That would
be righteous war.


I. War undertaken to accomplish the purpose of God. Israel. undertook
war, not of their own accord; not for selfish aggrandisement nor to realise
ambitious schemes. They were commanded by (od to possess the land.  Fear-
- ful may be the consequences of rash and inconsiderate war. “In the name of
our God we will set up our banners.”


II, War sanctioned by the will of God. Every nation prays for its armies ;
but no war in which the presence of God cannot be expected is justifiable.
1. God’s will is ascertained by His presence. “The Lord thy God is with thee.”
God may permit enterprises, but never helps them when they oppose His will.
Israel rebelled, “‘ went presumptuously up into the hill; God went not with
them and they were smitten by the Amorites (Deut. i, 43, 44). 2. God’s will ts
declared by His servants. ‘The priest shall approach and speak unto the
people.” They are not mere captains of the army, but ministers of God, re
minding of the past and encouraging for the present. Their presence and help
indicate God’s purpose. ‘The sons of Aaron, the priests, shall blow with the
trumpets ; and they shall be to you for an ordinance for ever” (Num. x. 8).


III. War conducted by the precepts of God. Here are specific directions
commands from God concerning war. War unprovoked and for unlawful
conquest finds no sanction in God’s word. When it becomes a necessity to
defend ourselves and punish evil doers, when it cannot justly be avoided, ‘‘ The
belligerent nation then becomes the executioner of Divine judyments, but it
must also know and confess that it is used by God for this purpose, and that it
only carries on war aright when it does so with this conviction. ‘Then only can
we come before God with confidence and a good conscience, because it is His
will that we have performed ; and every wilfully undertaken war forbids our
having free and happy access to God.”—Luthardt. “Every purpose is
established by counsel, and with good advice make war.”


Curistran Lirg A WARFARE.


~


In war, God alone was Israel’s confidence. Their enemies might excel in
nunibers and in military strength, but they were not to be atraid. God would
protect and help them.


I. This warfare is against mighty enemies. Surrounding nations were often
a terror to Israel. The Christian fights against powerful odds; principalities
and powers in earthly and heavenly places. 1. Mmemies great in number. “ A
people more than thou.” God is not always with the strongest battalions.
Numbers are often ranged against Him and His people. But He counts nations
as nothing and less than nothing. 2. Hnemies terrible in equipment. Horses


and chariots were most formidable elements of ancient nations, “Some trust


in chariots and some in horses,” but that is confidence vain and displeasing
to God. Glorious were the victories when Israel renounced trust in human
strength. “ ‘I'he horse is prepared against the day of battle, but safety (victory)
is of the Lord.”


II. In this warfare right men are waxteé. Every soldier is not valiant.
Gideon’s army was sifted, and many in Israel were sent away for lack of faith
and enthusiasm. 1. Good leaders are wanted. Men “anointed for war,” aa

269


OMAP. XX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY


—.- —








the Rabbins called the priests—men of the stamp of Henry Havelock and
Hedley Vicars. Men of undaunted courage, strong in God and prepared
to lead. 2. Good soldiers are wanted. Soldiers who can endure hardness,
a. Soldiers conscious of right. For if a man feels that he is in the wrong, ke
fears detection, disgrace and punishment. Macbeth started at the whisper
of every wind. “Virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful.”—Shakspeare.
b. Soldiers willing to serve. Volunteers, not pressed men. None can be forced.
Service that is forced is weakness and useless. Our hearts must be in the
conflict or we fight in vain. ¢. Soldiers full of courage ‘Ihe faint-hearted
injure the morale of the troops. Fear is contagious and leads to flight. Beware
of this infection, “ neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid” (Is. viii. 12).


III. In this warfare we should not be disheartened. ‘“ Let not your hearts
faint; fear not, and do not tremble.” Why be terrified? Opponents flee
before a brave man. “One of you shall chase a thousand.” 1. God’s providence
encourages us. “ Brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.” ‘I'here is constant
reference to this deliverance most striking and instructive. History unfolds
Divine providence ; abounds with proofs of omnipotence, and pledges of help.
Examples are cited to animate to fortitude and virtue. 2. God's presence is
with us. “The Lord thy God is with thee.” Not merely as commander, but
“goeth with you” into the greatest danger. Not as a spectator, like Xerxes,
who viewed the conflict from on high, but “‘ to fight for you” with the determi-
nation “to save you.” ‘The Lord thy God, He it is,” not a common general,
“that doth go with thee ; He will not fail thee, nor forsake thee.”


Tue Exemptions In Warn.— Verse 5-9.


Soldiers must be as free from care and cowardice as possible. Wellington
declared “that the power of the greatest armies depends upon what the
individual soldier is capable of doing and bearing.” Four classes are here
exempted :—


I. Those involved in business. The soldier leaves his private business when
he enlists to serve his country. ‘The farmer leaves his plough, the mechanic his
shop, and the merchant his store. In Israel those were not called to serve who,
from circumstances and prospects, would feel most keenly the hardship. 1.
Those engaged in dedicating a house. They must return to their house lest
another dedicate it. 2. Z'hose engaged in planting a vineyard must enjoy the
fruit of it. Building and planting are good and needful for the community, but
encumber the soldier,


II, Those hindered by social ties, “ What man hath betrothed a wife and
not taken her” (ver. 7; chap. xxiv. 5). “It was deemed a great hardship to
leave a house unfinished, a new property half-cultivated, and a recently con-
tracted marriage unconsummated, and the exemptions allowed in these cases
were founded on the principle, that a man’s heart being deeply engrossed with
something at a distance, he would not be very enthusiastic in the public service.”
(Jamieson). In an army there should be one heart, one purpose and one desire
to please the commander. In the corps of Christian soldiers there is entire
obedience to the will of the Captain of our Salvation. ‘“ No man that warreth
entangleth himself with the affairs of this life: that he may please him who
hath chosen him to be a soldier.”


III. Those deficient in personal qualifications. The fearful and faint-hearted
were ced to war. 1. Jn moral qualifications. Some think that the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY DEUTERONOMY. OHAF, XX,





fear named arose from an evil conscience which makes a man afraid of danger
and death. Men of loose and profligate lives are often cowards and curses to
an army. Hence those conscious of guilt were to be sent away. “A guilty
conscience needs no accuser.” “Conscience makes cowards of us all.” 2,
In natural qualification. The allusion seems to be natural cowardice. Men
reverence bravery, but cowards are objects of scorn. Wellington said of some
foreigners who ran away from the field of Waterloo, “ Let them go; we are
better without them.” There must be no fear in officers or men. No cowards
in the ranks lest the army flee before the enemy. “ Let him go and return unto
his house lest his brethren’s heart faint as well as his heart,”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver.1. Fear forbidden. Israelhad by the way? He, who begins the


seen little of war, only a few brushes in
their journey with inferior adversaries.
Things would soon become more
serious. Hence alarm and need of
admonition and encouragement. All
Christians are soldiers and wage a good
warfare. It is a necessary and trying
warfare — continues through every
season and in every condition. The
forces of their enemies may be superior
in number, vigilance, wisdom and
might. Hence danger of alarm and
need of fortitude in the warrior. None
have better grounds for courage than
we, not in ourselves for then we must
fail. First, the Divine presence:
“For the Lord thy God is with thee.”
Antigonus said to his troops, dismayed
at the numbers of the foe, “‘ How many
do you reckon me for?” But God is
all-wise and almighty. Nothing is too
hard for the Lord, and if He be with
us, “they that be with us are more
than they that be with them.”
“Greater is He that is in us than
he that is in the world.” Secondly,
His agency: “Who brought thee up
out of the land of Egypt.” ‘To a Jew,
this was not only a proof but a pledge ;
not only showed what He could do,
but was a voucher of what He would
do. He is always the same, and never
suffers what he has done to be un-
done. Strange would it have been,
after opening a passage through the
sea, to have drowned them in Jordan.
What would have been thought of His
great name, after placing himself at
their head to lead them to Canaan, if
Me had suffered them to be overcome


work, is not only able to finish, but
begins it for the very purpose. “He
that spared not His own Son, but
delivered Him up for us all, how shall
He not with him also freely give us all
things ?”—Jay.


Vers. 2, 3. The priest helping the
soldier. The priest shall approach and
speak unto the people. ‘“ A minister
of peace an advocate of war” only
when war is justified. Even then only
in showing how to regulate, mitigate,
and direct it. Learn—1. The con-
nection of religion with war in ita
sanctions and inspirations. 2. The
business of the priest to caution the
leaders and encourage the soldiers in a
righteous contest.


Ver. 5. Building and dedicating a
house. 1. By liberality to the poor.
Festive ceremonies and entertainments
were given. 2. By consecrating it to
God through whose aid it had been
built and by whose blessing it would
prosper. ‘There should be a family
altar and a family religion. “A
church in the house” (Psalm 30th—
compare title), ‘This the best ornament
and defence of the house.


Ver. 8. Faint-hearted. 1. Coward-
ice weakens—faint, fear, tremble and
terrify (ver. 3) are degrees of weakness,
2. Cowardice renders incapable of right
impressions, Let not your hearts be
tender to receive impressions of fear and
despair. Melting hearts are like hot
iron, capable of any impression. “ Steed

271


CHAP, XX.


your hearts.” 8, Cowardice affects
others, “ Lest his brethren’s heart
faint,”


Ver. 5-9. Defective armies (churches
or organizations), 1. Requiring to be
sifted. ‘I'he incapable and unfit sent
home. 2. Requiring to be re-organized.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY.





people.” Defects remedied and effici-
ency secured. Much to be done before
the Christian Church can fight and
conquer the world. ;
Christianity and Heroism. Chirist-
ianity makes true heroes in war. Ru!ers
in church and state should be chosen
on account of spiritual or Christian


“Captains” chosen fit “to lead the character.


Tar Mertuop or Conpuctina War.— Verses 10-15.


When Israel came nigh a city not belonging to the Canaanites, they were tc
summon it to peaceable surrender and submission (Jud. xxi. 13). Moses does
not encourage aggressive war. If the town resisted a regular siege was under-
taken, and when captured males were slain, women and children spared, and
booty appropriated to their own use.


I, Try mild measures before severe. Even in war there should be honour
and justice. 1. Offer peace before war. “‘ Proclaim peace unto it.” In the
settlement of quarrels, be ready to give and to submit to arbitration, proposals
of peace. God in mercy offers peace to sinners—has no pleasure in their
destruction, but beseeches them to be reconciled to Him. 2. A/ake men
tributary rather than exterminate them. It peace proposals were accepted,
they must acknowledge the supremacy of Israel by tribute-money. They must
renounce idolatry and become servants. Then their conquerors would be their
protectors. lf we yield to God and become His servants, we shall not only be
saved from destruction, but become fellow-citizens with saints and members of
God’s household.


II. Display the spirit of humanity. In most barbarous times this has often
been seen. Alexander, Ceasar, and Napoleon were not devoid of feeling.
x. Spare property. Cities not plundered, trees not destroyed. Cattle and
spoil to be appropriated to personal use. 2. Spare human lives. Helpless
women and innocent children not to be touched. Here is a degree of self-
control not displayed in modern Christian warfare.


A Wak or Exrermination.— Verses 16-18.


_ The Canaanites were to be completely exterminated. They fell under the
judicial displeasure of God and were utterly ruined, as the only means to
preserve Israel from moral corruption. Learn—


I, That men may become so wicked that utter rnin ensues. Of cities
given to Israel no remnant of inhabitants must be spared. Canaanites must
not share with Israelites in the land of promise. No terms of peace were
offered them. ‘They had filled up the measure of iniquity ; had become totally
averse to God; and were abandoned to there awful doom. ‘Their punishment
was not the execution of revenge upon enemies, but the result of their own
wickedness, the fulfilment of a Divine sentence upon that wickedness, “ ‘Thou

shalt save alive nothing that breatheth.”


II. This utter rain ensues lest the people of God should be endangered.
Israel mould have been corrupted by the lives and idolatry of Canaanites
7


——


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY, OHAF, XX,
Sete ee ee eee ee ee





God’s people are morally endangered by the pollutions and custome of the


world. God is concerned for their character and preservation (Ex. xxxiv. 11-16).
He loves them, and has given men for them, and people for their life (Is. xliti, 4).
“That they teach you not to do after their abominations.”


III, What a warning this utter ruin should be to all. First to God’s
people. What a motive for separation from sin and the world! What an


~ argument for obedience when the disutedient are punished so fearfully, War


against sin should be one of extermination. ‘he least evil, if spared, may rein
the character. But to the impenitent and ungodly, here is a picture of the
destruction which awaits them unless found in Christ, ‘They are reserved
“unto the Judgment of the great day.” ;


PRESERVATION OF Frurr TrEEs.— Verses 19, 20.


In carrying on war, leaders are apt to indulge in passion and destroy every-
thing within reach. In a long siege, Israel might use non-fruit-bearing wees,
but those bearing fruit were not to be touched.


I. God’s laws are intended to check unlawful feeling and action. God is
more merciful than we are. Food trees and human life have been wantonly
destroyed, and military rage is often most furious. ‘lhe ravages of war must
be checked. A voice must be heard, above the tramp of horsemen and the
command cf kings, ‘Thou shalt not.”


II. God’s laws prohibit any wilful waste at all times. God ever consults
our interests and economises our resources. “‘ ‘I'he Jews,” says Henry, “ under-
stand this as a prohibition of all wilful waste upon any account whatsoever.
No fruit tree is to be destroyed, unless it be barren and cumber the ground,
Nay, they maintain, ‘Whoso wilfully breaks vessels, tears clothes, stops wells,
pulls down buildings, or destroys meat, transgresses this law. Thou shalt not
destroy.” Broken fragments must be gathered up, that nothing be iest.
Every creature is good in its end, and nothing wust be refused or abused.


On Spanina Fruit TREES.


What are the lessons touching our own life which are suggested by this
exemption? 1. Spare the fruit trees,—TZhen men are to be self-controlled under
the most exciting circumstances. Jews were to bear this restriction 1 mind at
a time when most intensely excited. It was not to be remembered in
moments of tranquilly, but to be sent before them, when fiercest passious were
ablaze. We have been taught “that all is fair in war ”—this law contradicts
that proverbial morality. We are not to excuse wantonness by pleading excite-
ment of circumstances. Beautiful the provision that in the keenest coutest there
was to be recollection of law! It should beso in our lives. In this day of fierce
competition men are in danger of giving themselves up to passion, rather than
judgement, ard vicexcing the pressure of circumstances as an excuse for doing
some things they would never think of doing in caliner moments. Such piee is
vicious, Even in battte men ave not to lose reflectiveness, in the presence of
death they must remember the law of God. 2. Spare the fruit trees,
Then do not force a present victory at the expense of future suffering. Victories
may cost too much. What, if after conquest, we have cut off oes supply

8


CHAP. XX. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOHY.


and left ourselves without bread and water? The frequent question should be
not, can I reach yonder point? but can I reach it without sacrificing obedience
to divine law? You may get your own way in life, but what if you have to
burn an orchard in doing so? A fruit tree standing between you and victory
may appear a small thing, but that small thing represents the sources at which
life renews itself. What, if a man gain the whole world and loose his own soul ?
8. Spare the fruit trees. Then judge all things by their highest usefulness and
not by their temporary advantages. The tree might have been useful for
bulwarks but there was a higher use to which it could be put, and its treatment
was determined by this higher use. Things are not judged by their meanest,
but by their highest possibilities. Are we living along the line of our highest
capabilities, or consulting the conveniences of the passing moment? Who can
find a fruit tree being cut down to help a man over a brooklet, when the
meanest gate-post would have done just as well? Yet men lie in the
dust, when they could exert most beneficial influence upon society. ‘“ Aim
high, for he who aimeth at the sky shoots higher far than he who means a tree.”
4. Spare the fruit trees. Zhen man has tt in his power to inflict great mischief
upon himself and upon society. You cancut down. You have power to do
mischief, but not right. A man may show strength in cutting down, but if he
knew it he would show far greater strength in not doing so. Forbearance is
often the last point of power. What is the Christian application of all this?
1, Allin Christ Jesus are expected to bear fruit. 2. Only as Christians bear
fruié will they be spared by Jesus Christ Himself. 3. Only in so far as
Christians bear fruit ought they to receive toleration at the hands of society.
4. It is possible to bring forth evil fruit. 5. Fruit trees must be pruned.
“That ye may bring forth much fruit” (Vol. IIL, The City Temple).


BOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 10-15. Mercy and wrath. by or dwell near, and need its fruit for


I. Offered mercy precedes the execu-
tion of wrath. 1. A city beseiged.
2. Summons to surrender; city not to
fall by sudden surprise, or unwarned,
3. Offer of peace. TL Condign punish-
ment follows rejected mercy. Such
rebels, if permitted to escape, would
raise the standard of revolt elsewhere,
and strengthen the resistance of other
towns. Learn—1. The gospel a mes-
sage of reconciliation. 2. ‘I'he gospel
accepted brings peace. 38. The gospel
rejected declares the eternal ruin of
the rejector.—Bib. Museum.


Ver. 19. Our interpretation of the
primeval law of food is strongly con-
firmed by this passage and the essential
wickedness of destroying the sources of
kuman sustenance and comfort. The
idea is that the tree which God planted
is for all the children of men who pass


274


food—a permanent supply, which no
temporary exigency must be suffered
to destroy. The Mahommedans to this
day observe this law, and a curious
story is related of the Arabian prophet,
that when on one occasion in the siege
of a fortress, prolonged by the access of
the besieged during the night to the
date palms outside its walls, he ordered
some of his personal followers secretly
to cut down these palm trees, his
soldiers next morning remonstrated,
so that Mahommed had to invent a
special commission for the work, which
however, he never afterwards repeated.
(Temperance Com.) Fruit trees might
not be destroyed. Doth God take care
for trees? It was to teach us that if
we bring forth fruit fit for God’s taste
and relish, sanctifying God and Christ
in our hearts, we shall not be destroyed.
— Trapp.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





OHAP xXx,





4ALLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XX,


Ver. 1. Battle. On the whole
subject of Old ‘Testament wars we
give an extract from a paper read at
the Church Congress last week (Oct.
14, 1885) :—“ The Old Testament
takes man as he is, with savage, war-
like instincts, and does not ignore his
nature and proclaim at once the reign
of peace. but the people are taught
to see war in a new light. It is taken
out of the hands of man and becomes
God’s prerogative. Man wages war
only as his vice-regent. He is fighting
‘the battle of the Lord.’ There is
nothing personal in the campaigns of
Israelites, nothing national except so
far as the cause of Israel is the cause
of God. It is a great advance in
civilization when men neither take the
law into their own hands nor suffer a
relative to be the avenger of blood,
but trust to the administration of im-

rsonal law. Revenge, which in the
individual is a kind of wild justice, is
then transformed into that righteous
indignation whict is the root of the
judicial system. This was the first,
the indirect blow to the war-spirit of
the Jews. But they had more to learn
—that God is a God of battles is only
a half truth. ‘he higher truth was
dimly shadowed forth when the patri-
archal conqueror did homage to the
mysterious King of Peace—when the
wars of conquest were over and the
chosen people established in the land
their King, ‘a man of war’ is for-
bidden to build the temple and the
honour given to ‘a man of rest.’
From first to last the Jews were
taught that the explanation of the

resent is in the future, and as this
ene becomes clearer it is revealed
as a kingdom of peace. ‘This Old
Testament teaching in respect to
war is propwdeutic, leading men on
by little and little till they could sit
at the feet of Jesus; and provisional,


destroyed only by being fulfilled.”
Kev. Aubrey L. Moore.


Vers. 1, 4. God with thee. When
the Crusaders encamped before Jeru-
salem, a terrible struggle ensued. The
Saracens, who possessed the city, bore
down upon them in countless numbers,
and it seemed as though all was lost
to the Christian army, All at once a
joyful ery rang through the ranks—
“St. James is with us! He fights on
our side!” In the excitement of the
conflict some of them fancied they saw
the apostle in the clouds advancing to
help them! It gave them new courage.
They rushed forward with an energy
which could not be withstood, and the
battle was won,


Vers. 5-9. Roman soldiers were not
allowed to marry, or engage in any
husbandry or trade; and they were
forbidden to act as tutors to any
person, or curators to any man’s estate,
or proctors in the cause of other men.
The general principle was to exclude
them from those relations, agencies,
and engagements, which would divert
their minds from that which was to be
the sole object of pursuit—A. Barnes.


Ver. 9. Lead. Like Hannibal, whom
Livy says was first in battle and last
out of it,


Ver. 10. Peace. When Alexander
besieged a city, he sent an herald into
it with burning torch in hand, to pro-
claim that if any man would repair
and submit to him while the torch was
burning, he should be saved; otherwise
they might expect nothing but fire and
sword, ‘Tamerlane, when he came
against any place, first hung out a
white flag of grace, then a red, and
lastly a black flag, to show that now
there was no hope of mercy.—Zrapp.





CHAP. XXL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





CHAPTER XXL


Crrrrcat Norrs.—The reason for grouping these five laws, apparently so different from one
another, as well as for attaching them to the previous regulations is found in the desire to bring
out distinctly the sacredness of life and of personal rights from every point of view, and impress
it upon the covenant nation.—(Keil).


Vers. 1-9. Expiation of unknown murder. Lying, fallen, then lying (Jud. iii. 25), Ver. 2.
Elders. Representing citizens. Judges. Administrators of right. City. The nearest responsible
for cleansing rites. ‘he heifer, which had done no work, strong and of full growth, not cere-
monially profaned by human use (cf. Ex. xx. 25), had to die instead of the murderer who could
not be found. Ver. 4. Rough. A valley through which water constantly flowed, suitable tor
cleansing. Jared. Neither ploughed nor sown. Ver. 5. Priest. Whom Jehovah had chosen to
serve Him, was present, not to conduct the affair but to see that the rite was duly performed
nad accredit it when done so, Ver. 6. Wush. A symbolic act declaring innocence and repudiating
connection with the crime. Ver. 7. Answer for all the people. Merciful. Be propitiated towards
us; lit., cover this guilt (Lev. i. 4). Blood., i.¢., bloodshed ; the murder forgiven.


Ver. 10-14. A Captive Wife. Customary in ancient war for the victor to make a female
captive a slave. Moses checks severities and shows superior treatment. Shave, pare, lit., prepare,
by cutting her nails to proper size and form. (2 Sam. xix. 25.) Both customary signs of puri-
fication (cutting the hair ¢f. Lev. xiv. 8 ; Num. viii. 7). Symbols of passing out of the state of
a slave into reception of fellowship with the covenant nation. ‘This obvious by her laying aside
prisoner’s slothes.—Kedl. Bewail. This prescribed from motives of humanity that the woman
might have time and leisure to detach her affections from their natural ties and prepare her mind
for new ones.—Speak, Com. Merchandize, lit., treat her witl constraint, or as aslave. Humbled
in taking her captive and then refusing the place and honour of a wife.


Vers. 15-17. The Right of the Firstborn. Ifa man had two wives, one beloved the other
hated, loved less (¢f. Leah and Rachel, wives of Jacob), the firstborn hy the hated one must be
treated as such, In the division of property he must have double (ver. 17), a portion equal to
that of two; consequently the firstborn inherited twice as much as the other sons. Paternal
authority could set aside these rights on just grounds (Gen. xxvii. 33), but must not do so from
mere partiality. ;


Ver, 18-21. Punishment of a disobedient son. Rebellious whom milder measures failed to re-
claim. iders, as magistrates of a domestic kind, received the accusation of parents and upheld
their authority ; but prevented private acts of injustice. Gate. He was stoned by all the men |
of the town and treated as a blasphemer. Rebellion against parental authority struck at the
social fabric and must be severely punished,


Vers. 22, 23, Burial of those hanged. Sin, lit., a right of death ; ¢.c., capital offence. Hanged.
e curse of God, inflicted by God. Remain, the preceding command “to put away evil,” must
now be observed. Dejiled by exposing the corpse, especiaily the body of one guilty of such a
crime as to deserve this fate (ch Gal. iii, 13),


Unknown Crime.— Verses 1-9,


Preceding laws indicate vigorous and eifectual punishment of wilful murder
But if the murderer escaped they were not free, and the land was not unpolluted.


A great ceremony was appointed to put away guilt and express detestation and
innocence.


I. The criminal escaping. “ Not known who hath slain him.” Crime may
be committed in darkness and concealment. Men may evade laws most vigilant
and severe, and think they can escape ; but (od’s providence brings dark deeds
to light, and strange things have led to the detection of guilt. ‘The earth may
disclose her blood (Isa. xxvi. 21) in time ; if not, the future will reveal the
EAS, judgment of God when that which is past will be required (Eccles,
ili. 15).

_ UL. The community responsible for his crime. Blame is attached to Israel
in Cate or other, and they had to cleanse themselves. Society is bound


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. GHAP. XXI.





together for mutual help and good government. We are responsible not only
for what we can do, but for what we can prevent. We must not only reform
abuses and remove grievances, but prevent evils. Many among us are physically
and morally dead. Have we done what we could to prevent death or restore to
life? Is not our indifference a crime in the sight of God? “These ought ye
to have done and not leave the other undone.”


III, The whole community should endeavour to prevent crime. A senso of
responsibility should quicken its action, Immorality and outrages drive away
capital, create discontent and insecurity. There must be no impunity of
murder, no impunity of any public crime. All classes of the community are
concerned. Elders, judges, and priests should be anxious for public purity.
Society, with its governors and laws ; governors commissioned from heaven,
and laws rooted in the revealed will of God; not only claim, but enforce
obedience. The land must be purged from blood by public confession, prayer,
and righteous conduct. “So shalt thou purge away the guilt,” eto.


Expiration oF Unknown Murpra,


The sanctity of human life is still the leading thought, and when a corpse is
found “lying in the field and it be not known who hath slain him,” the land is
regarded as guilty before God (verse 8) until a solemn rite of expiation be gone
through. Verses 1-9 of this chapter prescribe the mode and form of this
expiation, which, from the nature of the case, could take place only when the
people were settled in Canaan, and so is prescribed first in Deuteronomy.—
Speak Com.


I. The imputed guilt of murder. The law increased the horror of the crime.
The administrators of law measured the distance from the slain man to the
nearest city, and laid upon it the duty of expiation. A sense of guilt fills all
classes of the community, and the people by their representatives cleanse them-
selves by appointed rites,


II. The solemn expiation of imputed guilt. When crime cannot be traced
to it origin—when it is committed in open day and in defiance of law; it is
most humiliating. All must purge themselves from suspicion and connivance.
“ Be not partakers of other men’s sins.” 1. By animal sacrifice. An heifer
strong and vigorous, unaccustomed to the yoke and not profaned by labour had
to be killed. 2. By public confession. ‘The elders by a significant act repudi-
ated the charge of bloodguiltiness and confessed their innocence. 3. By direct
intercession. Mercy was implored for the cities and the nation. We have
great need to cry to God for our land filled with iniquity and stained with guilt.
“Be merciful O Lord to Thy people Israel” (v. 8).


The important lessons of this expiation. The ceremony was public, im-
pressive and admonitory. 1. The extreme guilt of murder. The people were to
dread blood which defiled the hands which shed it. “ Your hands are full of
blood. Wash you, make you clean” (Isa. i. 15, 16) ; and crime which polluted
the land in which it was committed. 2. The necessity of atonement for guilt.
The crime was not passed in silence. The people were not permitted to be un-
concerned. Justice must be done and satisfaction given. 38. The provision made
by God for the pardon of guilt. Many think this is a symbol of atonement in
Christ, to whom our guilt was imputed and in whom we receive pardon and
peace. “The Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all.” a


OHAP. XX1 HOMi:LETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOM Y.





Gov’s Vatvue or InpivipvaL Lirz.— Verses 1-9.


“This narrative,” says one, “sets forth the preciousness of human life in the
sight of God.” Dr. Jamieson believes this singular statute concerning homicide
is far superior to what is found in the criminal code of any other ancient nation,
and is undoubtedly the origin or germ of the modern coroners’ inquests.
(Cf. Com. in loco.)


I. Discovered in the loss of one man. Only one missing! But God counts
men as well as stars, and “gathers one by one.” Ancient philosophy and
modern socialism overlook personality, and legislate for men in a mass. ‘I'he
individual exists only for the race, has no rights, and becomes a tool or slave of
society. Christianity does not belittle man, but recognises and renews individuals,
exalts them to responsibility, and appeals to them for right. ‘‘ Adam, where
art thou?”


II. Discovered in the injury to one man. One man was missing, but he
was murdered. His blood, like that of Abel, was crying for justice. God’s
image was defaced in humanity. Society was wounded in one of its members.
An enquiry was demanded, and the reproach must be wiped away.


III. Discovered in the interest which the community should take in one
man. “Am I my brother’s keeper?” Formerly heavy fines were inflicted on
districts to prevent the murder of Danes and Normans by exasperated Euglish-
men. We are members one of another; related one to another, and none of us
can turn away like Cain.


IV. Discovered in the provision made for every man’s salvation.
died for one and for all. He is not willing that any should perish. It is not
the will of God “that one of these little ones should perish.” “If one sheep
goes astray, the ninety and nine are left by the shepherd. He seeks the one
that is lost, and ts restoration brings greater joy than over all the remainder.”
“ Dost thou believe ?”


Christ


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 1-9.


Ver. 4. The place where the remem-
brance of blood is, is not suited for
cultivation and joy, but for sorrow and
awe, and penitential desolation ; it
is an Aceldama!— Wordsworth. The
spot of ground on which the sacrifice
was made must be uncultivated, be-
cause it was to be a sacrifice to make
atonement for the murder, and con-
sequently would pollute the land. This
regulation was calculated (1) to keep
murder in abhorrence, (2) to make
the magistrates alert in their office,
that delinquents might be discovered
and punished, and that public expense
saved.—A. Clarke.

278


Expiating «unknown
murder. We shall endeavour—I. To
explain the ordinance. In doing this
we must notice—1. Its general design.
God intended by this law (1) to pre-
vent the commission of murder; (2) to
rovide means for removing guilt from

is land. 2. Its particular provisions :
the victim, the death, the place; the
provarenant ane petitions of the elders,
I. To point out some lessons which
may be learned from it. 1. The im-
portance of preventing or punishing sin,
2. The comfort of a good conscience.
3. ‘The efficacy of united faith and
prayer.—C. Simeon.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. XXI.
—_—_—_—_—— ee eee


Tue Captive Woman.— Verses 10-14.


When a female was taken from surrounding nations and not of the Canaanites
and the victor, captivated by her beauty, contemplated marriage, a month was
allowed to elapse, that she might bewail the loss of parents and become reconciled
to her altered condition. Learn from this—


I. The Divine protection of woman, She was allowed to mourn, not to be
abused, and might be set at liberty or become the wife of a Jew. The oppression
of woman has been a crying evil im all countries, In the Old Testament we
have hints concerning her equality, dignity and influence. But Christianity
has exalted her to her lawful position as “the help meet” of man.


II. The mitigating power of love. Even in war woman may captivate by
beauty and relieve by compassion. Man must control unlawful passion and
defend the helpless. ‘‘ Love rules the court and the camp,” removes mighty
evils and wins great victories.


“ What love can do, that dares love attempt.”—Shakespeare.


II. The consummation of honourable marriage. “She shall be thy wife,”
not through lust but real love. ‘‘ Marriage has always been the conclusion of
love,” said Napoleon. Men should not be drifted into marriage, nor enter it
with sordid motives. Mutual society, help and comfort, both in prosperity and
adversity, is the chief end of marriage. “ Marriage is honourable,” ete,


Dientry anp Neeprv.t DiscrPring


_ The captured slave had prospects of conjugal union, But time was to
intervene, natural feeling respected, and the contemplated elevation gained by
lawful steps.


I. Prospective elevation. A higher life and real dignity were before her.
From a slave, mere property, she could become a Jewish mistress, invested
with inalienated rights and shielded by sacred law. (God’s providence opens
wonderful prospects to meanest subjects and elevates them to rank and dignity.
Woman’s creation indicates the benevolent purpose of God. She is not given
for grovelling and selfish ends, which many philosophers and some professed
Christians declare to be the chief design of her existence. Christianity elevates
her to equal spiritual dignity, to be the mental and moral companion with man.
She has yet to bless our homes, enrich our literature and rule our empires.


II. Needful discipline and delay. Delay often required, for haste in this
matter is risky. Early marriage a curse. ‘ Married in haste repent at leisure.”
1. Jn kindness to the woman. She was to receive considerate treatment.
Incidents of war no excuse for undue licence. Kindness must be shown to all
placed at our mercy. “ Let the husband render unto the wife due benevolence.”
2. Asa test to the man. Love cools and men become indifferent. This measure
calculated to test the feeling. “If no delight in her, let her go whither
she will.”


Toe Riauts or PrRmogeniture.— Verses 15-17.


Moses did not originate these rights, but recognised them, since he found
them pre-existing in the general social system of the Hast. Paternal authority
could set aside these rights on just grounds (Gen. xxvii. 33), but is forbidden
here to do so from mere partiality.—Sp. Com. “


OHAP, XXL


I. The rights of primogeniture defined. :
As head of the family, the eldest son would be put into power and


hath.”


rivilege, be heir of his father’s rank and wealth.
bis allowance, nor deposed from his authority.


HOMILETIC ‘COMMEN' TARY: DEUTERONOM Y.


“ A double portion of all that he


He was not to be limited in
The Divine Ruler entrusts him


with possessions and entails them by his will.


II, The rights of primogeniture upheld.
partialities are not to set aside the rights of the firstborn. l
When an Israelite had two wives together or in


through successive marriage.


succession, one might be loved and the other hated (ver. 15).


Individual preferences and
1. Lights upheld


God might


tolerate polygamy, but right must be upheld. 2. Rights upheld against human


partiality.


Justice must not bend to personal like or dislike.
divided authority, God and not caprice must rule. ipheld by Divin
Man is changeable; entails discord, feud and iitigation in his


injunction.


‘The influence of the second wife was later and more permanent.


Amid divided affections and
3. Rights upheld by Divine


family ; but God is just and impartial. He will protect our rights and vindicate


our character.
born ” (ver. 17).


“He shall acknowledge the son of the hated for the first-


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 10-14. These regulations given
1. as a protest against common crimes


in war. 2. Asa check to unbridled
passion. 3, As a protection to the
defenceless. “Compare the Mosaic


regulations concerning female slaves
with the universal and abominable
licentiousness of every heathen nation
in their intercourse with slaves. Do
not such regulations, at that early
period, in an Asiatic nation, bespeak a
wisdom and benevolence far superior
toa mere human legislator?” —Graves.


Vers. 15-17. Mischief of home
partiality. 1. In the family itself—
Jealousy, strife and confusion. 2 In


the distribution of property. Interest
of some consulted to the detriment of
others. Bitterness created and parental
honour despised. ‘ The right of the
first-born. 1. Consider the circum-
stances implied here. The first wif
dead; her children living. She is
forgotten in a new love. Her children
slighted. The second wife living and
loved. Her children take the chief
place in the father’s love. II. Consider
the Divine rule. The first-born not to
lose their place through their mother’s
fault, or their father’s new affection.
Learn—Justice to rule over fatherly
caprice.. This old law needs often to
be remembered.”—Biblical Museum.


Tur Resettiovs Son.— Verses 18-21.


In former verses


arents were urged to be careful of the rights of children ;


now very suitably children must not forget their duty and withhold their respect
from parents. But here is a common case, a sad picture of a rebellious son.


I, Parental authority defied. Young persons become wayward and self-


willed.


Domestic life loses its attraction, home is a prison, and unlawful


demands are urged. “ Give me the portion of goods that falleth to me.” ‘Tien
follow disobedience, rebellion and exile,


II, Parental authority failing in its purpose, Parental government is a
creation of God and should be upheld with prudence, affection and firmness.
Parents err in capricious and tyrannical government. Hence sometimes
reaction—the father a fanatic, the son an nfidel; the father too severe, the

280


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. XXL





son immoral and profligate, Children may be spoiled, disheartened and
provoked. ‘‘ My father treats me like a brute,” was the saying of a poor bright
boy. But children fail im obedience and filial duty, bring dishonour and
disgrace to parents. Wild sons become a father’s burden and a mother’s grief
Prov. x. 1). Home government restrains not, parental discipline fails,
athers like Howard in the lazaretto at Venice, and David in the palace,
exclaims, “Oh, my son, my son!”


III. Parental authority upheld by the uation. A wicked son is a peril to
society. Rebellion is considered a public crime, not a private wrong. Roman
laws were severe against rebellious children ; Athenians pronounced worthy of
death those who beat their parents or suffered them to want in old age, and in
China incorrigible children are delivered up to the magistrates. The law must
be honoured and upheld. he State cannot sacrifice its authority and interests
to drunkards and criminals,


AccursEep or Gop.— Verses 22, 28,


When a criminal was put to death and hanged on a tree, his body was not
to remain exposed all night, but buried the same day. He died under the
curse of God, and the land was not to be defiled by his exposure.


I, Hanging a disgraceful punishment. The body was exposed to insult and
assault. Shameful deeds were kept in public memory, and the dead was a
spectacle to the world. It was only inflicted on most infamous offenders.
Cicero calls it a nameless wickedness. Its pain and disgrace were extreme.


II. Hanging a defilement of the land. “ That thy land be not defiled.”
The vices of the living and the bodies of the dead defiled the land (Num. 35, 34).
1. Physically it would be defiled. In the hot climate its decomposition would
injure the bealth and peril the life of others. 2. M/orally, as the land of
Jehovah, it would be polluted. Remembrance of crime would harden the heart
aud breed familiarity. Hence—


III. Hanging a warning to others. The punishment was designed to deter
others. They saw the terrible consequences of guilt. Alas! “hanging is no
warning,” and men leave the very gibbet or the gallows to commit their crimes.


IV. Hanging, a type of the death of Christ. The apostle distinctly refers to
this in illustration of the shame and curse of the crucifixion. We were guilty
and deserved death. Christ was put to “an open shame,” slain, and “hanged
on a tree” (Acts v. 35). “ Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law,
being made (having become) a curse for us” (Gal. iii. 13). 1. He became our
substitute. 2. He was buried in the evening (Jno. xix. 31). 3. As the land was
cleansed by removal of curse, so the conscience and the Church purified by
Christ,


Tue AccurseD TREB.


I. A shameful death awaits abominable crime. “ Worthy of death” Jit, if
there be on a man a right of death, “he was hanged upon a tree.”


II, Public ignominy expressed in this shameful death. Penalty for crime,
detestation of the perpetrator and the curse of God.


III. The desirability of taking away the memory of this shame. “ He shall
281


CHAP. XXL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





not remain all night,” take him down from the tree and bury him; blot out


his name and remove the curse.


IV. Christ alone removes the curse.


The best of men treated as one of the


vilest, died the just for the unjust, “who His own self bare our sins in His own


body on the tree,”


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers, 20, 21. The connection of
gluttony and drunkenness. Both en-
slave the body, degrade the soul and
abuse the gifts of God. ‘ Be not among
winebibbers; among riotous eaters of
flesh: For the drunkard and the
glutton shall come to poverty.” (Prov.
xxiii. 20, 21). Matthew Henry’s note
is suggestive “ He (impious son) is
particularly supposed to be a drunkard
or a glutton. This intimates either
1. that his parents did in a particular
manner warn him against these sins,
and therefore in these instances there
was plain evidence he did not obey
their voice. Lemuel had this charge
from his mother (Prov. xxxi. 4). Note
in the education of children, great care
should be taken to suppress all inclina-
tions to drunkenness, and to keep them
out of the way of temptations to them;
in order hereunto they should be
possessed betimes with a dread and
detestation of these beastly sins, and
taught betimes to deny themselves.
Or 2.—That being a glutton and a
drunkard was the cause of his insolence


and obstinacy to his parents. Note—
Nothing draws men into all kind of
wickedness and hardens them to it,
more certainly and fatally than drunk-
enness does. When men take to
drink they forget the law (Prov. xxxi.
5), even that fundamental law of
honouring parents.”


Vers. 22, 23. Hangeth. 1. The
world’sjudgment. 2. The law’s penalty.
3. Christ’s treatment. “The law which
required this answered all the ends of

ublic justice, exposed the shame and
infamy of the conduct, but did not
put to torture the feelings of humanity
by requiring a perpetual exhibition of
a human being, aslow prey to the most
loathsome process of putrefaction. How
excellent are all these laws! How
wonderously well calculated to repress
crimes by shewing the enormity of sin !
It is worthy of remark, that in the
infliction of punishment, prescribed by
the Mosaic law, we ever find that Mercy
walks hand in hand with Judgment.—
A, Clarke,


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER. XXI.


Vers. 1-7. One slain.


“ Other sins only speak ; murder shrieks out:
The element of water moistens the earth,
But blood mounts upward.”—J. Webster.


Vers. 10-14. Beautiful woman. In
great crises it is woman’s special lot to
soften our misfortunes.— Napoleon I,


“The artillery of her eye.”—A. Cowley.


Ver. 12. Head. The hair is one of
the finest ornaments women have. Of
old, virgins used to wear it loose,
except when they were in mourning.—~
Luther.


Vers. 15-17. Inherit. Education is
of infinitely more importance to a son
than the patrimony of his ancestors,
or thousands of gold and silver. The
latter is enjoyed in time only; the
former goes with him into eternity.—
Dr. Davies.


Ver. 18. Son.


“Unhappy is the son
Who to his parents pays no ministzy.”
Euripides,
Stubborn, I never saw so much
essence of devil put into so small a
—F,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY DEUTERONOMY.


OHAP. XXL





Ver. 20. Glutton. A glutton will
defend his food like a hero.—Napo-
leon I. Drunkard. All the crivaes on
earth do not destroy so many of the
human race, nor alienate so much pro-
perty, as drunkenness.— Bacon.


Ver. 21. Stone him. The curse pro-
nounced on Mount Ebal against him
that setteth light by his father or his
mother, still hoversaround the rebellious


obedience af home provokes in the
world outside assault and revenge,
quarrels and death,—Fred. Perry.


Vers. 22, 23. Death, Justice pro-
portions the smart to the fault; so
that we may behold the greatness ot
the offence in the fitness of the punish-
ment.— W. Secker.


“ Murder may pass unpunished for a time,


child on his pathway through life, ara ee ne pea
and the character developed by dis-





CHAPTER XXIL


Crrricat Nores.—The cases stated and provided for in vers. 1-12 seem selected by way of
example, and belong, according to our notions, rather to ethics than to law. It is noteworthy
that no penalty is annexed to the breech of these regulations, No doubt it would be the duty
of the “ officers” (vera. 16-18) and the elders in the several cities to enforce their observance.—
Speak. Com.


Vera, 1-4. Humanity to neighbours. This is an expansion of Ex. xxiii. 4, 5. A stray sheep,
ox or ass to be taken to the owner. If owner unknown or lived at a distance, finder must take
it to his own farm until sought for. A fallen ox (ver. 4), unable to carry its burden, to be
helped up. Hide thyself, excusing or refusing help.


Ver. 5. Apparel of sex. Pertaineth not only dress, but arms, domestic and other utensils
(of. Ex. xxii. 6; Lev. xi. 823 xiii. 49). This designed to oppose idolatrous practices and to
prevent licentious conduct,


travellers. Affectionate relation
humanity in this precept. Prolong


Chance often met with b


Vers. 6, 7. Birds’ nests.
Wisdom


between parent and young to be sacred.
(Ex. xx. 12).


Ver. 8. House building. Roofs were flat and used for various purposes (Jos. ii. 6 ; 2 Sam.
xii. 2; Acts x. 9.) Human life was not to be endangered through any neglect of protection.


Vers, 9-12. Mixtures avoided. Prohibitions against mixing together things which are separated
tn God’s creation, consisting partly of a verbal repetition of Lev. xix. 19. To this is appended
in verse 12 the law concerzing the tassels upon the hem of the upper garment (Num. xv. 37),
which were to remind the Israelites of their calling to walk before the Lord in faithful fulfilment
of his commandments.— Keil.


Vers, 13-22, Laws of chastity. Designed to foster purity and fidelity in relation to the sexes,
aad to protect females from malice and violence. Chastise (ver. 18) with stripes not exceeding
forty in number. <Amerce (F.a at; merci, mercy; Lat., merces, wages, penalty) punish by
pecuniary penalty. Shekels paid to the father against whom the slander was made as head of
the wife’ family, The amount twice as much as that paid by a seducer (ver. 29),


* Vers, 22-30. Laws of marriage. Adulterers were both to be put to death (ver. 22). Betrothed
in the city and with her consent (cried not, ver, 24), both stoned. If found in a field (vers.
25-27), and she was forced, the man only died, as the only criminal. Not betrothed (ver. 28), a
fine for undue liberty and completion of marriage without divorce. Incest (ver. 80) prohibited
in repetition of earlier law (¢f. Lev. xviii. 8; xx. 11; 1 Cor. v. 1) to form a close, rs


OuAP, XXIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.
eae en


Resroration or Sreay Carrie amp Lost Goops,— Verses 1-4


Moses urges right action in manifold relations of national life, and teaches
Israel to regard all arrangements of God as sacred. They were never to cherish
any bitterness or hostility towards a neighbour, but restore stray animals and
lost. goods.


1. An indication of God’s Providence. ‘Doth God care for oxen?” Yes ;
and observes them go astray, or fall beneath their heavy burden. He made and
preserves them. He legislates for them, and our treatment of them is reverence
or disobedience to His command. ° Thou shalt not see,” etc.


II. An opportunity of neighbourly kindness. “Thy brother” comprehends
relatives, neighbours, strangers, and enemies even (Ex. xxiii. 4). The property |
of any person which is in danger should be protected and restored. Love should
rule in all actions, and daily incidents afford the chance of displaying it. In
trivial circumstances we may learn to forgive injury, love enemies, and do good
for evil. 1. Kindness regardless of trouble. ‘If thy brother be not nigh unto
thee, and if thou know him not,” seek him out and find him if possible.
2. Kindness regardless of expense. If really unable to find the owner, feed and
keep it for a time at thine own expense. “Then thou shalt bring it unto thine
own house, and it shall be with thee until thy brother seek after it.” If such
care must be taken for the ox, what great anxiety should we display for the
temporal and spiritual welfare of our neighbour himself.


III. An expression of humanity. ‘Thou shalt not hide thyself.” Indiffer-
ence or joy in the misfortune would be cruelty to dumb creatures and a
violation of the common rights of humanity. 1. In restoring the lost. Cattle
easily go astray and wander over the fence and from the fold. If seen they
must be brought back and not hidden away. 2. In helping up the fallen. The
ass illtreated and overladen may fall down through rough or slippery roads.
Pity must prompt a helping hand. “Thou shalt surely help him to lift them
up again.” Thus common justice and charity are taught by the law of nature
and enforced by the law of Moses. Principles which anticipate the gospel and
embody themselves in one of its grandest precepts, “‘ Love your enemies,”


Lyrercuanar or APpPaREL.— Verse 5,


Not only was property to be held sacred, but the distinction of sexes also,
by clothing suitable to each sex. A woman was not to put ona man’s clothing,
nor a man a woman’s, ‘This would be—


I, A display of indecent conduct. The putting on of the apparel of the one
sex by the other is an outrage of ordinary decency. 1. Jn common life,
Unbecoming levity is often seen. Modesty is the guard of female virtue and
the charm of social life. 2. In divine worship. Thecustom of changing attire
was prevalent in idolatrous worship. ‘The sexes of heathen deities were often
confounded and the worshippers endeavoured to please them by attiring like a
particular god. This is forbidden to Israel.


II. A destruction of natural distinction. God created them male and female.
This natural distinction should be preserved in manners and dress; but is
destroyed when women forget their sex and men their decorum (1 Cor. ii. 8-9).

284


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUVERUNONY. OHAP, XXiL,
I cee cee ee eS EIN ih oi were Lory el enna


T1I. An abomination to God. “ All that do so are abomination unto the
Lord.” The habit defaces the natural image of God in man ; opens up tl.» way
to impudenee, licentiousness and deception. ‘These evils are detestable to God.
For man and woman God has given a standard of dress and life,


Take Carg oF Brrps.— Verses 6, 7.


A bird’s nest seems a trifling thing to notice, but the majestic and the minute
tre equally under Divine care. Notice—


I. The wisdom of the precept. Birds have important uses in the economy of
nature. Extirpation of any species, edible or ravenous, especially in a land like
Palestine would be a serious evil. The vulture which destroys putrid bodies and
the ibis which devours snakes have been of service to society. ‘The owl keeps
down the mice, and sparrows, the caterpillar. God has made nothing in vain.
His wisdom and goodness rule over all.


II, The humanity of the Precept. To disturb the dam while sitting would
rob her of her young and her liberty. It would be wanton destruction and
cruelty. The tiniest birds are protected by God. Cowper would make no man
his friend who would tread even upon a worm. “ Are not two sparrows sold for
@ farthing? and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father.”


III. The benefit of the Precept. Spare the birds and thou shalt prolong thine
own days. Kindness to man and beast will elevate personal character, check
destructive tendencies, and please God. ‘hose who show mercy shall reap
mercy. Iu all circumstances benevolence to the creature and obedience to the
Creator will increase the happiness of life, and meet with the seal of Heaven.


Tue TREATMENT OF Brrp’s Nests.


I. The minuteness of divine law is here very beautifully illustrated. God
does not finish great breadths of work and leave the details to be filled by other
hands. He who guards planets, guards bird’s nests, though in the latter case
His defence may be broken down by wanton hands. Our own life to be exact
in detail. Not enough to keep the lawin great aspects which appeal to the

ublic eye, and by keeping which a reputation is sometimes unjustly gained,
but by attention to minute and hardly discernable features of character which
indicate the real quality of the man. II. The beneficence of divine law is
illustrated by protection of bird’s nests. God kind in little as well as great
things. Love is one whether shown in redemption of the race, in numbering
hairs of our head, ordering our steps or giving His beloved sleep. All law
benificent ; the law of restriction as well as liberty. Man to have dominion
over fowls of the air, but dominion to be exercised in inercy. Power uncontrolled
by kindness becomes despotism. Power belongs to God—unto God also belongs
mercy ; this is completeness of dominion, not only a hand to rule, but a heart
to love. III. A prohibition of this kind shows that there is a right and wrong
in everything. A right way of appropriating bird’s nests and a way equally
wrong. Morality goes down to every root and fibre of life. In offering a
salutation, opening a door, uttering a wich, writing a letter, in every possible
exercise of thought and power. IV. The principle of the prohibition admits of
‘wide application in life. He who wantonly destroys a bird’s nest, may one day
cruelly break up a child’s home. We cannot stop wantonness when we please.
‘Little tyrannies of childhood explain the great despotisms of gene life,


@@iaP, XXIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY


ee EE __ eee


Kindness an influence that penetrates the whole life, having manifold expression,
upward, downward, and laterally, touching all human beings, all inferiors and


dependants, aud every harmless


and defenceless life.


V. Beware of the


possibility of being merely pedantic in feeling. A man may be careful of kis


horse and cruel to his servant.


bird’s nest, yet would allow a poor relation to die of hunger.


Some would not on any account break up a


What with all


carefulness for dumb animals, if we think little of breaking a human heart by |
sternness or neglect! VI. Kindness to the lower should become still tenderer
to the higher. This, Christ’s argument in bidding us behold the fowls of the air,
that in their life we may see our Father’s kindness. “ Are ye not much better than


they ?”


If careful for cattle, “ How much is a man better than a sheep?” How


does the case stand with us, who have completer inheritance of liberty, who
have passed from the latter to the spirit? We are no longer true, noble and
kind, because of literal direction guarded by solemn sanctions, but because the
Holy Ghost has sanctified us, and made our hearts his dwelling place—


Dr, Parker.


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 1-8. Lost property restored.
An ass, an ox, and raiment samples of
the property of an Israelite. If lost
these must be restored. 1. ‘l'o preserve
them. 2. To show kindly feeling to-
wards aneighbour. Hence—I. Restor-
ation a duty demanded by a brother
and urged by God. II. Neglect to
restore a sin. A species of theft,
“Thou shalt not steal.” ‘lhe general
duty of stopping stray animals and
restoring them to friendly owners is
expressly taught here,


Ver. 5. Sex distinguished. 1. By
nature. 2. Bydress. 3. By manners.
4. By conduct. “This is a precept
against boldness and effrontery in
woman; and against effeminacy in
man. It is a precept against all
infraction of those laws which God has
established at the creation of man and
of woman out of man; and renewed
and reinforced in the incarnation of
Christ. It isa precept against all con-—
fusion of attire of men and women, |
especially in the Church of God.”——


Wordsworth


On Maxrna Barrtements.— Verse 8,


This is an extraordinary statement. May not a man please himself m
building a house which he is able to pay for? God says not, and society in
many particulars confirmed the word. ‘There is nothing which a man may do
merely to please himself. We are surrounded by other people, and it is one of
the most gracious appointments of Providence that we are obliged to consider |
the effect of our movements upon our fellow-creatures. Thus self will is:
limited, our character strengthened, and all that is highest in friendship purified |
and strengthened. It is easy to see how objections to the appointment of the |
text might arise. For example :—1. “ My neighbour will call upon me only
now and then; why should I make a permanent arrangement to meet an.
exceptional circumstance?” We are to build for exceptional circumstances.
The average tenperature of the year may be mild, wind low and rains gentle;
yet we build houses not for such averages, but for the possibility of severe:
trials, Vessels are not made by the shipbuilder for smooth waters and quiet |
days, but for the roughest billows and fiercest winds, Our neighbours’ visits |
may be uncertain, yet their very uncertainty constitutes demand for permanent |
arrangement. Be prepared for crises, expect the unexpected, and be sure of the:
meee He who is eo defended for his neighbour's sake will be equal to the!

2


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY, OSAP. XXIL.





severest emergencies of life. 2. “ But will it not be time enough to build
the battlement when anything like danger is in prospect?” No. Life is
regulated by the doctrine that prevention is better than cure. We are not at
liberty to try first whether people will fall off the roof. Life too short and
valuable to justify such experiments, He who prevents thie loss of life saves it.
Preventive ministries of life are not so heroic and impressive as those of a
more affirmative kind, yet they are most acceptable to God. Prevent your boy
from becoming a drunkard, it is better than saving him from extremest dissipa-
tion, though not so imposing before society. 3. ‘“ But ought not men to be able
to take care of themselves when walking on the roof of a house without our
guarding them as if they were little children?” No. We are to study the
interests of the weakest men. This is the principle of Christianity. “If eating
flesh or drinking wine,” etc. “ Him that is weak in the faith receive,” etc.
“ Destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ died.” The house may be
strong, but if wanting the battlement of grace above it, it is wanting in beauty
which is pleasant to God’s eye. You may be able to walk upon the roof without
danger, another may not have the same steadiness of head and firmness of foot,
It is for that other man you are to regulate your domestic arrangements.
“ Love thy neighbour as thyself.”

See the Christian application of this. If we are to build a house as not to
endanger the men a visit us, are we to build a life which may be to others
snares of destruction? Is not a battlement around our conduct? Are habits
to be formed without reference to social influence? Children are looking at us,
strangers take account of our ways, and though we may be proud of our strength,
they may be lured from righteousness by that licentiousness which we call
liberty.

H as God given directions for building a house and forgotten to give instructions
for the building of a life? Is it like Him to do the little and forget the great ?
Is He not more careful about the tenant than about the house? Instructions
for life-building abound. ‘“ Wisdom is the principal thing,” etc. Go to the
Book with earnest desire to discover the way of salvation, the secret of vital
growth, and God will teach.— Ze City Temple. Vol. LL.


Reniaiovs Aistuetics.— Verses 9-11.


As “a peculiar people ” God designed that they should walk worthy of their
high vocation. No intermingling allowed with heathen character and practices.
They and even their cattle were stamped with the mark of separation. By
forbidding the intermingling of seeds, animals and garments, God taught the
great lesson of spiritual separation. That lesson has been written for our
learning.


Tue Mrxep SEexp,


‘““ The seed is the word.” The Christian, faithful in his testimony to divine
truth, is the sower. Whatever is opposed to this seed, foreign to it in character,
arrests its fall into good ground, or obstructs its growth when rooted—is the
mischievous seed of the wicked one—the seed of “ tares” and choking “ thorns,”
A teacher of truth in pulpit, Sabbath school, or in house to house visitation
who seeks on the Sabbath to scatter the seed of tue kingdom, but during the
week is busy dealing out “ words to no profit,” has no more warrant to expect the
prepared heart among secular hearers than the husbandman in expecting the
culture and preparedness of his ground by the cultivation of eset :


GHAP, XXII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.








Tue Unequai Yox1na.


“ Thou shalt not plough with an ox and an ass together.’ This illustrates
the intermingling of persons of diverse characters and tastes 'This intercourse
is indispensible in certain reistions. Men of all characters and orders have
fellowship in different wavs. It would not be desirable, if practicable, for the
“ children of light” to be sevarated outwardly from “ the children of this world.”
Christ moved with crowds but had fellowsiiv only with few, contact and inter-
course with evil, but no communion with it. He met with men to teach, heal,
comfort, and save, but the means He used were words of truth and acts of love.
In Christ there were no unseemly and unequal voking. ‘The illustration refers
also to service—the inviting of opposite characters and interests in a common
cause. ‘The ox being stronger than the ass, two evils ensue. ‘The stronger
drags aside the weaker, and the weaker impedes the progress of the stronger.
Unequal yokes make bad ploughing and a crooked furrow. ‘I'he loss is seen in
waste of time, labour, and ground. “How can two walk together except they
be agreed?” In secular life two men united in partnership cannot prosper
without agreement. Each seeks his own selfish ends or unrighteous progress at
the sacrifice of principle. In spiritual life, when a Christian unites with apy
whose thoughts, tastes and habits differ from his own, how can they walk
harmoniously. Any good to be done is done defectively or left undone. Other-
wise it must be done separately ; the ox unyoked and freed from encumbrance.
The liberation happens in obedience to the Divine injunction, “ Be not unequally
yoked together with unbelievers,”


THe Mixep GARMENT.


“ Thou shalt not wear a garment of divers sorts, as of woollen and linen
together.” Many put on religion for particular days and special occasions. On
Sabbath they are suitably and religiously attired ; but other days of the week
find them wearing a garment of coarser material and divers colours. A “ linsey-
woolsey ” christianity is very popular. ‘I'he practical, outward life of a Christian
should harmonise with his spiritual hidden life, compared in Scripture to “ fine
linen, clean and white, the righteousness of the saints.” Hence exhortations to
“ keep ins garments, to hate the garment spotted by the flesh,” to “put off the
old man with his deeds, and put on the new man,” etc. Christians are a peculiar
people in God’s estimation, and should be in that of the world by reason of
moral character, their spiritual clothing. As “a holy priesthood” they should
never put off their long priestly linen garments, but let them be “for glory and
beauty.” A “royal priesthood” should evince its rank by “ royal apparel,” for
they that wear soft raiment are in kings’ houses. What a motive does this furnish
for practical godliness, ‘The priestly robe should be worn always, in all companies
and in all times ; should suit the home, the sanctuary, and the place of business.
Whatever forbids my robe forbids my presence. “ Ye are the temple of the
Holy Ghost,” and “what agreement hath the temple of God with idols.” A
testing principle is here, ‘The question is not what is lawful for a Christian, but
what is seemly, beautiful, and accordant with Divine taste. ‘he God of glory
is jealous for the glory of his children. He would have the outward correspond
with the inward. “ Wherefore be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not
the unclean thing,” — The Study, 1875.


288


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERUNOMY. OHAP. XXII,
Saree ee ee


THE Mora AnD THE Postrive Iw tar Dories or Lire.—Verse 11.


On this verse we remark—I. That it exhibits a positive duty. Moral laws
are of everlasting obligation ; positive may be temporary and local in their
existence. II. That as the inculcation of a positive duty, the precept of the
text was not so binding upon the Jews as those duties which were wholly moral,
III. That we who live under the gospel dispensation are not bound to observe
this precept at all. We are not under law, but under grace. IV. ‘That while
we are under no manner of obligation to observe this precept in its literal
meaning, still the moral principle which underlies that meaning, and which it
was intended to illustrate, is as binding now as ever. It teaches us that we
cannot “serve two masters;” “thou shalt have no other gods before me.”—
R. Harley, FBS,


HOMILETIC HINTS AND 8UGGESTIONS.


Ver.8. Battlements. 1. Danger in
ated of common resort. Roofs of

ouses much resorted to in cool of
the evening. 2. Danger in places of
devotion. They were used as an
oratory or places of prayer. 3. Danger
in places of rest. They were also slept
on during the heat of summer. It is
needful to have some parapet or fence
to guard ourselves and others from
falling down,


Ver. 9. Divers seeds. 1. To secure
the best crop. By enjoining the best,
uninixed seed, and by preventing one
seed from destroying tle other. 2. To
forbid heathen customs. Heathens
sowed barley with dried grapes, by
which they signified that their vine-
yards were consecrated to Ceres and
Bacchus, 3. ‘I'o induce simple trust
in God. By not sowing mixed seeds
they would indicate faith in God’s
providence in seasons wet or dry.
“The Church is God’s vineyard
(Is. v. 7; Jer. xii. 10; Mt. xxi. 33;
Lu. xx. 15). It must not be sown
with the tares of false doctrine,
mingled with the good seed of the
word,” — Wordsworth,


Ver. 10. Plow. Unequally yoked.
1. In the choice of companions. 2. In
married life (2 Cor. vi. 14). 3, In
Christian work. “The ass is lower
than the ox, and when in a yoke
together must bear the principal


weight, and that in a very painful
position in the neck; his steps are
unequal and his strength is iuferior,
which must occasion an_ irregular
draught, and great oppression to both,
The ass is a stubborn, rebellious, and
in these countries a spirited creature ;
the ox, on the contrary, is gentle,
tractable, and patient. Accepting
this interpretation, it gives us another
instance of that humanity which per-
vades the whole Mosaic code,” —
Cassell,


Ver. 11. Garment. 1. Dress accor-
ding to your station in life, Linen
and wool may have been the apparel
of priests and therefore forbidden to
the people, 2. Dress not in imitation
of the world. ‘I'he garment may have
been peculiar to the heathen priesthood
and therefore a virtual condemnation
of all idolatrous usages. ‘“ ‘These laws
were made to set forth how God
abhoreth all mixtures in religion, and
how carefully men should keep their
minds from being corrupted from the
simplicity that isin Christ.”—Zrapp.


Ver. 12. Fringes. Tassels on the
corners of the outer coat, or, according
to some, tassels on the coverlet of the
bed, which was tied to bed-posts for
the sake of decency. Learn—l. Not
to be ashamed of your religion however
peculiar you may seem to be. Israel
distinguished from other people by
T 289


OHAP, XXII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY.





these things. 2. Not to forget the
precepts of the word. Fringes reminded
of particular occasions and precepts.
“Speak unto Israel, bid them make
fringes throughout their
generations and it shall be
unto them for a fringe, that ye may


commandments of the Lord and do
them ; and that ye seek not after your .
own heart and your own eyes, after
which ye used to go a whoring: that
ye may remember and do all my
commandments, and be holy unto
your God.” (Num. xv. 38-40),


look upon it and remember all the


Purity aND Fipetiry mm Lire.— Verses 13-29,


The regulations which follow might be imperatively needful in the then
situation of the Israelites ; and yet it is not necessary that we should curiously
and impertinently enquire into usages unknown to the language of civilization.
So far was it from being unworthy of God to leave such things upon record,
that the enactments must heighten our admiration of His wisdom and goodness
in the management of a people so perverse and so given to regular passions—
Jamieson. We may thus arrange our matter—


I, The slandered wife (vers. 13-19). Chastity and fidelity should characterise
married life, “Chastity is the band that holds together the sheaf of all holy
affections and duties,” says Vinet. ‘This band may be broken and married life
be a curse. A husband may question the virtue of his wife from malice or with
justice, 1. Accused maliciously. He might take her to gratify lusts, then hate
her, try to get rid of her, and bring her in bad repute. A declaration of
innocence was made by parents before the elders, who were to send for her
accuser. He was chastised bodily and forfeited the privilege of divorce. Slander
1s a crime of the highest nature, a species of murder which destroys reputation
and character (Prov. xxv. 18). 2. Accused justly (vers. 20, 21). If the words
were true and the girl had deceived, was not found to be a virgin, she was to be
brought before the door of her father’s house and stoned by the men of the city.
She had committed fornication in her father’s house and folly in Israel (ver. 21).
(See Dinah, Gen, xxxiv. 7). Israel was a holy people by profession, and all
uncleanness was folly.


II, The unchaste wife. Glancing at the preceding verses, we notice—
1. Unchaste in marriage (vers. 20-22), Whoretars was a capital crime, treason
to the great king, and punished with severity. 2. Unchaste after marriage
(ver. 22), Adultery was a sin which could not be tolerated. Adulterers are as
hateful as adulteresses (Lev. xx. 10). The man who acts treacherously against
“the wife of his covenant” is as great a sinner as the woman who breaks the
marriage bond (Mal. ii. 14-16). There is no respect of sexes with God.


III. The seduced virgin. Three cases are given. 1. Betrothed virgin. (a)
In the town (vers, 23-24). Both of them, the man and the girl, were led out to
the gate of the town and stoned. ‘The girl because she had not cried for help,
therefore consented to the deed ; the man because he had “ humbled his neigh-
bour’s wife.” (6) In the field (vers. 25-27). She called for help and could get
none, hence not worthy of death. The man alone died. Insolitude the enemy
assaults, and our cry should be, “Help, Lord!” 2. Unbetrothed virgin
(vers. 28-29). he man paid the father 50 shekels of silver, married the girl, and
could not be divorced from her because he had humbled her. This was to
prevent such vicious practices (of. Ex. xx. 16-17.).

290


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOM Y. OMAP. XKIt,
eR a ne


Darx Sports in Soorat Lire.— Verses 13-30,


These are most delicate matters, but concern the welfare of society and not
beneath Divine legislation. “ Nor is it a better argument that the Scriptures
were not written by inspiration of God to object that this passage, and others of
a like nature, tend to corrupt the imagination, and will be abused by evil-
disposed readers, than it is to say that the sun was not created by God, because
its light may be abused by wicked men as an assistant in committing crimes °
which they have meditated.”— Horne.

1. Slander (vers, 13-19). The slanderer is most despicable and most
dangerous to society. “A false accusation is worse than death” (Eccles. xxvi. 5).
Many have fallen by the edge of the sword, but not so many as have fallen by
the edge of the tongue (Eccles. xxviii. 18). ;


“ Slander lives upon succession 3
For ever housed where it once gets possession.” —Shakspeare,


2. Adultery (vers. 20-22). Solomon paints the deadly snare of a strange woman
with a master hand and exquisite fidelity (¢f Prov. vii. 6-23). The warning is
not needless. ‘ Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge.” 93. Hape
(vers. 25-27). Laws may be too lenient for such violence of women. Surely,
if taking away life deserves punishment, this must be the murder of virtue,
“asin worthy of death.” 4. Fornication (vers. 28, 29). To gratify lusts,
some unrestrained by law human or divine, wound with keenest anguish, commit
irreparable injury to body and soul. “ But fornication and all uncleanness
- . .« « . let it not be once mentioned among you.” 5. Incest (v. 30).
Abominations like these abounded in Canaan, but must be destroyed in Israel
(Deut. xxvii. 20). This is doubly guilty, for she is near of kin, and she is
another person’s wife (¢f Reuben with Bilhah, Gen. xxxv. 22; Absalom with
his father’s wives, 2 Sam. xvi. 20-23 ; 1 Kings ii. 17). This is a repetition ot
the law (Lev. xvili. 8; xx. 11). Line upon line, to preserve from sin and purify
life. Our own laws might be more severe to check licentiousness and secuve
social purity.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO OHAPTER XXII. :


Vers. 1-4. Oz and ass. Iamshocked the horse. A man could not haw


at the thoughtless cruelty of many
people, yet I did a thing once that has
given me considerable uneasiness, and
for which I reproached myself bitterly.
As I was riding homeward | saw a
waggon standing at a door, with three
horses ; the two foremost were eating
corn from bags at their noses; but the
third had dropped his on the ground
and could not stoop to get any food.
However, I rode on in absence of mind
without assisting him. But when I had
got nearly home I remembered what I
had observed in my absence of mind,
and felt extremely hurt at my neglect,
and would have ridden back had I not
thought the waggoner might have
come out of the fioiase and relieved


had a better demand for getting off
his horse than for such an act of
humanity. It is by absence of mind
that we omit many duties—A&. Cecil.


Ver. 5. Garment. A man ought
in his clothes to conform something to
those that he converses with, to the
custom of the nation and the fashioe
that is decent and general to the
occasion and his own condition ; for
that is best that best suits one’s
calling, and the rank we live in.—
Feltham.


“For the apparel oft proclaims the man.”
8


Birds. Of love need J
291


Vers, 6, 7.


CHAP. ZXE.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





say anything ? Who is there that has
not watched the birds from St. Valen-
tine’s day onwards, through their
courtships, weddings, lovers’ quarrels,
house buildings, welcoming of the
small strangers, nursing the heirs and
heiresses, and sending the young
people forth into the world {—Prof.
G. Wilson.


Ver. 8. //ouse. Houses are built
to live in and not to look on; there-
fore let use be preferred before
uniformity, except where both may
be liad. —Bacon.


Ver. 9, 10.


[zg not a field where tares and thorns alone

Are left to spring ; good seed hath there been
sown

With no inspiring hand. Sometimes the shoot

{s choked with weeds, or withers on a stone 3

But in a kindly soil it strikes its root

And flourisheth and bringeth forth abundant


fruit,
—Dr. Southey.


Seeds. Humanity


Vers. 13-19. Occasions of speech.
Slander is a vice impure in its source,
dangerous in its effects, and sometimes
irreparable in its consequences. It
generally strikes three mortal blows—
it wouuds him who commits it, him


against whom it is committed, and
him who knows that it is cominitted.
It is tolerated in society only because
almost every one has an unhappy in-
clination to commit it—Saurin.


“ To speak no slauder; no, nor listen to it.”—
Tennyson.


Vers. 20-30. Virgin. Agesilaus,
king of Sparta, was a great lover of
chastity. In his journeys he would
never lodge in private houses where he
might have the company of women ;
but ever lodged either in the temples
or in the open fields, making a!l men
witnesses of his modesty and chastity.


Vers. 25-27. Rape. The Lacede-
monian commonwealth was utterly
ruined by a rape committed on the
two daughters of Scedasus and Leuctra
(/rapp). Publius Scipio Africauus,
warring in Spain, took New Carthage
by storm, at which time a beautiful
and noble virgin fled to him for sue-
cour to preserve her chastity. He
being but 24 years old, and in the
heat of youth, hearing of it, would not
suffer her to come into sight, for fear
of falling into temptation himself, and,
therefore, restored her safely to her
father. Aduirable example |


CHAPTER XXIIL


Crrrrcat Notrs.—From the sanctification of domestic relations, to which laws of marriage
and chastity in the previous chapter pointed, Moses now proceeds to legislate for the purity of


the congregation and the camp.


1-8, Rights of Citizenship in Israel. Forbidden to the mutilated in his sexual member


(ver. 1).


Mutilation practised among entiles, but unnatural in those made in God’s image and
chosen to be God’s peuple (Lev. xxii. 24). Bastard (ver, 2).


Offspring of incest and adultery,


gen.—collective bodies of contemporaries (cf. Gen. xv. 16 3 Ex. i. 6); tenth complete number
used in highest sense, and signifies an indefinite period. Ammonites and Moabites excluded.


Perhaps reference to their incestuous origin (Gen. xix. 30-38),


But they both combined against


Israel without provocation ; hired Balaam to curse, and brought upon themselves perpetual


rejection (cf, Num. xxiv. 9; xxil. 5, 6), Seek (ver. 6),


their welfare (Ezra ix. 12; Jer. xxix. 7).


Invite them to friendship, nor care for


Edomites and Egyptians had opposed (Num. xx. 18 ;


Ex. xx. 5), but Israel were to be friendly with them and not forget former hospitality.
Third gen, (ver. 8), ie. the great grandchildren who had lived strangers in Israel might be


tncorporated,


9-14. Purity of the camp must be preserved in war.


Wicked thing states in vers. 10-18


uncleanness of body ; theft, violence, and ains common to life in camps (Jos, vi. 10, 18). Then


292


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. CHAP, XXII.





follow sanitary regulations to secure cleanliness of person and habits, The necessities of nature
provided for outside the camp (vers. 12, 13), Walk. Fit for God's presence. Unclean thing.

Nakedness of anythiug”—nothing to be ashamed of ; no want of reverence in not removing
ev:l must be displayed,


15-18, Toleration and non-toleration. A slave running away from the tyranny of his
Master, not to be given up, but to dwell in the land (vers. 15-16). Prostitutes, male and female,
descended from Israel not to be tolerated, i.e, not allowed to give themselves up to prostitution
as religious worship (vers. 17-18). Dog is figurative (cf. Rev. 22-15) and equivalent to the
“Sodomite ” of the verse preceding (cf. Mic. i. 7; Baruch vi. 43). Speak. Com.


19-25. Theocratic rights of citizenship. Of a brother (4.e., countryman) an Israelite was not
to take interest for money, food, or any goods lent to him. Stranyer, not Israelites (cf. Ex.
xxii. 25; Lev. xxv., 36, 37). Vows fultilled without delay (cf Ex. xxii. 29; Num. xxx. 2;
Ece. v. 4, 5.) For general law of vows (¢/. Lev. xxvii). Hunger might he satisfied in vineyards
and cornfields of a neighbour, but nothing to be carried away in a vessel, Pluck (ver. 25 cf.
Matt. xii, 13; Luke vil). Right to piuck still recognised among Araba,


EXcLUDED FROM THE CONGREGATION.— Verses 1-5.


Everyone belonging to God’s people or devoted to God’s service should be as
fe as possible. ‘ Whosoever le be of thy seed in their generations that
ath any blemish, let hin not approach to offer the bread of his God”
(Lev. xxi. 16-21). Five classes are mentioned as unfit to enter the congregation
of the Lord,


I, Mutilated persons are excluded (ver. 1). Two kinds are specified,
1. Aunuchs. An ancient practice for priests of many heathen gods, especially
of the Syrian goddess, to be eunuchs, and for parents in various ways to mutilaté
their children and train them for the service of the great. God’s service
requires soundness and purity. Sacrifices must be free from defect and blemish.
Individuals in whom the Divine image was wilfully defaced were not qualitied
for office and association with Gcd’s people. 2. Bastards. Such spring from
an order not natural and divine. Whetlier heathens or strangers, oiten styled
harlots (Is. xxiii. 17, 18); or born before wedlock a stigma is attached to
discourage disgraceful habits. ‘I'hese prohibitions literally and symbolically
were suited for the Jewish Church—had rejerence only to its outward con-
stitution, and passed away when the kingdom of God was established.


II. Special nations are excluded (ver 3). Ammon and Moab were for ever
excluded. 1. hey neglected duty. As allies or neighbouring states they
brought no victuals into the camp, for which Israel would have paid them.
2. They were hostile in proceedings. Without provocation they opposed Israel
and hired Balaam to curse them. The unmerciful will be excluded from the
kingdom (Mat. xxi. 41-46). ‘here can never be any “ peace” or “ prosperity ”
to enemies of God. A curse falls upon all who injure God’s people, and they
will forfeit His favour for ever, Balaam had to confess, “ Blessed is he that
blesseth thee, and cursed is he that curseth thee” (Num. xxiv, 9).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 1, 2. 1. The privilege of inter- of man is made to praise God (Ps.
course with God and His people. xxxvi. 10.) All that are sinful and
“ Blessed is the man whom ‘nou impure are excluded from heaven.
choosest and causest to appr-ach unto ‘There shall in no wise enter into it
Thee.” 2. The purity re,aired for avything that defileth (Rev. xxi. 27)
enjoyment of this privilege. ‘The wrath pe


Gwar. XXIMl,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY,





Ver. 4 Neglect. Its guilt and


danger,
Vers. 4-6. Benevolence towards
God’s ancient people. I. The duty of
benevolence is general. 1. It is a
duty. 2. It is a duty absolutely in-
dispensable to our acceptance with


God. II. Our special obligation to
exercise it towards God’s ancient
people. 1. We are more indebted to


them than to any other people under
heaven. 2. The very blessings which
we enjoy were taken from them that
they might be transferred to us.
3. This very transfer of their blessings
has been made to us for the express


their necessity. III. The more par-
ticular obligations which we have to
exercise towards them at this time.
Observe—l. The interest now felt in
the Christian world for their restoration
to God. 2. The stir which prevails
among the Jews themselves 3. The
earnests which God has given us in the
actuat commission of some. 4. The
general voice of prophecy.—

C. Simeon, 11.A.


Ver. 6. As God takes notice of tha
least courtesy showed to His people,
even to a cup of water, to requite it,
so He doth of the least discourtesy,
even to a frown or a frump, to revenge


purpose that He might dispense them it—7rapp.


to that bereaved people in the hour of


Tur CURSE TURNED INTO A BiEssina.— Verse 5.


A divine law governs events which can never be changed. God can “ curse
the blessings of the wicked ” (Mal. ii. 2), or turn their curse into blessings us here.
Apply to other things—

1. In persecution. Often overruled for the triumph of God’s people and the
spread of God’s cause. “ ‘The more I seek to blot out the name of Christ, the
more legible it becomes ; and whatever of Christ I thought to eradicate takes
deeper root, and rises the higher in the hearts and lives of men.— Diocletian.
2. [n labour. What this would have been without sin we know not. The
ground is “cursed” and we toil in the “sweat of the face” (Gen. iii. 17-19.)
But the curse is blessed to physical health in the vigour and development of the
body, to intellectual enjoyment, in the rest and recreation of mind, to the good
of society, by promoting its interests and satisfying its wants. “‘ Labour is the ~
salt of life.” 3. Jn affliction, which checks sin, weans from the world, brings to
God, prepares and disciplines for future life, As fire refines gold, so affliction
purifies men. Many can say, “chastisements are blessings in disguise; it is
good for me that I have been afflicted.” 4. In sin. This greatest curse, which
brought death into both worlds, is made the occasion of the greatest blessing.
God, in his infinite wisdom, redeems from sin and death ; in Jesus Christ dis-
plays His love and magnifies His grace in the salvation of the sinner. ‘‘ This
also cometh forth from the Lord of hosts, which is wonderful in counsel and
excellent in working.”


Tue Epomitg aND THE Eayptian.— Verses 7-8.


Edomites refused permission for Israel to pass through the land, yet they
were related to them by kindred, and must not be abhorred. “He is thy
brother.” In Egypt Israel were oppressed, yet in that land they had received
benefits, and descendants in the third generation of both peoples might be
naturalised. Learn—


I, That the tie of kindred must be respected. God has bound men in


aren ca ties, and such ties should ever be held most sacred. “If there


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY. onAP. XXIII,








be not a religious element in the relations of men,” says Carlyle, “such
relations are miserable and doomed to ruin.” 1. In the family. Husbands
and wives, sisters and brothers must love another. 2. In the neighbourhood he
must feel the claims of others. Nothing can destroy this relationship. “There
is a law of neighbourhood which does not leave a man perfectly master on his
own ground.”—Burke. 3. In the country. Our native country makes its
impress on our character as its accent on our tongue. We must love and pray
for our country.


IT. That hospitality must not be forgotten. Israel had fow:sd a home in
Egypt and received many gifts in coming out. Edom was not very friendly,
but they had furnished Israel with victuals in their march, For these things
they must be rewarded. 1. Z7ime must not obliterate remembrance of kindness.
Years had passed, but Israel must not forget their obligation. Gratitude must

_ prompt generosity for special favours. ‘“ One good turn deserves another.”
2. Circumstances must not obliterate remembrance of kindness. Israel had
grown more prosperous and more powerful, but they were forbidden to revenge
or “pay back an old grudge.” No changes of time or place must alter dis-
position to do right. Our ill treatment in the past must “provoke to love,”
not to rancour, resentment and wrath, ‘See that none render evil for evil
unto any map, but ever tullow that which is good.”


The shade by which my life was crossed,

Which makes a desert in the mind,

Has made me kindly with my kind.
—Tennyeon.


Tue Sanotity oy THE Camp.— Verses 9-14


Sanitary rules of great importance are given here. Simple, well adapted to
the climate, and enforced by the highest motives.


I. Cleanliness must be enforced. This part of the ceremonial law was
constantly enforced. In private and in public it is a religious duty; in war or
in the camp special evils result from its neglect, “ In thy filthiness is lewdness”
(Ezek, xxiv. 13),


II. Wickedness must be avoided. “Keep thee from every wicked thing.”
Theft and violence are incident to camp life. Morals and religion are often
relaxed in time of war. Outward cleanliness was only symbolic of that holiness
for which God was training His people. “ Dearly beloved, let us cleanse our-
selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of
God,”


III. Purity is essential to success. “To deliver thee, and to give up thine
enemies before thee” (ver. 14). Sin paralyses, frustrates and hinders all effort,
In spiritual warfare, conquests are won by prayer and purity. Holiness is
invincible “ when the host geeth forth against the enemy.”


Goo’s Presence aN AnauMent ror Morat Purity.—Verses 12-14


If the presence of some eerthly prince would put us on our guard and make
us AASe | not to offend, how earnest should we be to put away every “unclean
thing” when “ God walketa in the midst of the camp.” ood


OHAP. XXIML.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY


i a aa
I. In daily life. Outwardly “wash and be clean” in person and habits ;


inwardly in heart, character and conduct,


purity,” says the Talmud.
II. In the domestic circle.


“Outward cleaulivess is inward


This was no mere typical cleanliness, but such


as pertained to the person and dwelling of every Israelite, and which the Creat. °3


laws of health require from all classes aud rauks,
the God of law, order and beauty. Dirty homes


injurious to morals and social life.


It is a part of the syste:: of
are repulsive and unhealtuy—


“ Cleanse your persons and dwellings, else I


shall never believe that you have cleansed your souls,” said John Wesley.


III. In the Christian Church. God is specially in “the camp” of believers


to work for deliverance and progress.
lowered. Every soldier must be holy and
church constantly guarded. ‘fle Great King


ci 4M


army, that he may dwell there.
unclean thing in thee, and turn away


HOMILETIC HINTS


Ver. 9. Keep thee. Walk accu-
rately, as carrying thy life in thy
hand ; for “the sword devoureth one
as well as another” (2 Sam. ii. 25);
it spares neither lord nor losel. Every
avldier, therefore, should be a saint,
realy pressed to meet the Lord, Who
hath said, ‘I will be sanctified in all
them that draw near unto Me”
(Lev. x. 3).—7rapp.

The soldier's bearing. 1. The nature
of this injunction. he true soldier of
Israel to be honourable, self-coutrolled,
chivalrous, 2 The reason of it.
That Israel might be respected for
character as well as courage. That by
their virtues and successes God, their
Lawgiver, wight be honoured. 3. The
application of it. Character of soldiers
of Christ. Kivht methods for lawful
ends.— Lib, Museum,


The standard of piety must not be
consistent, and the interests of the
demands a clean camp and a purified


ny camp shall be holy, that He see no
from thee.”


AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 13. Unclean thing. The charge
to be clean. 1. From moral pollution
(ver 9). 2. From ceremouid pollution.
3. From natural pollution (vers. 12-14).
—Mt, Henry. Hereby God tanzht His
people holy conversation, that they
should keep themselves from iniquity
as David did (Psa. xviii, 23)—that
is, from such sins as either by their
constitution, calling, company or
custom, they are most proue to.—-


Lrapp.


Ver. 14. Conditions of victory.
1. Purity of character. 2. The pre-
sence of God. 3. Rectitnde of pur-
pe Then the enemy will be lke the

uyptians. “ Let us flee from the face
of Israel, for the Lord fighteth for
them ” (Ex. xiv. 25),


Spectra L.aws.— Verses 15-18,


Israel were to be a terror to tyrants, a refuge for afflicted people and a repre-


sentative of God.
whoredom.


They were to protect the oppressed, but to sanction no


I. Fugitive slaves were allowed asylum. The reference is not to idolaters,
but to slaves who fled from a foreign country and from harsh treatment from an


unjust master. 1,
deliver him unto his master.”


They were protected from oppression. “hou shalt not
In Greece and Rome slaves were pursued by


their masters, and if caught were branded with a red-hot iron. Buta refugee


was free, as in Britain now,
296


the moment he sets his foot upon the soil. They


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OH4P. XXIII,


Sn ra re


were permitted to settle at pleasure. Not merely protected but encouraged to
reside where it was best for him, or where he might choose. Lawless power
must be checked. The interests of men wast be felt when their fortunes are
committed to our care,


Il. Prostitutes were prohibited from their ealling. Males and females were
devoted to the service of Ashtaroth, visited cities, wandered as mendicants in
country villages and enticed the people to abominable crimes. 1. Persons were
forbidden to profess. “'Nuere shall te no whore (sodomitess) of the daughters
of Israel, nor a sodomite of the sons of Israel,” attachés to the worship of God
and reproaches to the people of God. 2. Their sinful gains were rejected at
the altar. The profits of prostitution must not be given into the treasury.
They were scaudalous hire, the price of a dog, an “abomination to the Lord,”
and inust not be “ brouglit into the house of the Lord.” We cannot honour
God with our substance unless secured by righteous means.” God not only
looks «t what we give, but how we got it.” “TI hate robbery for burnt-offering.”


“ He will be found impartially severe,
Too just to wink, or speak the guilty clear.”
— Cowper,


Crvm Ricuts.— Verses 19-25.


Here is not only a plea for liberty and a check to lewdness, but a law of
asury and of vows, and a right to appease hunger.


I. A right to borrow without interest. From a stranger interest might be
allowed. Commerce must be carried on and capital invested. It is a legal act,
and often a mutual benefit, to borrow and pay favour for the loan. But from
an /sraelite no interest must be taken. Kindly feeling must be cherished. “ He
is thy brother ” (verse 20.) They might lend money, seed, or food among them-
selves; but covetousness be checked, separation from other nations must be
preserved, and God must be acknowledged. “‘That the Lord thy God may
bless thee,”


II. A right of discretion in making a vow. None were compelled to vow.
“Tf thou shalt forbear to vow, it shall be no sin in thee.” But having made a
vow, it must be faithfully performed. ‘ hou shalt not slack to pay it.” [t is
sacred in character, binding in force, and ought always to be made witli timely
caution (Num. xxx. 2). “ Better is it that thou shouldest not vow than that
thou shouldest vow and not pay ” (Ecce. v. 5).


Ill. A right to refresh themselves in cornfields or vineyards. Labourers
in the vintage, or travellers in the cornfield, had an interest in the fruit of the
land. 1. //unger might be appeased. Provision was thus made for the poor.
Nature’s products are given to satisfy human wants. Jewish “poor laws”
permitted neighbours to pluck the fruit of the proprietor’s fiells, “Thou
mayest pluck the ears with thine hand” (ver. 25). 2. Dishonesty must not be
practised. ‘I'he sickle must not be put into the standing corn, nor a grape
carried away in a vessel. “ Thou mayest take for necessity, not for superfluity,”
says Trapp. Kindness must not be abused. We must not ceusure men, nor
insist upon compensation for trifles. Be generous, Remember “ the kindness
and philanthropy of God our Saviour towards man ” (‘Tit. iii. 4). =


CHAP, XXIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 17,18. Dedication of unholy
gains, Many public prostitutes dedi-
cated to their gods a part of their im-
pure earnings, or were kept in the
temple to support abominable wership.
Stich offerings—1. A reproach to their
dignity. They were Israelites, the
people of God. ‘ Nosuch thing ought
to be done in Israel.” 2. An offence to
their God. Holiness becomes the house
of worship of God. The wages of
licentiousness pollute the altar. ‘‘ The
sacrifice of the wicked is an abomi-
nation to the Lord” (Prov. xv. 8,
21, 27).


Vers. 19, 20. Usury. 1. Lend
cheerfully, without extortion or oppres-
sion, 2, Lend with a view to please
God, whose favour will rest upon them
in domestic, social and national life.
“That the Lord thy God may bless


thee in all thou settest thine hand to
in the land ” (ver. 20).


Vers. 21-23. Vows. 1. Rule in
making them. a. Voluntary. A self
imposed obligation. 6. Cautiously. “Be
not zash with thy mouth, to cause thy
flesh to sin” (Ecc, v. 6). 2. Rule in
paying them. a. Instantly. As the
best proof of sincerity. ‘“ Defer not to
pay it.” 5, Cheerfully. ‘‘ God loveth
a cheerful giver.” That which is
gone out of the lips cannot be recalled,
but performed solemnly, punctually,
and fully.


Vers. 24, 25. Varied Rights. 1.
The rights of travellers to eat. 2. The
rights of property which must not be
infringed. 38. The rights of God to
claim possessions and legislate for their
use. “The world is mine and the
fulness thereof.”


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XXIII.


Vers. 1-6. Defects. Deplorable is
the degradation of our nature.—South,


* Trust not yourself ; bab you defects to know,
Make use of every friend and every foe.”—
Pope.


Ver. 5. Ourse. Human curses are
ofttimes more an honour than a
disgrace.x—Dr. Thomas.


Vers. 7,8. Not abhor. let former
kindnesses be remembered, and past
injuries be forgotten.— Wordsworth.

“ Wilt thou draw near the nature of the gods §

Draw near them then in being merciful ;

Sweet mercy is nobility’s true badge.” —


Shakspeare.


Vers, 10-14. Clean. I have more
than once expressed my conviction—
that the humanizing influence of habits
of cleanliness has never been sufh-
ciently acted on. A clean, fresh, and
well-ordered house exercises a moral,
no less than a physical influence. Nor
is it difficult to trace a connection

298


between cleanliness and the formation
of habits of respect for property, for
the laws in general, and even for those
higher duties and obligations the obser-
servance of which no laws can enforce.—
Dr, S. Smith,


Vers. 15,16. Servant. St. Baron,
before his conversion to Christianity,
caused one of his slaves to be severely
beaten and then sold. After his con-
version, he could not rest till he had
induced this slave to cause lis imprison-
ment, where he deplored constantly his
crime against his human and Christian
brother.—JUl. Paul and Onesimus.


Vers. 17,18. Price. Religious pro-
fession was, at first, a conflict—a
sacrifice: now it is become a trade.—
R. Cecil.


“ Look to thy actions well :
For churches either are our heawas or hell ”—=
G. Herbert.


Vers. 19, 20. Usury. Commerce


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


OMAP. XXIII,





flourishes by circumstances, precarious,
contingent, transitory, almost as liable
to change as the winds and waves that
waft it to our shores.—Cotton.


Vers. 21-23. Vows. When you
have promised to do any good office,
the right of the thing promised hath,
before the God of Truth, passed over
from you to another; consequently,
you will esteem yourself obliged to
stand to the performance of your word,
though it may be to your own pre-
judice.— Venn.


Vers. 24, 25.—A lady on her journey
in India rested on her palanquin be-
neath the shade of some banyan trees,
while her bearers kindled a fire, and her
servant began his cooking preparations,
Close by was a garden of gourds and
other Indian vegetables, and the lady
was surprised to see her servant coolly
walk into this garden, gather first one
kind of vegetable after another, till his


hands were full, when he went to the
fire and began cutting them up. His
mistress called him, told him not to
forget to pay for all he had taken, for
the owners would come and water the
plants. ‘The man smiled and said they
would not require payment. ‘The lady
tried to explain that it was stealing to
take away the property of another
without paying for it. Hesmiled again
and with truthful expression replied in
broken English, “hat no stealing,
ma’am ; that one custom in my coun-
try. Travelling this way take what
we want, but no carry away.” The
owners of the garden soon afterwards
appeared, the servant told them in his
native tongue, how his mistress accused
him of stealing, on which they were all
amused. ‘I'his had evidently been the
habit of their country from time im-
memorial, and they had no desire to
change, but were contented to do as
their fathers had done before them.—
Biblical Treasury.





CHAPTER XXIV.


Carricat Nores.—In this chapter certain duties social and domestic are chosen to {Mlustrate the
general application of the law.


1-5. Relation of man and wife. Divorce. The verses are hypothetical and should form one
sentence, the first three being protasis and ver. 4 the apodosis. Moses neither institutes nor
commands divorce, but permits, puts under careful regulations which was too prevalent, too
deeply rooted to abolish. The passage harmonises with Mat. v. 31, 32; xix. 8-9, Favour. Does
not please him. Unclean- Nakedness, disgrace or shame (1 Sam. xx. 30; Is. xx. 4). Bull, t.¢.,
writing of cuttings, a certificate of separation, from the man with whom the wife was one flesh
(Gen. ii, 24), The first husband could not take his divorced wife back again ; she was defiled
(ver. 4) by marriage with a second husband. This moral defilement not removed by divorce
from the second husband even after his death ; but abomination a atain upon the land, as much
as incest and licentiousness (Lev. xviii. 25).


A precept, similar to that in Ex. xxii. 25, 26.
6-9. Various prohibitions. Upper stone is concave and covers the nether like a lid-law,


prohibited either from being taken; for then the hand-mill would be injured and life
endangered.


7. Repetition of law against man-stealing (Ex xxi. 16).


8, 9. Plague (Lev. 13, 14). Leprosy was the symbol of sin, most often the theocratic
punishment, the penalty for sins committed against the theocracy, as in the cases of Miriam.
Gehazi and Uzziah.—(Abp. Trench.)


10-18, Warnings against oppression. In loans they must not compel the borrower to give a

ledge that was really necessary for him. If poor man pledged his cloak it was restored

fore night, In East, poor generally have only their daily garments to cover them at night,
(of. Ex. xxii. 25, 26). i an


CHAP, XXIV, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





16-18. Warning against injustice. Hired servants, paid at close of day; to withhold wages
for a night would entail suffering and be sin, injustice. ;


16. Of. Lev. xiv. 18, and Jas, v. 4,


16. Caution addressed to earthly judges, God, as Sovereign Judge of all nations might
visit the sins of parents upon children (Ex. xx. 6), In heathen nations whole families were
involved in the penalty of the parent and were put to death together ; in Israel it must not be
thus (¢/, 2 Kings xiv. 6 ; Jer. xxxi. 29, 30).


27. Pervert. Law against perverting right of strangers, widows and orphans repeated from
(Ex. xxii. 20, 21; xxiii. 9); with addition not to take a widow’s pledge, for they were once
strangers and bondmen in Egypt (Lev. xix. 33).


19-22, Portion of the friendless, No injustice done to the poor, but they must be helped out
of abundance ; by a forgotten sheaf in the harvest field (ver. 19); by the fruit of the olive tree
(ver. 20); and by gleanings from the vintage (ver. 21), In ver. 22 the reason is given, as
fim ver. 18 and chap. xv. 15.


Tue Sanctity or tHe Marriaae Bonp.— Verses 1-5.


The relation between man and wife here set forth is one that is sacred and
binding.

I. One which must not be broken by frivolous pretexts, The original
institution sets forth the perpetuity of the bond (Gen. ii. 24). Divorce for a
time may be tolerated, but it contravenes the order of nature and of God. No
whims, no words, no slander (Hp. xxii. 18-19), no seduction before marriage
(xxii. 28-29), must lead to separation, ‘“ What God hath joined together let
not man put asunder.”


II. One which must be strengthened by every possible method. Instead of
frivolous rupture there should be constant endearment. ‘The claims of married
life rise above the exigencies of military service, and can only be severed by
death. ‘He shall not go out to war” (ver. 5). Domestic duties must not be
sacrificed to public engagements. “Neither shall he be cuarged with any
business.” Home must be guarded and the wife loved. “ Be free at home and
cheer up his wife.”


Tue Law or Drvorce.— Verses 1-4


This permissive law of divorce was one of those “statutes” given to the
Israelites uhat were not good (Ezek. xx. 25)—t.e., not absolutely, but only
relatively good ; not the universal and perpetual law, but a provisional enact-
ment suited to the demoralized state and peculiar circumstances of the Hebrew
people (Rom. v. 20; Gal. iii. 19), ‘They were allowed to divorce their wives
without the assignation of any cause ; but it was accompanied under the law
with three conditions which were calculated greatly to prevent the evils
incident to the permitted system, viz.—lIst. ‘hat the act of divorcement was to
be certified on a written document, the preparition of which with legal formality,
probably by a Levite, who might admonish and counsel the parties, woul afford
time for reflection and repentance, as well as impart a solemn and deliberate
character to the transaction. 2nd. That it was “ given in (into) her hand,” either
rivately or publicly. When delivered privately, it was stamped with the
Ranoaa seal, and handed to the repudiated wife in preseuce of her witnesses ;
but when done publicly it was accompanied with increased formalities, and
frequently taken to the Sanhedrim, to be there deposited in their archives for
preservation. 3rd. That in the event of the divorced wife being married to

800


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. CHAP. XXiv.





another hushand, she could not on the termination of the second marriage be
restored to her first husband, however desirous he might be to receive her. In
the circumstances of the Israelitish people this law of divorce was of great use
in preserving public morals, and promoting the comfort and permanence of
married life.—Jamieson’s Com.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 1-4. Christ’s toleration of
divorce. Viewing these words in rela-
tion to Matt. xix. 1-12, we learn—
1. That this was concessive legislation ;
a deviation from the eternal standard
of right, not a change of law—moral,
like natural Jaw, is unchangeable.
Moses suffered them, “but from the
beginning it was not so.” 2. That it
was conceded on account of their
“ hardness of heart.” They bad fallen
into that condition in which obedience
to the higher law was impossible. The
least of two evils was chosen. But for
divorce the woman might have been
the victim of tyranny, rigourand death.
But while permitting divorce, Moses
restricts it.

Checks upon divorce. He enacts (1)
that divorce must not take place as
hithertofore at the arbitrary will and
pleasure of the husband, and by mere
word of mouth, but by reason given,


and by means of a written and formal
document. This legal document would
require time and the intervention of
public authority to attest sufficiency
and due execution. This delay would
give opportunity for reconsideration,
interposition of magistrates to ad-
monish and prevent frivolous com-
plaints. (2) That the divorced wife
who had married a second time shall
never return to her first husband. This
would admonish the parties that di-
vorce once consummated would be irre-
parable and ought not therefore to be
brought about rashly and lightly.—
(Speak. Com.)


Vers. 1-5. ‘he rights of woman.
1. To legal divorce when justified.
2. To be treated with due respect at
home. Other systems degrade, but
this exalts woman.


Tue Sacrepness of Human Lire.— Verses 6, 7, and 10-12.


In these prohibitions we see the sacredness of life in its various conditions


and changes.


I. The implements by which life is sustained must not be taken.
stone was the only means of grinding corn for daily sustenance.


The mill-
To take any


part would hinder work, prevent tle payment of debt, aud injure “a man’s life.”
‘Tools are needful to trade ; beds, cluthing, and cooking utensils to the comforts


of lie.


We must work with our hands the thing that is good that we may


“have to give to him that needeth ” (Hp. iv. 28).


II. The freedom by which life is enjoyed must be respected. T'o steal or sell


@ man was a capital offence, “'I'hat thief shall die.”
Many would prefer death to slavery.


liberty that gives life its chief value,


Kidnapping deprives of
To


be made aslave would be a calamity most terrible, and when this results from
kidnapping it is the most crushing of all misfortunes. Joseph was sold.
Egyptian and classic history, American slavery, and African serflom tell of


bloody scenes enacted for purposes of man stealing, é
Gospel of Christ were greatly needed to check the atrocious crime.
Ain or if he be found in his hand, he shall surely be


stealeth a man, and selleth
put to death” (Ex. xxi. 16),


The law of Moses and the
“ He that


301


OHAP. XXIV. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY.





III. The House in which life is spent must not be invaded. The pledge
must not be fetched out of the house. The owner must bring it to the door,
“An Englishman’s house is his castle.” The home of the poor must be as safe
as the mansion of the rich ; the hut of the serf as sacred as the palace of the
prince, Thank God for the security and sanctity of home!


What can be sweeter than our native home |
Thither for ease and soft repose He come 3
Home is the sacred refuge of our life.—Drydem,


REMEMBRANCE OF THE Past.— Verses 8, 9.


No house was to be visited by a lender, but in case of leprosy the priest might
enter and examine it. Home was to be inviolable except when public security
demanded exposure. Hence special warning is given to avoid any sin which
might bring the plague. Miriam’s case is prominently set forth. Learn—


I. The past history records interventions of God. God is in our own history—
in the history of all nations, but especially in Jewish history. Under the
Theocracy are remarkable instances of sins and punishments.


II. These interventions of God should be remembered by us. Israel were
to remember “what the Lord God did” in Egypt and “by the way” to Canaan.
“Memory is the conservative faculty,” says Sir W. Hamilton. It preserves
from oblivion events of importance, and puts them again before our eyes.
“ Remember Lot’s wife.” ‘“ Remember hal the Lord thy God did unto


Miriam.”


III. Obedience to this rule will convert past history into help for the
future.' The future lies before us; the past is the period of facts, pleasing or
painful. It is the storehouse of instruction and encouragement. Things whieh
are written in Scripture and in history are written “for our learning.” Sin
brings punishment, and obedience God’s favour. Let us avoid the one and
secure the other. “All these things happened unto them for ensamples (types,
figures), and they are written for our admonition (warning) ” (1 Cor. x. 11).


PROTECTION FOR THE UNFORTUNATE.— Verses 10-17.


In these words we have warnings against injustice and oppression of the poor—


I. The poor must not be compelled to lend unlawful pledges, ‘“ The borrower
is servant to the lender,” and may be forced to servile bondage. Man thus
becomes an alien to his brother, aft often the victim of gratification—not the
object of sympathy. ‘The widow’s raiment was not to be taken (verse 17).
The borrower was not to be compelled to give up any pledge needful for life and
comfort. This would check strife, save from mendicancy, and urge generosity.


II. The condition of the poor must not be needlessly exposed. The lender
was not to go into the house of the borrower (verse 10). He must spare his
neighbour’s feelings, and not require exposure of his home or declaration of
insolvency. ‘I'he creditor must not be insolent, but mitigate severity and
preserve good feeling, “ Blessed is he that considereth the poor.”


III. The wages of the poor must not be withheld. “Thou shalt give him
his hire” (verse 16). He sets his heart, has special desire for it, and his distress
should urge its due payment. To withhold it for a night would be injustice,

3h?


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. \ OHAP, XXIV,





and inflict great suffering. This humane law was highly esteemed in after times,
“ He who treats a hireling with harshness sins as grievously as if he had taken
away life, and trausgresses five precepts.” It is robbery and a special sin
against God. “Thou shalt not defraud thy neighbour, neither rob him: the
wages of him that is hired shall not abide with thee all night until the morning
(Lev. xix. 13).


IV. The poor must not be deprived of justice (ver. 17). The repetition of
this law indicates the strong tendency of the Jewish people to oppress and illuse
strangers and the desire of the Moses to check it. They must not upbraid the
stranger for his nationality nor remind him of his former idolatry. ‘Their own
bitter experience should remind them of this inhumanity. ‘“ Thou wast a bond-
man in Egypt.” Our own humiliation should soften our hearts towards others
and teach us that the security of society depends upon the equal rights of all
its ranks.


IuporTant RECOLLECTION.— Verse 18


The admonition may seem needless, but we are prone to forget God’s works
and wonders, We have need to be stirred up to remembrance for four purposes.
first, for the purpose of humility. We think more highly of ourselves than we
ought to think. With the lowly is wisdom. If wise, we were once foolish ; if
justified, we were once condemned ; if sons of God, we were once servants of sin.
Look to the rock from whence hewn. Second, for the purpose of gratitude. If
affected by kindness from our fellow creatures, should we overlook our intinite
Benefactor. We have no claims upon Him and should be thankful for all His
benefits. But herein is love. Blessed be the God of Israel, for He hath visited
and redeemed His people. Thirdly, for the purpose of confidence. David
argued from the past to the future. Because thou hast been my help, therefore
under the shadow of thy wings will I rejoice. Here we have peculiar reason
for encouragement. What were we when He first took knowledge of us? Was
the want of worthiness a bar to His goodness then? Will it be so now? ‘s
there variableness or shadow of turning with Him? Is there not the samo
power in His arm and the same love in His heart? Did He pardon me when a
rebel, and will He cast me off now that He has made me afriend? ‘He that
spared not His own Son but delivered Him up for us all,” ete. Mourthly, for
the purpose of pity and zeal. How many round about you in the gall of
bitterness and in the bond of iniquity ready to perish? You know the state
they are in, and the blesseduess of deliverance from it, You are witnesses what
God is able and willing to do. Invite the prisoners of hope to turn to Him--
you can speak from experience.—Jay,


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 8,9. The Plague of Leprosy. 8. Laws of labour. Hiring—prompt
1. Miriam’s sin. 2. Miriam’s punish- and frequent payment of labourer’s
ment. 8. Miriam a warning to others. wage.
“Take heed.”
Ver. 15. Setteth his heart. How
Vers. 10-15. Social Laws. Lawis exceedingly natural is this! The
the bond of social morality. 1. Laws poor servant who seldom sees money,
of lending and borrowing. 2. Laws of yet finds from his master’s affluence
social intercourse. Regard the cir- that it procures all the conveniences
cumstances and the homes of the poor. snd comforts of life, longs ee time





when he shall receive his wages, Should
his pay be delayed after the time is
expired, he may naturally be expected
to ery unto God against him who with-
holds it.—A. Clarke.

“ Lest he ery.” <A crying sin (ef.
Jas. v. 3), condemned by the very
light of nature, Plato would have him
double paid that is not paid in due
time,— Zapp.


Vers, 17, 18. Three classes men-
tioned as liable to oppression. 1. Zhe
stranger ; seldom protected by any
legislation, unless they had become
permanent residents. 2. 7he father-
less, 3. The widow. The right of
widows and orphans were protected
generally by civilised communities,
But protection is often insufficient,
therefore the command of God and the
legal penalty certain to fall on those


HOMiLETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOM ¥.





who offend. ‘‘ Oppress not the widow,
nor the fatherless, the stranger, not
the poor,” etc. (Zech. 7, 9).


Ver. 18. Lemember. Most people
who have affluence, rose from com-
parative penury ; for those who are
born to estates frequently squander
them away; such therefore should
remember what their feelings, their
fears, and anxieties were when they
were poor and abject. A want of
attention to this most wholesome
precept, is the reason why pride and
arrogance are the general character-
istics of those who have risen in the
world from poverty to affluence, and
it is the conduct of those men which
gave rise to the rugged proverb, “ Set
a beggar on horseback, and he’ll ride to
the devil” —.A. Clarke.


Harvest Laws.— Verses 19-21.


In these words we have the earliest poor law that we read of in the code of
any people, uniting the obligation of public duty with private benevolence,


I, God has special regard for the poor.
the widow were defended by special providence,
The Mosaic law is full of tender provisions for them. ‘To neglect,


Lord’s care,”


The stranger, the fatlerless, and
“The Lord’s poor are the


despise or reproach them is to mock God himself. “ Whoso mocketh the poor


reproacheth his Maker” (Prov, xvii. 5).


II. God demands that our charity should be constantly exercised towards


the poor.


substance for charity.


substance,” etc. (Prov. iii, 9).
autuimn—seasons of trial and want.


“The poor ye have always with you” to remind us of dependence
upon God ; to beget kindly feeling and cultivate constant charity.


1. He gives


‘The harvest, the olive tree, and the vine, the fruits of
the farm, and the results of labour and skill are His gifts,
God’s bounty should be laid out to God’s glory.”


“ What comes from
‘Honour the Lord with thy


2. Le gives seasons for charity—seed time and
Our bounties are never amiss—never out


of season. “‘'l'o everything there is a season and a time ” (Ece, iii, 1),


III. The motive which should prompt this charity is God’s goodness to us.


“Remember thou wast a bondman in Egypt.”


How often does God appeal


to us on this ground? Facts in our experience and history enjoin warmest and
purest benevolence to the wretched and defenceless—facts which many would
turn to the cherishing of rancour, malevolence, and misanthropic feeling. God


regardeth not persons ;


He knoweth no ritualistic and national differences,


“ He it is that executeth the judgment of the fatherless and the widow, and
Who loveth the stranger to give unto Him food and raiment, Wherefore thou
also must love the stranger, for ye yourselves were strangers im the land of


Lgypt.”
804


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.
ny


OHAP. XIV,


GuEanina a Diving OagpInANoR


I. The privilege of gleaning as accorded to the Jews: “freely they have
received ” of God, and “ freely they were to give.”


II. The far higher grounds of this privilege as existing among us. Let it
be recollected from what misery we have been redeemed, and can we find a
stronger argument than this for liberality to the poor. Learn—1. As gleaners,
avail yourselves of your privilege. 2. As proprietors, perform the duties that
are here enjoined you.—C. Simeon, M.A.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XXIV,


Vers. 1-4. Divorcement. An idea


Ver. 8. Leprosy. By others’ faults
may be formed of the social state of


wise men correct their own. ‘“ There-


Palestine at the beginning of the
Christian era from the existing con-
dition of the Jews in that country.
“ Wherever the teaching of the oral
law prevails unchecked, as in the holy
cities of the East, the concocting of
divorces forms a chief branch of the
business of a Rabbi—he ts occupied
incessantly in putting asunder what
God hath joined—and as a consequence
those cities are full of poor, unhappy
divorced women and girls, with all the
intrigues inseparable from a state of
things which saps the very founda-
tions of society.”—Jewish Intelligence,
September, 1863.


Ver. 5. Taken a wife. After the
battle of Granicus, previously to going
into winter quarters, Alexander the
Great proclaimed to all of his soldiers
who had married that year, that liberty
was granted them to return home to
Macedonia and pass the winter in the
society of their wives; appointing the
officers to conduct this howeward-
bound party and to bring them back
to the army when their furlough was
’ expired.—¢f. Jam. Com.


fore,” says Bp. Hall, ‘God strikes
some that he may warn all,”


Vers. 10-15. Poor. It was the
advice of a bishop to a candidate for
ordination, “Take care of the poor,
and the Lord will take care of you.”
The history of that clergyman (who
is still living) has most remarkably
justified the wisdom of the counsel
and verified the truth of the pre-
diction.—G. S. Bowes.


Vers. 19-21. Harvest field.


“Ye who have sown,
And reap so plenteously, and find the grange
Too narrow to contain the harvest given,
Be not severe, nor grudge the needy poor
So small a portion. For He who gave
Will bounteously reward the purposed wrong
Done to yourselves; nay, more, will twice

repay
The generous neglect.”
—Hurdis.


Ver. 22. Stranger.
Love’s special care


Are strangers poor and friendless,
eB.





CHAPTER XXV.


Critica Nores.—Corporal punishment. Controv., dispute arising from {nflicted Injury.
Justify pronounce just, Ex. xxiii. 7 ; Prov. xvii. 15.


2 Lie down.


‘Precisely the same as the E,


tian bastinado, which was applied to the bared


back of the culprit, who was stretched flat on the ground, his hands and mga held by


OMAP. XXV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





attendants” (Jam). The law of Moses introduced two restrictions, the infliction of punishment
in presence of the judge and the limit to 40 stripes. If a criminal deserved severer punishment
he was executed,


5. Ox. In other kinds of labour oxen were muzzled. The spiritual sense is applied, 1 Oor.
ix. 9; 1 Tim. v.18; Hos. x. 11.


5-10. Law of Levirate Marriages. This usage existed before the law of Moses (Gen. xxxviii.
8-11) and seems to have originated in patriarchal times, for preserving the name and honour of the
eldest son—the chieftain of the family. The Mosaic law rendered the custom obligatory
(Mat. xxii. 25) on younger brothers, or the nearest kinsman, to marry the widow (Huth iv. 4), by
associating the natural desire of pi aes of a brother’s name with the preservation of
property in the Hebrew families and tribes (Num. xxxiii. 54; xxxvi. 9). Ifa younger brother
declined to comply with law, the widow brought her claim before the authorities in public assem-
bly (the gate of the city); she was ordered to loose the thong of his shoe (ver. 9) a sign of
degradation—following up that act by spitting, not in his face, but in his presence before him on
the ground (Jam.)


11, 12. Severe penalty imposed upon a shameless woman, who wilfully should endanger or take
away the power of off-spring from a man, Ex. xxi. 22,


13-16. Weights and measures. Divers, lit.,“astone and astone”—one just and one false, ora
light and heavy one. Weights consisted of stones ; facility in procuring them tempted to fraud.
Measures, lit., “an ephah and an ephah,” the common or standard measure in Israel. L,
ef. iv. 26; v.16. Unrighteously. Moses sums up all the breaches of the law. (Keil.)


17-19, Doom of Amalek. Did, met, thee; i.¢., stealthily and in hostile encounter; not found
in Ex. xvii. 14. The Jews had not only to manifest love and kindness, but often to inflict
punishment upon God’s enemies. They were executors of Divine judgment upon Amalek and
others 3 ¢f. 1 Sam. xv. 8, 82, 33.


PUNISHMENT OF THE GuILTy.— Verses 1-8.


God took special care for the administration of justice. The guilty must be
punished, and the innocent defended. It is the duty of earthly tribunals to
govern in equity.


I. Punishment incurred. There must not be mere report or accusation. The
accused and accuser must be brought face to face, the dispute decided before the
authorities, and the criminal be found “worthy to be beaten.” The wicked cannot
sin with impunity. Punishment was demanded under the theocracy. Conscience
predicts retribution and human magistrates are appointed to administer it. In
Joing so they are types of the eternal judge.


II. Punishment inflicted. We have special directors given to make the penal
system just and effective. 1. By the authority of the judge. Not by some
private heartless official wishing for revenge. Magistrates bear the sword, (Rom.
tiv. 4; 1 Pet. ii, 14,21). 2. In publicity. “ Before his face.” This would be
tself a part of punishment and a check to cruelty and excesss, 8. According
to desert. “ According to his fault.” There must be discrimination and rectitude,
To justify the wicked and condemn the just would reverse the order of justice,
and become “an abomination to the Lord ” (Prov. xvii. 15), 4. In measured
degree. “ Forty stripes he may give and not exceed,” v. 3. Stripes, few or many,
according to guilt, but never to exceed forty. Punishment should ever be
measured according to strictest justice, Our penal code has been disgraced by
cruel administration, and punishment has often been excessive, outrageous, and
beyond moral desert. “They shall judge it according to my judgments,”
5. With scrupulous fear. Lest “thy brother should seem vile unto thee,”
Excessive punishment degrades humanity, dishonours law, and hardens the
criminal. He must be corrected, reformed, and treated with humanity. “Count
him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother,”

806


.


ree


in the law of Moses.


BOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY, OHAP. XXxV.
a ESSE Ue ee
Tue Riauts or Lasoun.— Verse 4.


The command not to put a muzzle upon the ox, is no doubt proverbial in ita
nature, and even in the context before us is not intended to apply merely
literally to an ox employed in threshing, but to be understood, in the general
sense in which the Apostle Paul uses it in (1 Vor. ix. 9, and 1 Tim. v. 18), viz :
that a labourer was not to be deprived of his wages. Keil.


I. Rights enforced by common usage. ‘The use of oxen in treading out corn
unmuzzled still prevails among Arabs and eastern nations. If God takes “ care
for oxen,” we must treat them kindly. The ox is not a mere animal, but a
labourer, contributing to the sustenance and help of man.


II. Rights enforced by special enactment. This was a wonderful provision
Nothing was too trivial connected with men or brutes.
God defends the rights of every creature, and teaches us to recognise the
nobility of labour in the smallest law.


III. Rights enforced by Divine Law. This is a general principle, extending
to the plougher and the sower. ‘oilers of hand and brain are not mere drones,
but essential to the well-being of society. In all departments “ the labourer is
worthy of his hire.” ‘I'he highest authority applies the law to ministerial sup-
port (Luke x. 1). “If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing
if we shall reap your carnal things?” (Tim. v. 18).


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS,


Ver. 3. Haceed. Abuse of power in
excessive punishment. Power given
for edification uot destruction (2 Cor.
xiii. 10). “ There is an honour due to
all men (1 Pet. ii. 17), and though we
must hate the sin, yet not the sinner,”
Trapp. ‘The reason assigned by the
legislator in this statute for restricting
the number of stripes 1s very remark-
able. It is not simply a motive of
compassion for a sufferer—it is a
respect for human nature, the rights
of which are preserved even in &
criminal. To inflict upon a man an
excessiveand degrading punishment isto
outrage the feelings of those who witness
it,andto pour contempt upon humanity
itself. This humane character of the
Mosaic legislation is deserving of special
notice. How rigorous soever it may
be in some respects, it upholds the
dignity of man’s nature, and does not
permit even a guilty offender to “seem
vile unto others.” —Jamieson.


Ver. 4. Not muzzle the ov, Though
enacted in a particular case, it teaches
the humane lesson that animals, while
engaged in the service of man, are.
entitled to his indulgence and kindness.
Paul quotes this law (1 Cor. ix. 9;
1 Tim. v. 18), and shows that God did
not appoint it for the sake of oxen
alone, but that every labourer is worthy
of his hire, and hence declares the
obligation of men to exercise justice in
pba rewarding those who labour
or their advantage, especially those
who labour for the good of their souls.
The application, so far from weakening,
seems to confirm its obligation and
reference to that point, inasmuch as it
displays to us that, in the eye of God,
the same principles of equity are
expected to prevail amongst all His
creatures, and that they are not to be
confined to our dealings with men.—
Jamieson.


Toe Law or Levinate Marriace.— Verses 5-10,


This law is not peculiar to the Jews, but is found in all essential respects the
seme among various Uriental nations, ancient and modern, and exists at present


807


O8aP, EXv, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


among the South African tribes, the Arabians, the Druses, and the tribes of the
Caucasus (Speak. Com.)





I. The duty imposed. ‘The obligation was onerous and recognised as one of
affection for the memory of the deceased. It devolved upon the nelyhbouring
kinsman—“ brethren that dwell together,” not “a stranger.” Affection is
neediul in married life. ‘This cannot be forced. Love leads to duty and self-
Bacrifice,


II. The design of the obligation. (a) To prevent alienation of property ; (b)
To raise up seed. To be without issue was considered a great calamity (Gen.
Xvi. 4) ; a successor and heir a great blessing ; (c) To perpetuate a name, “ that
his name be not put out of Israel.” Parents are anxious to maintain the honour
and preserve the name of the family. Loss of inheritance, alienation of the
rights of the firstborn, are a disgrace. God’s favour is better than fame which
“is the shade of immortality, and in itself a shadow.”

Unblemished let me live, or die unknown,
Oh ! grant me honest fame, or grant me none.— Pope.


III. The reproach of neglecting the obligation. It was not so binding as
to permit no escape. If the brother preferred to submit to reproach, “If the
man like not,” he might refuse (ver. 7). Then the thong of his shoe was loosed,
he was stripped of power and degraded as a slave. Spitting in the face or in his
presence, was the strongest expression of insult and contempt. The man was
not worthy to take his brother’s place, was scornfully rejected by the woman


herself, and his name became a bye-word in Israel. “The house of him that
hath his shoe loosed,”


TrapDE Morauity.— Verses 13-16.


The language of Scripture on this point demands the serious attention of all
engaged in trade. Principles of life are given in minute detail and enforced by
special sanctions,


I. God requires honesty in trade. Not only in courts of law, but in commercial
life, in the market place, and in the shop, justice must be done. There must be
no different weights and measures ; one for buying and another for selling; one
light and another heavy. This was the iniquitous system of Jews. Accurate
inspection may restrain gross deceit with us, But trickery and close dealing,
evasion of legal rights, and deviation from honest trading are too prevalent.
Advantage is taken of ignorance. Impositions, double-dealings and hard bargains
are struck with cleverness and self-satisfaction (Prov. xx. 14). Christian professors
and Christian churches have need of warning and care, “That no man go beyond
and defraud his brother in any matter” (1 Thess. iv. 6).


II, Honesty in trade is enforced by special sanctions. That which is the
standard of measure, the rule of justice must of itself be just. IEFf not there
will be fraud and deceit. 1. Justice will gain temporal advantage. “That thy
days may be lengthened in the land” (ver. 15). Right prolonged life and
made it happy. As a matter of self-interest, “ Honesty is the best policy.” It
will enrich spiritual experience, promote social morality and preserve national
life. 2. Justice will secure God’s approval. We must act as under his eye
and seek “a conscience void of offeuce towards God and man.” Equity and
not “customs of the trade” must be our law. “A false balance is abomination —
to the Lord; but a just weight (a perfect stone) is his delight” (Prov. xi. 1).
8. Anjustice wall expose to God’s curse. “All that do unrighteously are

308


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY, OHAY. XXV,
a


abomination unto the Lord.” Man may excuse convenient lies, commend
trickery for its wisdom (Luke xvi. 1-8) and cry “business is business,” but such
trading is hateful to God, will bring shame and curse upon those who practise
it, “ Divers weights (a stone and a stone) and divers measures (an ephah and
ephah), both of them are alike abomination to the Lord” (Prov. xx, 10).


Tur Couristan ry CoMMEROR


The greatest difficulties in the way of a Christian commercial life, arise out
of the practices which prevail. Enforce right conduct, you are met by an
appeal to general sanction, and a reference to the consequences which would
follow from its adoption, in ridicule and condemnation, in loss and suffering.
Thus the Christian tradesman must shape his principles in the way of reform
and opposition—


I. Endeavour to point out what Christianity requires of a man in his
dealings in business with his fellow-men. 1. Christianity requires the most
rigid adherence to the principles of moral integrity in commerce. Truth is
one of these, which lies at the basis of all intercourse, and without which society
would be impossible. All positive misrepresentations, all arts by which one
thing is passed off for another, all false appearances given to things, and all
deficient scales and measures, are condemned. Honesty is another Christian
virtue in commerce, In giving everyone his due, in meeting all equitable claims,
For a man to refuse to pay his debts is dishonest. ‘Owe no man anything.”
A debt is a debt until it be paid or forgiven. Bankruptcy is not payment. No
earthly tribunal can exempt from the claims of eternal justice, and an honest |
debtor will deem nothing Ais while creditors are unsatisfied in fact or feeling.
It is a grand saying of De Foe, “ The obligations of an honest man can never
die.” 2. Christianity requires the exercise of love and kindness in commerce.
A man may be just, and yet a monster of inhumanity. The Christian spirit of
love should not be confined to some departments of human life and excluded
from others, It is designed to create a higher morality than that of the world,
it will dictate much which law cannot take cognizance of, and preserve for the
wretched practice of exclusive dealing, of punishing a man for his politics or
religion by withholding custom and thus making commerce the instrument of
bigotry and exclusiveness, 3. Christianity requires that a man should preserve
his soul in peace and patience in commerce. Commerce implies contact with
others. It compels intercourse with men of powerful passions, different dis-

ositions and opposite principles. Hence we are sorely tried, exposed to
innumerable disappointments, vexations and annoyances. We may be deceived
by those we trusted, and injured by those we benefited. All this must be
endured in meekness, and the heart must be kept calm and unrufiled, seek no
revenge, but cherish the spirit of love. 4. Christianity requires that commerce
should be consecrated and elevated by the spirit of holiness, There is a harden-
ing and corrupting tendency in commercial pursuits. Constant calculation of
profit and loss, incessant contemplation of pecuniary interests are apt to contract
and debase thesoul, ‘The man who gives himself wholly to gain becomes earthly,
sensual and devilish. All spiritual generous sensibilities and aspirations are
destroyed. He becomes less malleable than the coin with which he deals. But
Christianity teaches that commerce is a means, not an end; “that a man’s life
consisteth not in the abundance of things which he possesses ;” that we may be
yet having all things, and rich, yet having nothing. Commerce will be
really noble and raised fom the dust, when the higher faculties are are


OMAP. XXV, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.
a


with secular pursuits ; wealth possessed and used in the spirit of stewardship,


and a vigorous habit of Christian liberality finds a constant vent for the acquisi~
tions of Christian industry,


II. Having described what a Christian should be in commerce briefly show
why he should be it. All considerations by which ‘religion and morality are
commended and enforced are applicable here. ‘I'he course pointed out is right
in itself, what we owe to God and connected with eternal destiny. Itis necessary
to inherit the kingdom of heaven. It is presented to us in the example of
Christ, whom all disciples should imitate. In one word, Christianity requires it ;
all its precepts, principles, blessings, and prospects require it. But adduce some
particular considerations. 1. Commerce is a most important part of life. \t
enters largely into our engagements. It is in some form or other the greatest
part of the life of multitudes. Could a man be a Christian and yet not be a
Christian in his dealings with his fellow-men? Is it possible to retain the spirit
of the gospel and yet not bring it into business? The power of religion must
be best displayed here. The truest test of a man’s spirituality is in his secular
life. It is often said, “A man is really what he is relatively.” I would add a
man is spiritually what he is secularly. 2. Commerce is a most influential part
of our life. It is part of life with which men have most to do and of which
they can best judge. It is the world-side of our religion. Ungodly men cannot -
see us believe and always hear us pray, but they behold our behaviour towards
others. Though ignorant of doctrinal theology, and strangers to true spirituality,
they are no bad critics of moral conduct. What then is our influence, if we be
not holy in business? What use saying, “I know the truth,” if it can be replied,
“ You do a lie?” What an agency in the conversion of the world would be a
blameless secular life throughout the Church! It would be better than an army
of ten thousand missionaries. 3. Commercial holiness is imperatively required
by the character and temper of the times. It is a commercial country and age
in which we live, and commercial sinfulness is a prevailing feature. It is the
duty of the Christian to adapt his example and display the virtue most wanted.
Never more necessary for saints to “condemn the world ” by secular integrity,
to give a noble example for it to follow, and to bring a spirit from above to bear
on its pursuits, (4. J. Morris.)


Tae Doom or AMALEK.— Verses 17-19,


“Whilst the Israelites were to make love the guiding principle of their
conduct in their dealings with a neighbour, and even with strangers and foes,
this love was not to degenerate into weakness or indifference towards open
ungodliness, To impress this truth upon the people, Moses concludes the
discourse on the law by reminding them of the crafty enmity manifested toward
them by Amalek on their march out of Egypt, and with the command to root
out the Amalekites” (¢/, Ex. xvii. 9-16).— Keil.


I, Amalek’s sin against Israel, “How he met thee by the way,” stealthily
and fierce encounter, in a most difficult and risky place, “in Rephidim ” (¢f
Ex. xvii. 8). 1. This attack was unprovoked. No occasion was furnished for it.
Israel had not the remotest intention to injure the persons or seize the territory
of Amalek. But they were jealous at the prosperity of Israel, as descendants
of Esau entertained a grudge against them, and longed to injure them. 2. This
attack was cowardly. It was a mean, dastardly, insidious surprise, not in front,
but in the rear, on “the hindmost”—not on the strong and vigorous, but on
“ the art “the faint and weary.” We havea kind of reverence for the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. XXV.
et eS ee ee ee ee ee


brave, but cowards are objects of scorn and contempt. 3. This attack was cruel.
Upon stragglers, upon a host tired in the march, almost unarmed and unable to
resist. “ ‘Ihe tender mercies of the wicked are cruel.” 4, This attack was
rereeintens “He feared not God.” A defiance against God of whom they

ad heard, and whose mighty acts in Egypt and the Red Sea had defended his
people. It was an insult, “a lifting up of the hand upon the throne of God”
(Marg. Ex. xvii. 16). ‘The fear of God” alone can restrain from evil, When
this is cast off, there will be no “regard for men.”


II. Amalek’s sin remembered by God. “Remember what Amalek did.”
A record was kept “in the book” (Ex. xvii, 14), and this conduct was never
forgotten. 1. Sin is never overlooked. Sileuce may be kept at the time of
commission, God may appear to connive, to wink at times of ignorance and
sin (Acts xvii. 30), but they are not overlooked. If no direct interposition,
‘men must not excuse, take courage, and cry God hath forgotten. God’s patience
is no proof that He thinks lightly of sin. Sentence ia gone forth ; Edom’s doom
was predicted, but warning is given, time for repentance afforded before
execution. 2. Sin is kept in remembrance. A book of record is found
somewhere. An impress is left upon nature, upon the human mind, and upon
moral conduct. Wickedness is read in the pangs of conscience, the power of
evil habits, and the moral forces of the universe. God prepares ministers of
vengeance, and in due time the judgment will come.


III. Amalek’s sin punished by God. Injustice and cruelty towards God’s
ee will not pass unavenged. Joshua had punished them, but a more terrible
oom awaited them. 1. Punishment long delayed. For some wise reason the
honour of Jehovah was not vindicated at the time. The base attack was
repelled, but the territory was not invaded—the final judgment was delayed,
This was inflicted partly by Saul and David (1 Sam. xiv. 48 ; xxvii. 8; xxx. 17;
2 Sam. viii. 12), finally and completely under Hezekiah (1 Chron. iv. 43),
Judgment may linger, but it is “laid up in store.” 2. Punishment by those
who have suffered. God’s people themselves, when fixed in privileges and
possession, must inflict it. Power and position are not given for selfish
enjoyment. We must be ready for warfare as well as for service. No pity,
no pride must prevent us from executing God’s will upon our enemies.
“ Remember,” “ thou shalt not forget it.” 3. Punishment most severe. ‘Thou
shalt blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven” (Ex. xvii. 14).
Fearful doom! But Scripture, Providence and human history confirm the
law—“ He shall have judgment without‘ mercy, that hath showed no mercy.”


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS,


Vers. 11,12. Shameful insult. No Vers. 17-19. Amalek. 1. Ungodly


excuse in the plea to help her husband,
“Modesty is the hedge of chastity,
and therefore ought to be very care-
fully preserved and kept up by both
seXe8,


Vers. 13-16. ‘‘ Customs of trade.”
Often—(1) sinful, (2) corrupting, aud
(3) dangerous, “Shall I count them
pure with the wicked balances, ana
with the bag of deceitful weights?”
(Micah vi. 11).


principles lead to wicked conduct.
“ Amalek feared not God.” 2. Wicked
conduct is not allowed to gounpunished
in the providence of God. 3, ‘This
punishment when inflicted is full of
suggestion—(a) delayed to prove the
patience of God towards his enemies.
(b) severe, to avenge His people, and
teach the doctrine of retribution. “ 'The
portion of wicked men is to be “for-
otten in the city where they had so
nae ” (Eccles, viii, 10). Their memory
. $11


GHAP. XXV.


dies with them ; or if it be preserved,
it stinks in keeping, and remains as a
curse and perpetual disyrace ” (Trapp).
It is not always consistent with the
purposes of the Divine economy to
vindicate the honour of Jehovah by
any general punishment at the time.
But if no further notice had been
taken, this contemptuous defiance of
the power and majesty of God would
have appeared to escape with impunity,
@ circumstance which might have de-
graded the Deity in the estimation
of Israel, who judged of His power as


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; DEUTERONOMY.


meee ae a ee ee





all other nations then judged of their
guardian gods, by His rigour and
promptitude in defending His people
and punishing their enemies. He
would not suffer Aiwalek to pass finally
unpunished, but would authorise and
employ them to inflict judgment, thus
impressing His people themselves with
the salutary conviction that where the
majesty of Jehovah was insulted,
present delay of punishment affords
no presumption of final tmpunity.—
(Graves on Pent.)


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XXY¥.


Vers. 1-4. Judgment. No obligation
to justice does force a man to be cruel,
or to use the sharpest sentence. A
just. man does justice to every man
and every thing; and then, if he be
also wise, he knows there is a debt
of mercy and compassion due to the
infirmities of man’s nature; and
that is to be paid; and he that
is cruel and ungentle to a sinning
person, and does the worst to him,
dies in his debt and is unjust.—Jeremy
Zaylor.


Vers, 13-16. Trade. What signifies.
@ man’s trade? A man of honest trade
can make himself respectable if he will
(George III.), ‘To be honest as this


world goes is to be one picked out of
ten thousand. —Shakspeare.


Vers, 17-19. Not forget. Most just
it is that he who breweth mischief
should have the first draught of it
himself—(Jemmat). For inquisition
shall be made into the counsels of the
unyodly, and the sound of his words
shall come unto the Lord for the
manifestation of his wicked deeds
( Wisdom i. 7-9). | Mercy to him that
shows it is the rule by which heaven
moves in pardoning guilty man; and
he that shows none, being ripe ip
years, and conscious of the outrage
he comuits, shall seek it and not find
it in his turn.—Cowper,


ee


CHAPTER XXVI.


Critica. Norrs.—The rehearsal of rights and duties, public and private, terminates in this
chapter with two liturgical enactments. ‘These have a clear and close reference to the whole of
the preceding legislation, and form a most appropriate and significant conclusion to it, (Sp. Com.)


1-11 First fruits,


Fruit. Visible proof of possession ;


distinguished from those offered in


harvest (cf. Ex. xxii, 29), at feasta of Passover and Pentecost, and from offerings prescribed


(Num. viii. 8).


These are private aud personal—not national,


8. Priest. Owned the first fruits as property. Profess, a confession of offerer, of indebtedness,


5. Syrian. (Lit, aramcean) from residence with Laban in Syria, Perish, by Laban’s severity
and many hardships in nomadic life. Lyypt (cf. Gen, 46).


6- Evil. On multiplication and oppression in bondage, and guidance out (cf. Ex i., ii, iv.,


v. 11.
and strangers,
312


Rejoice either in the possession of blessings given, or in feasting with friends, Levites,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. XXVL


ee ee
12-15. Tithin. Third year’s tithe employed at home in charity and hospitality.


18. Hallowed. Consecrated, things devoted to holy uses, J have not. Not a self-righteous
Seplgel solemn declaration that nothing which should be devoted to God had been secretly
ep


_ 14. Mourning, “ When the Israelite would be unclean ;” or like Egyptians made in harvest
time, offered the first fruits of earth and kept feast of Isis in doleful lamentation. Unclean,
unworthy of divine acceptance. Dead in funeral service as some ; or to idols, deified heroes and
Be images—all things were dedicated to glad and holy, not to unclean and idolatrous


15. Look. Form of thanksgiving (ef. In, lxiii. 15),


16-19. Faithful obedience. “A brief and earnest exhortation by way of conclusion to the
second and longest discourse of the book.” Avouched, solemnly pledged themselves to obey ;
accepted Jehovah as their God, who had declared that if they kept the covenant they should be
His special people.

19. Above. (cf. Ex. xix. 6). “The sanctification of Israel was the design and end of ita


divine election, and would be accomplished in the glory to which the people of God were to be
exalted.” —Kei,


Ganine THE INHERITANCE. — Verses 1-11.


Reference had been made to the sanctuary as the place chosen by God and
fit for religious worship (chap. 12). Two gifts specially counected with the
social life of the people had to be preseuted—the first fruits and the second
tithe. Moses now prescribes the form of the interesting ceremony, which
reminded the nation of their indebtedness, and duty to God.


I. An acknowledgment of God’s help in getting the inheritance. (God was
very prominent in Israel’s history and position. Precept and command, rite
and ceremony, reminded them of this. 1. God promised the inheritance. (300d
and great things are promised to us to wean affection from earth, excite hope,
and stimulate effort. God presents worthy objects on which to centre hope, and
gives grace by which it may be realised. 2. God settled them in the inheritance.
Good may be withheld and fulfilment delayed through ingratitude, unbelief and
rebellion. But if we are faithful and follow God, he will fulfil the promise and
lead us “into the land.” We shall possess without fear; dwell without disturb-
ance, and no power on earth can uproot us. He can “establish (fix), strengthen
(for defence), and settle” (1 Peter v. 10),


II. A confession of unworthiness to receive the inheritance. No merit is
due to us. If inheritance is given, it is not created by human toil and skill.
From beginning to end of life God must be honoured and man humbled.
“ Who am I, O Lord God, and what is my house, that thou hast brought me
hitherto?” 1. Humble in origin (ver. 5). The “nation great, mighty and
populous” sprang from “a few,” the many from one, “ a Syrian ready to perish.”
God is wonderful in working, and brings great results from small begiunings.
“Though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter end should greatly increase ”
(Job viii. 7; xlii. 12). 2. Helpless in history. Few, hated, and oppressed, what
could Israel do? ‘The mighty hand” and “the outstretched arm” alone
could deliver, defend, and secure the inheritance. ‘he might of Egypt, the
perils of the desert, and the dangers of conquest were overcome by (God's help.
With omnipotence on vur side we can do anything. ‘“ ‘They got not the land in
possession by their own sword, neither did their own arm save them: but thy
right hand, and thine arm ” (Ps. xliv. 3).


III. The duty imposed by securing the inheritance. Duty means debt.


God’s bounties always put us under obligation. ‘The response should ae
if


OHAP, XXVL HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





‘ What shall we render unto the Lord for all His benefits towards us?” 1. To
consecrate the first fruits. ‘Thou shalt take the first of all the fruit of the
earth.” Conscientious and careful dedication of first fruits is required. Every-
one should bring his “basket” to God as an acknowledgment of mercy, ‘This
in token of the sanctification of the whole. “Honour the Lord with thy
substance, and with the first fruits of all thine increase.” 2. To worship God
in public. The offerer had “to go into the place” which God had chosen.
The gift must be accompanied with public worship and confession ; “ worship
before the Lord” (ver. 10), Remembrance of Divine goodness kindles adoration
and praise. Fervent praise is acceptable to God, and leads to love and amity in
His people. 3. To cultivate social joy (ver. 11). God has made us prosper,
and we should make others glad. Gifts received in the right spirit and used in
the right way enlarge our sympathies and help us to promote the enjoyment of
our fellow men. The highest will remember the lowest in society. The most
wealthy will seek out and relieve the outcast and most degraded. _in the spirit
of Christ we shall “sit down” with strangers and fatherless, “with publicans
and sinners, and eat with them.”


Diving Herp m Homan Lire.


Israel had “come” to the land, but the way had not been discovered and
cleared by their own guides. They had been “ brought unto the place,” almost
carried like helpless children by Divine goodness. It was fit that they should
know, confess this and learn lessons of wisdom. “'The private life of man,”
re eepoleen I, “is a mirror in which we may see many useful lessons
teflected.”


I. Divine help in timely circumstances. Life is full of change, a journey
“through many a scene of joy and woe.” But God helps “in time of need.”
1. In periods of risk, “ A Syrian ready to perish” was Jacob. The cruelty of
Laban, the wrath of Esau and the perilous journey to Egypt endangered life.
“There is but_a step between me and death,” said David. 2. In periods of
adversity. ‘Evil entreated, afflicted and under hard bondage” (ver. 6). This
prepares us for advancement, as it did Joseph, David, and Israel. The gem
cannot be polished without friction, ner can we be perfected without suffering.
3. In pertods of prosperity. “The day of adversity” is not our eztire lot,
“The day of prosperity” is equally a divine appointment. “God also hath
set (made) the one over against (like parallel with) the other” (Ecc. vii. 14.)
We need divine instruction especially in prosperity, to humble and show us out
unworthiness (Gen. xxxii. 10). To keep us dependant and grateful, and remind
us of our origin and history. ‘Look unto the rock whence ye are known, and
to the hole of the pit whence ye are digyed.”


Il, Divine help secured through prayer. “ We cried unto the Lord our
God” (ver. 7). Prayer teaches dependence upon God. In trouble we have an
incentive to pray. Men who have ridiculed have then been compelled to
acknowledge God. In affliction and danger prayer is earnest and prolonged.
“We cried unto the Lord.” Confidence in God has given courage and gained
success in battle. Moses and Elijah were the real defence of Israel ; Hezekiah
and Isaiah brought down blessings upon Jerusalem (2 Chron. xxxii, 20-23),
“The good man’s prayer moves Omnipotence in the administration of the
universe.” It is a mighty, moral force in the history of men ; it has achieved
what numbers and valour never vould achieve. “ ‘Then they cried unte
the a n their trouble, and he delivered them out of their distressea,”

14


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OHAP, XXVIL





III. Divine help acknowledged in grateful remembrance. Several forms
of memorial are given. Sensible signs are often needful to quicken memory and
orompt gratitude in reviewing past life. 1. Jn self consecration to God. 'lhere
can be no worship without this. Attendance and reverent attitude are outward
acts. The heart must be touched and drawn out before we can offer spiritual
service. Nothing can rise above its limits. A beast cannot act as a man, and
a man perform the work of an angel. Neither can the impenitent, ungrateful
sinner render true worship. Only when love fills the heart and mercy is duly
appreciated do we present ourselves ‘“‘as living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to
God.” 2. In acts of practical piety. The Israelite was not merely to “ profess”
Nae 3), but perform, “ take the first of all the fruit.” Words are cheap but

eeds are scarce. God requires sincerity as well as sacrifice. The first fruits of
time and mental vigour. The produce of our land and the share of our gains
belong to Him. ‘The best of everything should be offered to God. ‘Ihe first
fruit of thy corn, of thy vine, and of thine oil, and the first of the fleece of thy
sheep, shalt thou give Him.” 3. Jn works of perpetual charity. Love to God
must show itself in benevolence to men—the divinity we preach be seen in the
humanity we practise. Charity must never fail, Relief must not merely be
given in “deserving cases,” to persons “worthy of help,” but to the undeserving.
“The world is the hospital of christianity,” and the duty of the Church is to
seek out the destitute and aged, those in great suffering and unable to work.
This is the mark of “pure religion” says Jamesi.27. ‘his gained Joba
character which his friends could not assail, and a reputation which they could
not tarnish (xxxi. 16-22), “Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and
that those bring the poor that are cast out to thy house? when thou seest the
naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thyself fom thine own
flesh ?” (Is. lviii. 6, 7; 1 17).


Gop’s Girra— Verses 9-41.


The dedication of first fruits was an act of worship, an acknowledgment of
God’s bounty, and a confession of entire dependence upon Him for every mercy
received,


I. God’s gifts bestowed in rich abundance. Deliverance, security, health,
and honour—the fruits of the earth and the profits of business, Everyone has
personal experience to relate of thrilling interest ;—escape from danger, incidents
of travel, re-union of friends) What “signs and wonders” in our past and
present life !


II. God’s gifts designed for human happiness, “Thou shalt rejoice in every
good thing ”—in private comfort or in social festivity. We are objects of God’s
constant care and kindness, and others should be remembered and share with us,
Our gifts are not for selfish indulgence. We must not be like the Caspian Sea
which receives rain and rivers which flow into it, and which is said not to have
an outlet—not a rill to run from its waters. “Hat the fat, and drink the sweet,
snd send portions unto them for whom nothing is prepared” (Neh. viii. 10).


III. God’s gifts dependent upon obedience for continuance. What we have
may be taken away if we do not improve it (Mark iv. 25). The diligent worker
gathers to himself what is lost by tne idle, and talents not used pass away from
the possessor. “If we do not use, we lose.” —Matthew Henry, Temporal mercies
can never produce holy joy unless used for God. Withhold the first fruits and
the whole may be witlidrawn. Give and you shall possess “a blessin, if ye


obey the commandments of the Lord your God” (Deut. xi. 27 ; se 15).


—


GaP. XEVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





HOMILETIO HINTS


Vers. 8-6. Gratitude to God en-
forced. We shall L Point out our
duty in reference to the mercies we
have received. For this purpose we
ought—1. To review them frequently ;
2. To requite them gratefully. II.
Recommend it to your attention. It
is—1. A universal ; 2. A reasonable ;
8 A delightful duty.—C. Simeon, M.A.


Ver. 5. Great results from small
beginnings. 1. In the history of Israel.
2. In personal history. 38. In history
of the Christian church. What hath
God wrought! Admire the power of
God; recognise the providence of God ;
acknowledge dependence upon God.


Ver. 11. “ Duty of delight.” A
duty specially appropriate to a Chris-
tian upon whom all gifts of grace and
sweet influences are bestowed by a
reconciled God. “Who giveth us
richly allthings toenjoy” (1 Tim. vi. 17).
This was—l. An O. TT. principle,
“ Neither be ye sorry, for the joy of the
Lord is your strength” (Neh. viii. 10).
2. A N. T. command. “ Rejoice in
the Lord always, and again I say re-


AND 8UGGESTIONS.


brethren, rejoice in the Lord” (Phil
iii, 1). 38. A duty sadly forgotten.
“They dwell on the duty of self-
denial, but they exhibit not the duty
of delight,” says Ruskin.

This verse exhibits—1. The will of
God. Some say “they will suffer for
it” if they are glad, as if God grudged
happiness to His creatures and took
hard compensation for their enjoy-
ments. They forget that God’s nature
is a joyful nature—that the element in
which He lives is a joyful one, and
that when He communicates good and
bestows a new nature they are parts of
His joy. Showing forth praise is a
work and a witness for God in a joyless
world and a thankless race.

“ A sunshine in a shady place.”


2. The nature of true religion. Se
the exquisite sense that is in this won-
derful book, the Bible. The one ex-
treme is you must live an ascetic,
denying yourself everything ; the other
extreme is, you must live like an
epicurean, enjoying exclusively a
monopoly of everything. The pre-
scription of the Bible is, take the food
that God sends you, thank Him for it,


joice” (1 Th. v. 16. “Finally, my rejoice in it,


Tur SackED Use or Common Grrrs.— Verses 12-15.


The second year’s tithe, or vegetable tithe, instead of being taken to the
sanctuary as in other years, was devoted to hospitality and charity at home (ef,
xiv, 28.) At “the end of tithing,” a solemn declaration was made before God
that the law had been strictly fulfilled, and nothing reserved for personal use.


I. Nothing had been misappropriated. In many ways God’s gifts are mis-
applied. 1. In ways of uncleanness, “I have not eaten thereof in my
mourning,” when the Israelite would be unclean (Lev. xxi. 1; Hos. ix. 4).
Sorrow should not be associated with thanksgiving and joy in God. The bless-
ings of life tend not to degrade, but to elevate and dignify. 2. In alienation
from sacred purposes. “ Neither have I taken away aught for any unclean use”
(ver. 14). For any common use different from that appointe —gifts have a
sacred as well as secular use. They are desecrated if spent upon ourselves or
in sin. They are God’s property and must not be used as we please. He has
claims upon us, The Levite, the widow, and the fatherless, represent His claims,
To neglect them is to disobey and insult Him. 3. Jn consecration to unlawful


practices. “Nor given aught for the dead.” In funeral expenses or feasts of
Bik


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. XXVL





mourning which were often urgent and unforseen. Houses of mourning or
- idolatrous customs, it would be unlawful to sanction. Our gifts are abused if
diverted from hospitality and religion, if devoted entirely to worldly customs or
forbidden uses.


II. Everything had been duly performed. Nothing had been withheld.
“T have hearkened and done all thou hast commanded.” If disobedient, this
solemn confession was a lie—an act of hypocrisy! ‘The danger of the Church
to-day is not from outward assailants, but from unfaithfulness and inward corrup-
tion, from false vows of mere professors and partial consecration of real believers,
The precepts of the Gospel and the spirit of the Master lay a tax upon the
worldly goods and personal sympathies of the wealthy and gifted. If from
selfish motives we keep back some and profess to have devoted all to God, we
act the part of Ananias. Every one should declare the supreme worth and
manifest the inward beauty of truthfulness. ‘‘ Lying lips are an abomination
to the Lord; but they that deal truly are his delight !”


III. Everything was enjoyed by permitting others to share it. “I have
given them unto the Levite and unto the stranger,” etc. (ver. 13). Dedicated
things were devoted to glad and holy feasting. Do good to all men, for they
are God’s creatures. But the necessitous are the special objects of God’s care,
end should partake of our beneficence. ‘God hath left his poor saints to
receive his rents” (Gurnall). Alms given to them are lent to God (Prov. xix. 17)
and will be paid back with interest in their increase and enjoyment. We double
our joys and increase our own store when others share them. “ We should
remember the poor” (Gal. ii. 10).


Prayer anp Cuarity.— Verses 13-15.


The tithes were to be presented, a declaration made that they had not been
withheld, and then an earnest prayer offered for the land and the people who
dwelt in it (ver. 15).


I. Prayer and charity united in Christian life. We have the aspect man-
wards and godwards. Love as you are loved ; forgive that you may be forgiven,
bestow that you may receive again. Alms and prayers spring from one root
and are bound together by one law. Cornelius “was a devout man, gave much
alms to the peeple, and prayed to God always” (Acts x. 3).


II. Charity no ground for boasting in prayer. We only do our duty that
we are commanded to do, when we help the destitute, This affords no ground
for pride and the spirit of the Pharisee—a self-complacent and self-vaunting
spirit. Instead of numbering fasts, tithes and merits ; we must forsake our sins,
love God and our neighbour as ourselves (cf Luk xviii. 11, 12). “ These ought
ye to have done and not to leave the other undone.”


III. Prayer that charity may be constantly practised. We cannot give to
others unless blessed ourselves. Constant prayer secures constant supply.
“ Ask and ye shall receive.” Prayer begets dependence, fitness to receive, and
readiness in bestowing our blessings. Our liberality should ever be the outcome
of our gratitude to God. “ Freely ye have received, freely give.


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 13-15. Devotion and daily —should prompt to self examination
life. Integrity in daily life the condi- and obedience. ore
tion of acceptable prayer. Prayer Ver. 15. Prayer and patriotism.
reminds of shortcomings in daily life The prosperity of the ate (land)


GHAP, XXVL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





intimately connected with the moral
condition of the people. A blessed
eople, a blessed land. ‘We must
earn hence to be publics-pirited in
rayer, and to wrestle with God for
Blecara for the land and nation, our
English Israel, and for the universal
Church, which we are directed to re-
member in our prayers, as the Israel


of God” (Gal. vi. 16).


Reverence in prayer. 1. For God
is Holy. Holiness becomes His house,
2. For without His cognizance we
could get nothing. 8. It is marvellous
condescension to hear at all. “ Took
down from thy holy habitation.”
4. All that He bestows is from
sovereign mercy, “ Which thou hast
given us,”


A Memorasrte Day.— Verses 16-19,


“ This day ” was a time of solemn admonition, of wonderful pledges between
God and His people, and of deep spiritual significance.


I. A day of beneficent deeds (ver. 16). ‘Laws had been revealed for worship


and life.


The people had vowed to God that they had liberally devoted “ their


hallowed things” to the needy. Distress had been relieved, hearts had been


gladdened, and burdens removed.
rejoiced together before the Lord.


II. A day of solemn dedication to God,


Giver and receiver had been thankful, and


“Thou hast avouched the Lord


this day to be thy God” (ver. 17). Their hearts had been weaned from idolatry


and self. God’s


providence had brought them on their Journey, and God’s


goodness enriched them with blessings. Gratitude bound them to God, and
they pledged themselves not to forget nor disobey him. Canaan would have


been a dark and dreary land without Him,


His presence, like sunshine, fills all


hidden recesses of life, and makes creation glad.
III. A day of distinguished privileges from God. God accepts His people’s


pledge generously,
1. Ln material pre-eminence.


espouses them, and makes new discoveries of His love.


“To make thee high above all nations,”
Eminence and honour come only from God.


“Glory, honour, and immortality”


are reserved in heaven for well-doing (Rom. ii. 7). 2. In spiritual adoption,
He chose them to be His own special and “ peculiar people” (verse 18). They
were elevated in position and moral condition—brought near to God by


obedience. Christians have a


and exaltation.
highest honour,


special place
heaven the relation will be complete.
mayest be an holy people” (verse 19).


in God’s regards on earth, In
3. Jn moral purity. “That thou
This was the end of their obedience


They were chosen to be holy (Eph. i. 4). Moral purity is the
Worldly greatness will never satisfy the cravings of the heart,


Holiness is the admiration of friends, a terror to enemies, and the end of life,
“ All the people of the earth shall see that thou art called by the name of the


Lord ; and they shall be afraid of thee,”


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 16-18, Ready obedience and
great reward. 1. Zhe law of God re-
vealed. Divine in origin, wonderful
in history, authoritative in claims,
These injunctions are not devices of
men, but commandments of God. 2.
The voluntary obedience to law, They

318


willingly and_ publicly avowed God to
be their God. They were to do, not
to dispute the commands, It is not
enough to read and understand them.
They must be sincerely, faithfully and
universally kept. Not as the result
of human energy, but of Divine in-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


OHAP, XxVL


nee rt nore cap py


fluence (Ezek. xxxvi. 27).
expression of Divine pleasure at this
voluntary obedience. Jehovah recipro-
cates the feeling, “'The Lord hath
avouched thee.” Natural and super-
natural blessinys are pledged in variety.
Loyal obedience secures present favour,
and will gain future honour and re-
nown. “If ye will obey my voice
indeed, and keep my covenant, then
ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto
me above all people.”


3. The


Ver. 19. High above all nations.
It is written, righteousness exalteth a
nation, but sin is a reproach to any
people (Prov. xiv. 34). While Israel
regarded God’s word, and kept His
testimonies, they were the greatest and
most respectable of all nations ; but
when they forsook God and His law,
they became the most contemptible.


O Britain! even more highly favoured
than ancient Israel, learn wisdom by
what they have suffered. It is not
thy fleets, or thine armies, howsoever
excellent and well appointed, that
can ultimately exalt and secure thy
permanence among nations. It is
righteousness alone. Become irreli-
gious, neglect God’s ordinances, pro-
fane His sabbath, despise His word,
persecute His followers, and thou art
lost.— A. Clarke.


Vers. 17-19. Covenanting with God.
I. Our covenant engagements. 1. To
accept God as our God. 2. To act
towards Him as becomes us in that
relation. II. Our covenant advantages.
1. God will own us as His people.
2. Bestow on us blessings worthy of
that relation: holiness, honour, and
happiness.—C, Simeon, M.A.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XXVI.


Vers, 2-4. First. This is the rule
of sacrifice—a costly precept to the
worldling and the formalist. But to
the servant of God, it is a privilege to
lay aside a portion with the sacred
stamp, “ This is for God.” This sacred
devotedness is the true road to riches
(Prov. xi. 24). God challenges us to
“prove him now herewith,” if the
abundant harvest, and the eee
vintage shall not put unbelief an
covetousness to shame (Neh. iii. 10;
2 Chron. xxxi. 5-10).—C. Bridges,


Ver. 5. Few. Athens and Rome,
Babylon and Persia, as well as England
and France, rose by slow degrees to
their unrivalled eminence. Whereas,
the Hums and Vandals flashed in their
terrible greatness for a few years, and
passed unto oblivion as mysteriously
as they rose into power.— Dr. Brewer.


Vers. 6-9. Our affliction. Suppose,
Christian, that the furnace was seven
times hotter, it is but to make you
geven times better ; fiery trials make
golden Christians (Dyer). “ God’s
children,” says an old author, “are
most triumphant when most tempted ;


most glorious when most afflicted;
most in favour with God when least in
man’s esteem. As their conflicts, so
their conquests; as their tribulations,
so their triumphs ”—

The good are better made by ill,

As odours crushed are sweeter still.

Rogers.


Vers. 10, 11. Rejoice. Who par-
takes in another’s joy is a more humane
character than he who partakes in his
grief.— Lavater.

All who joy would win
Must share it—happiness was born a twin.—
Byron,

Vers 12-14. Done all. People in
general have no notion of mixing reli-
gion with common life— with their
pleasures, with their meals, with al)
their thoughts, Hence itis they think
that their Maker is an enemy to happi-
ness, and that religion is fit for the
closet only.—Mayow,


Ver. 15. Look down, Prayer and
thanksgiving are like the double motion
of the lungs—the air that is sucked in
by prayer is breathed forth again by
thanksgiving.—Godwin, Aue


OHAP. XXVL





—


Vers, 16-19. Above all. Do not
forget that greatness before men is
sometimes littleness before God, and
that every man who lives only to love
God and to do good to his fellows is in
the sight of his Maker truly great. It
is honour and blesseduess the greatest
to belong to the army of Jesus Christ
—to be holy, loving and faithful, a
witness for God, an instructor in His
House, a benefactor among men.—





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTLRONOMY,


(J. £. Resoman). In the estimate of
honour he should learn to value the
gifts of nature abcve tlose of fortune;
to esteem in our ancestors the qualities
that best promote the interests of
society, and to pronounce the descen-
dant of a king less truly noble than the
offspring of a man of genius whose
writings will instruct or delight the
latest posterity. —Gtbbon. .


CHAPTER XXVIL


Carrican Norrs.—Connect this chapter with verse 16 of preceding one, where Moses com:


cludes discourse on plains of Moab.


Here he dwells on sanctions of


e law and sets forth ix


striking detail the blessings of obedience and curses of disobedience.


1-4. On the day of entrance into the land, stones must be erected and the law written on
them. ders, rulers, and representatives of tribes, prominent, because they would require what
was due after death of Moses. Great stones fulfilled (Josh. viii. 80-32). Plaister. Daubed witk
paint or white cement to make conspicuous. Writing not to be cut into stone and then covered


with slime,


AU words, not the Decalogue, nor the blessings and curses following, nor the Book of


Deuteronomy, but all laws revealed from God by Moses, not historical, didactic and non-legislative
matter in Pentateuch, but simply its legal enactments (cf. Speak. Cum.). Ebal, the place specified
daen.


for stones (chap. xi. 29). Now Mad-el-
4-8. More details. Altar.


None used in ordinary cases except brazen one at door of taber-


nacle, but on this occasion they were to renew the covenant and offer sacrifices, Stones, not
covered with slime, but unhewn, according to Ex. xx. 25. Ofer burnt offerings and peace
offerings, symbolic of entire dedication and enjoyment of Divine grace.


8 Plainly. To read easily,


910, Heed, An appeal for attention, When the covenant was renewed and law set up in
Canaan, Israel bound themselves to hearken and keep the commandments.


11-26. Form and manner of the solemn blessing and cursing. Tribes appointed to stand on
Gerizim sprang from two wives of Jac ’b, Leah, and Rachel. All the four tribes located on Ebal,
from handmaids Zilpah and Bilhah—Reuben is added, probably because he lost his primogeniture
(Gen. xlix. 4); and Zebulum, because youngest son of Leah (Speak. Com.).


14, Levites.


Only to speak aloud, #.¢., to pronounce the different formularies of blessing and


cursing. In pronouncing benedictions they turned towards the multidude on Gerizim, from
whom rolled back the Amen; in turning to Kbal, in distinct and solemn tone they received back
the same impressive Amen in ratification of each blessing and curse,


15-25,


‘Twelve curses against transgressions of the covenant.


The first eleven directed


against special sins, selected by way of example; the last comprehensively sums up in general


terms and condemns all and every offence against God’s law.—( Speak. Com.)


15. Image,
eovers private as well as public image worship.


(of. 4,16; Ex.xx. 4; Lev. xxvi. 1.) Secret place set apart as a shrine, This


16. Light. Disregards, or lightly esteems parents (Ex. xxi, 17; Lev. xix. 8).


17, Landmark. (cf, Deut. xix. 14.)


18. Blind. Wack of consideration for sufferin


of desolation (Ex. xxii. 21; Mal. iii. 5; Ps, lx


g (Lev. xix. 14), Perverteth, taketh advantage
viii. 5),


30-23, (of. Lev, xviii. 23; xx. 15.) Heinous sins springing from unlawful passions, destructive


ef bodily vigour and family bliss,
#4. Secretly. To kill him (Gen. ix. 5).


$5. Reward. (cf. Ex. xxiii, 7,8.) For this section of. Josh, viii, 30-86,


820


HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY, omar. xxvn
SS ‘-


Tue Memoria. Pittars.— Verses 1, 4, 9 and 10,


Instructions are given for setting up pillars or stones, on which the law must
be written. bis was a common mode of publishing edicts or laws in ancient
times. The design of these pillars is significant. They assert: ©


I. The principle on which the Land was held. “On the day,” when they had
crossed Jordan, they must halt, erect great stones and remember their title deeds.
The entering into the land, its conquest and permanent possession depended upon
certain conditions. 1. They took possession through God's covenant. That day
they had become the people of Gor! He was about to give them the land which
he had promised. 2. hey could keep possession only through obedience to that
covenant, “‘'I’hou shalt therefore obey the voice of the Lord” (ver. 10). The
law is set up, the covenant solemnly renewed, and the national policy fixed.
All progress and prosperity depend upon God. Obedience to him will give
access to the land with its beauties and products, access to possession and glad-
ness. Hearkening unto his voice we succeed in all enterprises and positions.
Never forget the terms on which you enter in. Everything is given in mercy
and only kept by obedience—“ That thou mayest go into the land.”


II. The Perpetuity of the Divine Law. “ Write all the words of this law.”
The law was unchangeable, adapted to Israel in the wilderness and in Canaan,
to every nation and every age. We are apt to forget it. New conditions of
life efface it from our minds. It must, therefore, be preserved and perpetuated
—written not on pillars and parchments, but in the heart and life, ‘‘ Writter
not with ink, but with the spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but
in fleshy tables of the heart.”


III. The obligation to keep this Divine Law. It must ever be prominent
and lifted up before us, ‘he covenant must not simply be ratified but kept.
1. This is pressed with authority—“I command you.” Not the mere act of
Moses and the elders, but the expression of God. 2. 7his is pressed with
earnestness. “Take heed and hearken, O Israel” (ver. 9.) Moses, the leader,
is earnest. The priests and Levites are earnest. Feeling the obligation our-
selves, we must be urgent in pressing others. Delight in God’s law and
passionate concern for others should ever characterise ministers and leaders.
‘he very name and calling impose responsibility upon God’s Israel. ‘The Lord
hath avouched thee to be his peculiar people and that thou shouldest keep all
his commandments (ch. xxvi. 18: Ex. xix. 5.)


Tue Stones ALTar.— Verses 5-7,


An altar was set up, besides monumental stones. No tool must be used in its
preparation. Burnt offerings and peace offerings were to be offered as in the
covenant of Sinai, and a festive entertainment was to follow. Notice the
erection and design of this altar.


I. The erection of the Altar. Patriarchs erected an altar to express gratitude
to God and confess dependence upon Him. 1. The circumstances, As soon
as they entered into Canaan, the stunes and altar must be fixed up. Many
would counsel delay. They were in a strange place, surrounded by enemies,
and must prepare for defence. (rod is our best defence. In every new situation,
enterprise, and possession God must be first. Acknowledge Him, and He will
direct thy steps. 2. 7he material. In rough material, without the touch of an


iron tool (ver. 5). Perhaps to indicate that God requires no help Bea man in
z 2


OHAP. XXVIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY,





making atonement for sin, no art and co-operation in setting forth his claims.
Decorations in worship pre-occupy the mind, and may lead to idolatry. At any
rate, nature is God’s work, pure and holy. Man, by contact, may pollute it ;
hence the altar for expiation of sin must be free from taint and human
corruption, “Thou shalt not build it of hewn stone ; for if thou lift up thy
tool upon it, thou hast polluted it ” (Ex. xx. 25).


II. The design of the Altar. Burnt offerings were expiatory, signs of dedica-
tion of life and labours. Peace offerings were expressions of gratitude for
benefits received, tokens of reconciliation with God. Both were offered to mark
(1) Israel’s gratitude for blessings of covenant relation ; (2) Israel’s determina-
tion to consecrate themselves wholly to God’s service (cf Ex. xxiv. 5). In the
sacrificial meal they entered into blessings of divine grace and enjoyed rital
communion with God. Thus were they divinely taught and solemnly pledged
by this public ceremony to carry out their sacred obligations. Sin must be
expiated by sacrifice before we can have access to God. But God has made
rovision. In faith and obedience “ thou shalt eat, and shalt rejoice before the
ord thy God.”


Tue Stoyzs anp fHE ALTAR. — Verses 2-7,


There is an intimate relation between the two, symbolic of spiritual trath—


I, The stones represent the demands of law. Stern and exalted, requiring
perfect and constant obedience. Plain and adapted to man in its revelation—
testifying against all disobedience. Law must exist—can never be abolished
nor give life. It brings curse and condemnation.


II. Altar represents atonement for violations of law. Law has been satisfied
in its demands, God has made provision for access, pardon, and peace. Without
sacrifice there is no remission of sin. Law stands erect and unyielding as the
pillars of stone. The altar indicates propitiation and grace. We are set free,
redeemed from the curse of the law, that we may honour God in obeying it.
By the stones God speaks to us; on the altar we sacrifice and speak to Him,
Thus communion is real, vital, and complete.


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS


Vers. 2, 8, 8. In these verses it
appears that Israel set up a monument
on which they must write “the words
of this law.” 1. The monument itself
must be very mean; only rough un-
hewn stones covered over; not with
polished marble or alabaster, nor brass
tables, but with common plaster. ‘I'he
word of God needs not to be set off
by the art of man, nor embellished
with “ enticing words of man’s wisdom”
(1 Cor. ii. 4; Col. ii. 4), 2. The in-
scription was to be very great. “ All
the words of this law.” Some say the
ten commandments, others the five
books of Moses, but probably only an

822


abridgment of the book of Deuteronomy
or the blessings and curses here set
down (¢f. Josh. viii. 34),— Wilson,


Ver. 6. Altar. This atonement is in-
troduced in the very midst of the moral
law, that the people of Israel might be
pointed forward to that great provision
through which the breaches of that
law might be forgiven, and in which
strength might be found for obedience
(Cumming). At all events, the stony
pile was so large as to contain all the
conditions of the covenant, so elevated
as to be visible to the whole congre-
gation of Israel; and the religious


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


OHAP, XXVII.





ceremonial performed around it on the
occasion was solemn and impressive—
consisting, jirst, of the elementary


Lord. There were thus the law which
condemned and the typical expiation
—the two great principles of revealed


worship needed for sinful men ; and,
secondly, of the peace offerings, or
lively social feasts that were suited to
the happy people whose God was the


religion (Jamieson). Very plainly,
ver. 8. Not very finely ets admired
by the curious, but very plainly that
he who runs may read.—J/t. Henry.


BLEssING AND Cursina.— Verses 11-14.


The curses only given, and not the blessings. For as many as were under
the law, were under the curse. It was reserved for Christ to bless, to do what
the law could not do.


I. The special places. Gerizim was one pulpit and Ebal another. Their
isolated position made them naturally suitable for the occasion. (cf. Stanley,
Sinai and Palestine.) But their moral import is significant. One may suggest
bondage, another freedom. Both set forth what nature may become, a blessing
or a curse, according to its use. Creation is in sympathy with man, responds
to his moral condition, and is wasted or blessed by his moral conduct. “ Things
take the signature of thought.”


II. The appointed agencies. On the sides of the mountains the tribes were
drawn up, six on one, and six on the other side. The priests pronounced, in
loud tones, blessings and curses. On Gerizim were stationed descendants of
Rachel and Leah. On Ebal the posterity of the two secondary wives of Jacob,
Zilpah and Bilah, with those of Rueben, who had lost his primogeniture—the
children of the bondwoman and the children of the free. (Gal. 4, 23.) The
moral of the mountains is legible enough. Men, according to training, history
and position, have power to do good orevil. Their ascent on the mount of
wealth, learning and success, will be a source of blessing or curse to those
below them. ‘I will bless thee, and thou shalt be a blessing,” (Gen. xii. 2.)


Curses anpD Responses.— Verses 25, 26.


Previous laws had prohibited these things, but now God openly declares a
curse upon offenders,


I. The curses pronounced against transgressors. T'welve in number answering
to the twelve tribes of Israel. The first, against those who make graven or molten
images of Jehovah, and set them up in secret, that is to say, against secret
breaches of the second commandment (Ex. xx. 4); the second, agaiust contempt
of, or want of reverence towards parents (Ex. xxi. 17); the third against
removing boundaries (chap. xix. 14) ; the fourth, against leading the blind astray
(Lev. xix. 14) ; the fi/th, against perverting the right of orphans and widows
(chap. xxiv. 17); the sith, against incest with a mother (chap. xxiii, 1;
Lev. xviii. 8) ; the seventh, against unnatural vices (Lev. xviii. 23) ; the eighth
and ninth, against incest with a sister or mother-in-law (Lev. xviii. 9, 17); the
tenth, against secret murder (Ex. xx. 13; Num. xxxv. 16) ; the eleventh, against
judicial murder (Ex. xxiii. 7, 8); the ¢welfth, against the man who does not set
up the words of the law to do them, who does not make it the model and
standard of life and conduct. This last curse applied to every breach of law
and proves that the different sins mentioned were selected by way of example
and were mostly such as could be easily concealed from judicial So taies


-


CHAP. XXVIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY,








The office of the law is shown in this last utterance, the summing up of all the»
rest, to have been pre-eminently to proclaim condemnation. Every conscious
act of transgression subjects the sinner to the curse of God, for which none but
He who has become a curse for us can possibly deliver us (Gal. ili, 10-13).—


Keil.


II. The curses publicly ratified hy the people. It is easy to understand amen


to blessings, but how could the people say it to curses ? { cknow
he response was not a mere profession of faith in


ledged the equity of them.


They felt and acknow-


the truth of the curses, but an open declaration that they were just, true and


certain.
which brands sin with a curse.
amen.
righteousness,”


Their amen was the expression of deep conviction, the approval of law
1, Scripture says amen.
3. 7he universe of God says amen.

“Just and true are thy ways.”


2. Conscience saya
“The righteous Lord loveth


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS,


Vers, 11-15. A Wonderful Scene.
1, The locality. Describe the valley
between Ebal and Gerizim (cf 'Tristam
Ld. of Is. Bonar and Stanley). 2. The
Actors, Priests, tribes and people dis-
tinctly, loudly and solemnly reciting
their parts. 3. The audience. Their
position, sat on sides of the mountains;
attention, waiting in awful silence for
the utterance. ‘Take heed” (ver. 9);
response, ““ Amen.” What a grand
assembly! What a solemn purpose
and how serious ue consequences !


‘* All the world’s a stage,
And all the men and women merely
players
They have their exits and their en-
trances, ete.


Shakspeare.


Secret Sins.—Most of the sins were
secret, but are brought to light by the
Omniscient Judge, and receive their
just desert. 1. Men outwardly moral
may be addicted to secret sins, 2. God
will discover these sins, pronounce sen-
tence, execute judgment upon them.
“For His eyes are upon the ways of
man, and He seeth all his goings,
There is no darkness, nor shadow of


darkness, where the workers of iniquity
may hide themselves.”


Ver. 15. Amen. A little word of
big meaning. 1. An acknowledgment
of the supremacy of moral law. ‘This
law is a real force, above all conting-
ency and human control. Right and
wrong are eterual verities, written in
the nature of tliings, and can never be
altered. Amen, “so beit.” 2. A con-
fession of justice in the administration
of His law, God is absolutely supreme,
a law to himself. Right is not inde-
pendant of his will, cannot be accom-
plished without his providence, what
he wills must be done, because right.
Dr. Payson once asked if he saw any
special reasons for some particular
event, replied, “ No! but I am as well
satisfied as if I could see a thousand.
God’s will is the very perfection of
reason.” ‘“ Amen, so be it.” 3. A
submission to the decisions of this law.
These decisions may be opposed to our
wishes and anticipations, but there is
no injustice in the government of the
world. ‘‘ Amen, so be it.” “ Shall
even he that hateth right govern, and
wilt thou condemn him that is most
just ?” (Job. xxxiv. 17.)


IDOLATRY, OR SINS AGAINST THE SECOND CoMMANDMENT.— Verse 15.


This command against image worship in public or private, sets forth :—


1, The Spirituality of the Divine Nature. The words forbid any image o
Jehovah in a material form. Other nations had images, regarded them witb


824


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OMAP, XXVM.





superstitious veneration, and were influenced by seductive practice, But God
will have no likeness of him, no representation, to becloud his spiritual essence
or rank him with forms of matter. Images lower the conception of Deity, tend
to make him the product of human thought and ingenuity, and devrade the
worshippers. “God is a spirit” entirely separate from matter, “‘I'o whom,
then, will ye liken God, or what likeness will ye compare to him?” (Is. xl. 18).


II. The Spirituality of Divine Worship. We are forbidden to worship God
by graven images. 1. /n material forms, This was prohibited in Rome by
Numa, a Pagan prince, yet allowed by the Pope, a Christian bishop! Devotion
to God must not be excited, directed and helped by pictures and crucifixes—
symbols which are liable to take the place of truth symbolised and lead to
sensual worship. “‘l'urn ye not unto idols, nor make to yourselves molten
gods.” 2. Jn fanciful forms. Worship is often will-worship (Col. ii. 23). We
fancy a God, cut and carve one like ourselves in our evil imaginations, Our
worship is governed by the power of imagination, not the power of faith.
“ We are tlie offspring of God,” our life is the breath of the highest life, and
our moral nature makes us kin with Him. “ We ought not to think that the
godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone, graven by art and man’s device ”
(Acts xvii. 29).


Fitrat Disnonour.— Verse 16,


This sin is against the fifth commandment. Obedience to God first, then
respect for parental authority, which represents God.


I. What these words imply. First, lack of true affection. ‘Then irreverence,
disobedience, and defiance. If there be no love, no right feeling, children will
soon dishonour and reproach their parents. It is more than uncharitable, uncivil
or unjust, to withhold from them what is due. “In thee have they set light
by father and mother.” ‘The instincts of nature, the demands of conscience,
and the word of God, require honour to father aud mother.


II. What these words require. Gratitude for existence, sustenance, and
education. Love, trust, and filial fear, Submission to rebuke, instruction, and
correction. Endeavouring to be comfort and support in time of ueed. Never
to despise and mock our parents. “ He that curseth Jather and mother, let him
die the death.” The poet Cowper expressed true feeling when presented by his
cousin with a portrait of his mother. “I had rather possess that picture than
the richest jewel in the British crown; for I loved her with an affection that
her death, fifty-two years since, has not in the least abated.”


Men oF Insusticz.— Verses 17-19,
Three forms of cruelty and injustice are here given—


I. An unjust neighbour (verse 17). Removal of landmarks a secret way of
injuring a neighbour and breaking the law of love—disregard to his will and
property. An act springing from selfishness, pride, a spirit of oppression and
covetousness. Disregarding the authority, and confusing the heritage God gave
to families. An old form of dishonesty, robbing your neighbour to increase
your own lands ; tempting flocks and herds out of other folds into your own.
“ Remove not the ancient landmark which thy fathers have set” (Prov, xml. 28).


II, An unjust counsellor (verse 18). It is specially cruel to impose upon
the ignorant and defenceless—to misdirect the blind or cause them to stumble
825


1


OMAY. XXVO. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY,


=





by treachery, deceit, and wrong advice. To help the deaf and blind has always
been considered an aet of benevolence. Job “was eyes to the blind” (xxix. 15
Tenderness is enjoined by the apostle—“ That no man put a stumbling bloc
or occasion to fall in his brother's way” (Rom, xiv, 13). The deaf and blind
may be unable to detect the offender and bring him to an earthly tribunal, but
God hears when the human ear is deaf, and sees when the human eye is dark,
“Cursed be he that maketh the blind to wander.”


III, An unjust judge. Widows and orphans have lost protectors, No
advantage should be taken of their poor and helpless condition. Justice should
be done to the stranger, ignorant of our laws and customs—to the widow, too
poor and weak to secure legal advice. Judgment must never be perverted by
bribes to judges, by sophistry of advocates, and by evidence false and


maufactured.
in His holy habitation” (Ps. Ixviii. 5).


“A father of the fatherless, and a judge of the widows, ia God


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 15. Images. 1. Men eject
God from heart and mind. 2.


Make, set up, worship and keep
rivals or antagonists. 3. This com-
mand, forbidding all false gods,


would bring man into right attitude
with God. Craftsman. A profession
sinful, degrading and dangerous,


Ver. 16. Setteth light. Notice the
close relation between reverence to
God and _ reverence to parents,
Cursing a parent was punished as
blasphemy against God (Lev. xx. 9).
Unnatural despisers of parents in
many ways; resistance to authority
—contempt of reproof, denying obliga-
tion—needless exposure to sin. Every
village bears testimony to this crying
sin. Solon asked why he made no law
against parricides, replied that he could
not conceive of anyoue so impious and
cruel. God knows man better. The
heart is capable of wickedness beyond
the imagination of the heathen sage.
Cursed. Absalom self-willed and re-
bellious against his father, made a
reproach before the people (2 Sam.
Xviii, 9-17). Confessions on scaffold


that the first step was contempt of
parental authority and restraint. If
not literal fulfilment, often retributive
judgment late, but certain, in dis-
appointed hope, poignant anguish
and corrections from their own sins
(Jer. ii. 19).


Vers. 17. Landmark. 1. Every man
has certain rights—political, social and
religious, 2. These rights should be
respected—not to be removed. ‘They
are sacred and inalienable. We have
plenty of liberty in our own sphere
without encroaching upon the rights
and in the boundary of others, 3.
Violation of these rights, sinful and
risky. Intense selfishness—social in-
Justice—disregard of divine order and
will bring a curse. “ Cursed be he
that removeth his neighbour’s land-
mark,”


Vers. 17-19. Principles of humanity.
1. Respect for rights of property (ver.
17). 2. Tender regard for the un-
fortunate (ver. 18). 3. Justice ad-
ministered to the helpless (ver. 19).


Sins or UncLeanness.— Verses 20-23


Sins which spring from lust destroy the sacredness of the human body and


dissolve family relationships.


I. That men have a tendency to commit great sins,


Learn—


Judgment is perverted,


the heart alienated, and the power of evil habits drives men deeper into self.


826


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. XXVII.





corruption. The blackest crimes have disgraced humanity—incest, adultery,
robbery, fratricide, and murder. Pride has been in active conflict with personal
and social liberty. Covetousness bas dried up the wealth of provinces and the
sources of enterprise. Sensuality has wasted the strength and manhood of
the people. “ Pleasure has mounted the throne and shame departed from the
heart.” Paul’s terrible indictment (Rom. i. 16-32) is not more severe than
that of Tacitus and Seneca—‘ All things are full of crimes and vices.”


II. That this tendency has existed in all ages. It is not the birth of
modern civilization, but old as human nature itself. In Jewish and Gentile
world, in corrupt and enlightened ages man is the same the world over. ‘I'he
principles that prompted to these crimes are alive and at work in every
unregenerate heart in the present day. Moral corruption invariably follows
religious debasement. “For this cause God gave them up unto vile (shameless)
affections (passions) ; for even their women (who lost modesty, a priceless
jewel) did change the natural use into that which is against nature,” &e.
(Rom. i. 26, 27).


III. That God seeks to preserve men from great sins. By His word, with
its fearful warnings, threatenings, and promises. By His spirit, enlightening
the mind, discovering dangers, renewing the disposition and destroying the
tendency to evil. By His providence, in putting barriers in the way, checks to
prevent crime; and by His grace, to form and strengthen habits and efforts
the very opposite. Sins of the deepest stain, and the most inveterate strength
may be overcome, ‘My grace is sufficient for thee.” “The blood of Jesus
Christ cleanseth us from all sin.”


Murper.— Verses 24, 25.


Two kinds of murder are here mentioned, secret murder and judicial or
murder under colour of law.


I. Murder is an offence to God. It may be secret and undiscovered, but
the curse of God rests upon it. If bribed or hired to convict and condemn the
innocent ; then it makes the ordinance of God to patronise villany and shame
(1 Tim. i. 9.) Man is “ made in the image of God.” Not simply life, but the
man himself is sacred and divinely guarded. To destroy the work is to dis-
honour the workman. “ Thou shalt not kill.”


II. Murder is an injury to society. Men owe duties to one another as well
as to God. Respect for life is one of the first duties. Murder destroys the
security of life, defeats the primary object of human government, brings dis-
grace to the murderer and entails suffering upon the murdered and his relations.
Society is outraged by the crime, and its welfare demands the punishment of
the criminal, “He that killeth any man shall surely be put to death.”


Tue Demanps or Gop’s Law.— Verse 26,


{n general terms this verse sums up all offences against the law. In itself
and in its connection it is instructive, not subordinate truth, ornamental and
non-essential. Reference is made to it in the New Testament, as a vital
fundamental truth, lying at the roots of the Gospel, and setting forth the
permanency of moral obligation. pe


OHAP, XXVIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


SN


I, God’s Law is the standard of duty. It legislates for individuals and
nations in all relations of life ; it comprehends every duty, and touches every
act. 1. Divine in origin. Not of human invention. No mere conventional
rules made by civil governors, by priesteraft, and by philosophers. Not as the
edict of a master mind did Moses publish the law, but as the distinct utterance
of God Himself. “The Lord talked with them from the heavens, and Gud
spake all the words of this law.” 2. Spiritual in nature. The law is
spiritual, originating from the spirit of God and appealing to the spirit of
man. It relates not merely to outward acts, to parental discipline, social
custom, and civil government, but to “the thoughts and intents of the heart.”
It demands right feelings and right thoughts. Christ tells us that it is hearte
life which determines our guilt or innocence in the sight of God (Mt. v.
21, 28). 3. Clear in its demands, Spoken distinctly, and appealing to the
senses at Sinai (Ex. xix. 16), Written plainly on the pillars (ver. 8), and
now printed for us. We cannot plead ignorance nor mistake ; we cannot
complain of uncertainty and want of light to guide us in worship and the
discharge of duty. ‘The law is high as the summit, loud us the thunders, and
Beene as the flames of the mount on which it was given. It is holy, just,
and true,


II. Obedience to God’s Law must be perfect. It requires us not only to
abstain from wrong, but to do that which is right. 1. Perfect in extent. “ All
the words of this law.” There must be no choice, no omission, no extenuation.
Actual breach of one involves neglect and contempt of all. “ For whosoever
shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point (one commandment), he is
guilty of all, t¢, becomes liable to condemnation under indictment which
includes all particular commandments of the law (Jas. i. 10.) 2. Perfect in
duration. There must be a confirmation, a continuation in every act of life.
For under the covenant of works to break down only one moment, even the
last, is to be lost. “ Obey my voice and do them, according to that which
I command you : so shall ye be my people, and I will be your God” (Jer. xi. 4).


III. Imperfect obedience to God’s law will bring a curse, Who has given
or can give perfect obedience in every thought, word and deed? The blot of
a single sin on a character pure as that of an angel would seal our doom. “Do
and live” is the voice of law, “but the soul that sinneth shall die.” No
middle sentence between these two and nota whisper of mercy. “Cursed is
everyone that continueth not in all things which are written in the book of the
law to do them.” Every mouth is stopped before God. All are guilty and
exposed. We must either continue in misery, bear the curse, or appeal from
law to gospel. It is terrible to be cursed by men, but to be cursed by God, who
uever errs in judgment, nor ceases to warn—what must this be! But “ Christ
hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us,” “There
‘8 no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus,”


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS,


Ver. 19. 1. A dependent class, check it. The same ‘endency dis-


objects of pity. “The stranger, father-

less, and widow.” 2. Advantage is

often taken of this class. This law is

repeated, indicating strong inclination

among the Hebrews to ill use strangers,

and auxious desire in the legislator to
828


covered in modern days.


Vers, 20-23. 1. Aominable crimes.
Common in Canaan and Egypt, to the
last degree of unnatural mixture,
Condition of Sodom, and passages in


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


OHAP, XXVIII.





Pauline epistles, confirm the corrup-
tions of the heathen world. 2. Aw/ul
consequences if not checked. (a) Men
demoralised by lust and_ bestiality.
(6) Laws of consanguinity violated
by illicit intercourse and incestuous
marriage. (¢) Social retribution follows.
Land unproductive by sloth, luxury
and effeminacy of the people. The
country an easy prey to the foreigner
(Persia, Turkey). (d) The anger of
God displayed. God curses such crimes
by nature, providence, and conscience.


Many a crime deem’d innocent on earth
Is registered in heav’n, and these, no doubt,
with a curse annex’d.
Man may dismiss compassion from his heart,
But God will never.
— Cowper.


Ver. 26. From this we see that every
precept of the holy law is equally
obligatory, and that he that is guilty
of a breach of one is guilty, not merely
of breaking an individual law, but of


insurrection and rebellion against the
Great Author and Inspirer of the law
—the Lord God of Israel. We thus
learn that the breach of one precept
is regarded by God as an impeachment
of His jurisdiction and authority as
King and Lord. View sin then not
lightly, not as a mere breach of an
isolated law, but as insurrection avainst
the Great Law-giver himself. This
truth also disposes of the principle of
the Pharisee, that excessive and
scrupulous attention to one law was
an atonement for daily disobedience
to another. The more we study the
law, the more searching, inquisitive
and comprehensive we find it. What
a solemn truth, that all born into the
world are born in the eclipse, by nature
under the curse. ‘‘ By deeds of law no
flesh shall be justified.” If you feel
convinced of sin, condemned in your
heart, flee to Christ. For what the
law could not do, that God hath done
in his son, etc.—Dr. Cumming.


[JLLUSTRATIONS TO OHAPTER XXVII.


Vers. 2-4. Write. Stones and even
rocks are seen in Egypt and the pen-
insula of Sinai, containing inscriptions
made 3000 years ago, in paint or
plaster, of which, owing to the serenity
of the climate, the coating is as firm
and the colouring as fresh as if it had
been put yesterday.—(Jamieson.) I
have seen numerous inscriptions of
this kind of writing more than 2000

ears old, and still as distinct as when
it was first inscribed on the plaster.—
Thomson Ld, and Bk.


Vers. 9, 10. Heed. God esteems
our actions and works, not according
to the greatness or exactness of the
performance, but according to the
sincerity and truth of our hearts in
doing them (J. Meade). Child-like
obedience moves towards every com-
mand of God, as the needle points the
way the loadstone draws. If God calls
to duties which are cross to flesh and
blood, if we are children, we obey our
Father.— Watson.


Ver. 15. Image. Yet man—this
glorious creature—can debase His
spirit down to worship wood and stone,
and hold the very beasts which bear
his yoke and tremble at his eye for
sacred things.—Landon,


Ver. 16. Father. It is certain,
whatever can be signified by fear and
honour and reverence, is the duty of
children—that is, so far as to think
honourably of parents—to speak well
of them, to conceal their faults, to ex-
cuse them to others, and to comport
themselves with reverence and great
regard before them. Grieve them in
nothing ; this is the sweet measure,—
J. Taylor.


Ver. 17. Removeth. Covetousness
debaseth a man’s spirit.— Archbishop
Tillotson.


* Desire of having is the sin of covetous-
neas


—Shakspeare.
829


CHAP. XXVII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


I


Ver. 18. Wander, Deceit is only
a game played by small minds.—
(Corneille). Cursed. It is a double
pleasure to deceive the deceiver.—
Lontaine,


Ver. 19. Judgment. I mistrust the
judgment of every man in a case in
which his own wishes are concerned.—
Wellington,


Vers, 20-23. vil passions and
lusts. “If I had but character,” said
Mirabeau, “if I had but been a good
man, if I had not degraded my life
by sensuality, and my youth by evil
passions, I could have saved France.”
—Farrar.

“ Passion is the drunkenness of the mind.”

— Spencer,


Vers. 24-25. Slay.


“ Murder may pass unpunish’d for a time,”
But tardy justice will o’ertake the crime,


Dryden.


Ver. 26. Law. The main strength
and force of a law consists in the
penalty annexed to it.—(/lackstone).
Hard and imperious law has not a
word of encouragement for the sinner,
nut a grain of sympathy, not an atom
of help—nothing but an awful threat
of judgment and fiery vengeance on
his failure. President Garfield truly
said “Coercion is the basis of all law.
A law is no law without coercion,”—
I. Griffith,


CHAPTER XXVIIL


Carrroan Norrs.—Moses now enlarges and gives the blessings and curses in detail (ef. Ex.
xxiii. 20-28 and Lev. 26.) The blessings are declared in fourteen verses ; the curses require


nearly four times as many.


Thus here again the curse is the more conspicuous feature in the


law Speak, Com. Obedience the condition of blessing and this is repeated at beginning (verse
2) middle (29) and close (verses 13, 14) in positive and energetic form.


1-8. Blessings actual powers which follow and overtake them in all relations of life, Field


(verse 3; Lev, xxvi, 3.) Body (verse 4), i.e. children.


Basket (verse 5) for carrying articles for


personal use (Deut. xxvi. 2). Store Lit, kneading-trough, in which daily bread is prepared (Ex.
xii. 84), Comest in all journeys or affairs and administrations (Num. xxvii. 17; Deut. xxxi, 2 :


2 Sam, iii, 25,


7214,
bless, ete. Conquest over enemies (verse 7).
8) underground generally (Lev. xxvi. 7, 8).


Effects of blessings expressed in tne optative forme earnestly desired, May the Lord

Flee in rout, in many ways. Storehouses (verse
Exhaltatiun (verse 9),
vii, 6). Called (verse 10) rightly and truly a most excellent and favoured people,


Holy (Ex. xix. 5,6; Deut.
Plenteous


(verse 11) it. shall make thee abound in good, superabundance for good, i.e. for happiness and
prosperity (cf. 30, 9.) Treasures rain and fruitful seasons. Head verse 13) independent in


power and dignity (Is, ix. 14; xix. 15).
which blessings depend,


Tail not vassals,


(Verse 14) emphatic conditions on


15-19. Curses proclaimed in sixfold repetition, the exact counterpart of blessing almost,
“The special modes in which these threats should be executed are desoribed in five groups of


denunciations,” verses 20-68. (Speak, Com.)


20-26, First group. Cursing (cf. Mal. ii. 2) on all they do, issuing in various forms of disease:


famine, and defeat in war.


not European phthisis.


vegetation, Brass (verse 23),


Vex, Confusion, as armies in defeat (cf, vii. 23; 1 Sam. xiv. 20),
Pestilence. Fatal epidemic (1 Kings viii, 837 ; Amos iv. 10).


Consumption. Wasting sickness,


Fever, Acute disease. Sword. Others drought or heat curse rests on


Hard, dry, and shut up from giving rain, Dust shall fall like
showers—dry, and as a burning sirocco (verse 25).


Smitten (cf. Lev. xxvi. 17 ; Is. xxx. 17).


Removed. Not dispersion among heathen, but driven from one place to another without
settlement, Meat (verse 26), a great horror, the case with many Jews in Antiochian persecution


(Pa. lxxix, 2),
330 e


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. GHAP. XXVIII,


Pe





27-34 Second Group. TLoathsome diseases, and humbled and oppressed by calamities. Botch,
black leprosy, peculiar to Eg. (Ex. ix. 9). Emarods, fistula or piles. Scab, scurvy, Jtch maost
malignant in East. Verse 28. Mental ailments, bewilderment, and paralysed with terror.
Mad (Jer. xxv. 16-18). Grope, like the blind, in painful uncertainty (Is. lix, 10), Verse 30,
Utter spoliation. Everything dear taken and not restored (verse 81). Might. All help would
fail (Gen. xxxi. 29).


35-46, Third Group. As such diseases separated from men #0 Israel would be separated,
rejected by God and brought under the dominion of strangers. Knees. Incurable leprosy,
affecting joints, extremities, and whole body. King. A prophetic anticipation. No king given
under Mosaic system, Serve. Seduced or compelled by idolatry as in Assyrian and Babylonish
capcivity (Jer. xliv. 17-19).


38. In their own land curse would rest upon labour and enterprise (Mic, vi. 15; Hag. i. 6.3
Joel i, 4). Worms, Weevil destructive to vines. Vers. 48, 44 compare with vers. 12, 13
Sign (ver. 46). A warning to other nations For ever. A remnant would return to faith and
obedience (Rom. ix. 27 ; xi. 5) :


47-57. Fourth Group. More severe calamities are described in subjugation to a foreign foe.


49. Nation. Some think the Chaldeans. “ But it needs only to read this part of the denun-
ciation and to compare it with the narrative of Josephus’ De Bell. Jud. VI. to see that its full
and exact accomplishment took place in the wars of Vespasian and Titus against the Jews, as
indeed the Jews generally admit.” Speak. Com. Eagle. Roman ensign (cf. Mt. xxiv. 28).
Fierce (ver. 50). Strong of face (ef. Dan. vii. 23), upon whom nothing would make impression.
The foe would consume cattle, besiege towers, and so distress them that they would eat the
fruit of their body, ¢.¢., their own children (2 Kings vi. 24-80 ; Jer. xix. 9), The effeminate man
een have an evil eye, i.¢., envy toward a brother who had nothing left to give to the revolting
vian


5§, The tender woman would be led to appease hunger by her young one, her after-birth, and
then with her children.


58—68. Ultimate issue of the curse in uprooting Israel and dispersing them if obstinate
fn rebellion Book the Law or Pentateuch. The diseases of Egypt would decimate them
remarkably fulfilled in persecution and war. God, who had done them good, would rejoice
over their destruction ; those who survived would be scattered (cf. Lev. xxvi, 33; Jer. xvi. 13 3
Eccles. xlviii. 15 ; Jos. De Bell. Jud, VI. ix. 2). They would find no rest (ef. Jer. xxvi. 36 3
Amos ix. 4). Life would be suspended on a mere visible thread, which might be snapped
any moment (ver. 66). Brought out of Egypt by mighty power, they would be carried back
in slave ships and become bondmen,


National OBEDIENCE aND UniIvensaL Prosperity.— Verses 1-6.


National obedience would be rewarded with extraordinary prosperity,


I. Prosperity in city and country (verse 8). The city needs God in busi-
ness ; councils, boards, and counting-houses would never increase and prosper
without Him, “ Except the Lord build the house, they labour in vain that
(are builders of it) build it; except the Lord keep the city, the watchman
waketh but in vain” (Ps. cxxvii. 1). The field—such a contrast from the
city, for ‘God made the country, but man made the town”—needs God’s
sunshine and shower. In trade and agriculture they would prosper if obedient.


II. Increase of population and of cattle (verse 4). “The fruit of thy
body.” A numerous offspring was promised to Abraham (Gen. xxii. 17).
Children healthy and happy “are a heritage of the Lord, and the fruit of the
womb is his reward” (Ps. exxvii. 3). There should be increase in cattle, kine,

nd tlocks of sheep, and the ground should produce enough to keep them.


III. Abundant supply of the necessities of life. In their basket and in
their store they would never want—enough for personal and domestic use, no
scarcity in anything. “ Hearken diligentiy unto me, and eat ye that which ig
. good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness. ee


CHAP. XXVIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY





TV. Safety in all journeys. “ When thou comest in and when thou goest
out” (verse 6). We need constant protection on sea and land, in train and
market traps. What wrecks, what accidents we read of! How we depend
upon God! Never safe, never easy, if He suspends His favour! If He bless,
go where we will and engage in what trade we like, all is well. ‘The blessing
of the Lord it maketh rich, and He addeth no sorrow with it.”


Errects of Diving BLEssING IN THE CrrcumsTANces or Lire.— Verses 7-10.


The effects of God’s blessing, like the influence of gentle showers, would be
diffusive and rest upon them in all circumstances and conditions of life. _ This
is seen in three relationships, to their enemies, to trade, and to other nations.


I, Supremacy over enemies (ver. 7). They shall be smitten and put to
flight in various ways. A small number would over-match a mighty host. On
God’s side we are on the right side. “ God and one man are always a majority ”
says one. “ There is no restraint to the Lord to save by many or by few.


II. Success in all undertakings. “In all that thou settest thine hand unto”
(ver. 8). In all handicraft and labour, in what they had and in what they did
they would be blessed. If rich, we must not be idle. Accumulation of wealth
may be accumulation of sorrow. Life which may be a continual feast may be a
constant vexation if not faithful to God. “Godliness is profitable unto all
things, etc.”


III. Increase of national glory. This glory ia special, universal and certain
1. Ln renewed covenant. God would exalt them in character and position
according to the oath which he made from the first. An oath never forgotten,
but specially mentioned and confirmed for help and encouragement to His
people. hey were a peculiar and special treasure unto Him above all people
2. Jn exalted holiness. “ An holy people unto himself” (ver. 9). He not only
takes them, but keeps them in the covenant. Establishes tlem in holiness and
truth. This is the highest honour, Outward prosperity decays like a flower,
withers away like Jonah’s gourd ; but the glory of holy character and conduct
is a glory that excels. 8. In great wealth. ‘Thou shalt lend unto many
nations and thou shalt not borrow” (ver. 12), The borrower is always
servant to the lender. But they would have money to lend, never be
reduced to straits, to dependence upon others—never become victims of
cruelty, nor even objects of sympathy. 4. In mighty power. “The head
and not the tail.” Never servile, but always supreme. “ Above only
rising in wealth, dignity, and power, and not beneath.” This realised in
the time of David and Solomon. Loyalty to God is the way to ascendency
among nations. “'T'he ancient and honourable he is the head.” 5. In
universal favour “ All people of the earth shall see and be afraid of thee
(ver. 10). When God is with us, and his glory reflected in holy life, men rever-
ence our grandeur and fear our authority. ‘I'he nearer to God, the greater our
influence over men. An obedient holy Church would be a formidable power,
“terrible as an army with banners.” All people would see its spiritual distine-
tions, feel its moral force and mysterious influence (Acts ii. 43 ; iv. 13; Jos. it
10, 11. ‘“'Ihere shall no man be able to stand before you : for the Lord your
God shall lay the fear of you and the dread of you upon all the land.”


WonverFvL Buiessinas.— Verses 1-14.


I. Blessings extensive in their character (vers. 3-7). Given to Israel first,
but for every nation that fears God and keeps His commands. Reaching into -
832


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OMAP. XXVIIL





the future and enduring for ever. 1. Wide in their sphere. For family and
sity, social mtercourse, business and war. Comprehending everything needful
for a nation’s wealth, health, and happiness, 2%. Abundant in variety. Rain
in Its seasons, increase of cattle and flocks, increase of wen and of honour.
Temporal and spiritual in going out and coming in, upon individuals, house-
holds and possessions.


II. Blessings certain in their bestowment. Not merely by the soil of
Canaan or the laws of Nature; but by special promise and special providence
“Thy God will set thee on high.” “ All these blessings shall come upon thee.”
We speak of “the reign of law,” and forget that all laws physical or spiritual
are ordained and controlled by one supreme lawgiver. Fidelity to God prompts
to right use of means and reaps the results of natural laws. “ All things work
together” (in harmony, not in opposition) for good (as the.result) to them that
love God” (Rom. viii. 28).


III. Blessings conditioned in their enjoyment.
without special design. The conditions of their tenure are plain—1. Attention
to God’s will. “If thou shalt hearken diligently ”—eager and diligent atten-
tion given to every word of God. 2. Obedience to God's commands. ‘To
observe and to do all His commandments ”’—obedience habitual, sincere, and
devout. 3. Perseverance in good. Unswerving in principle, apostacy would
provoke divine judgments. ‘These are the conditions, repeated in positive and
negative form, mm verses 2, 9, 13, and 14. “Thou shalt not go aside from any
of the words which I command thee this day, to the right hand or to the left,

to go after other gods to serve them ” (ver. 14).


Not given at random and


ImporTaNT PrincrPLes oF Lire


We may sum up the preceding thoughts in a brief sketch of the principles
which ought to influence our conduct.


I. That cur future happiness largely depends upon our present conduct.
“Tf thou shalt.” Man is free to choose, obedience is not forced. Life and
death set before us, which shall it be? ‘‘ Choose ye.”


II. That obedience to God alone will secure this happiness. God has
pledged this ; a kind providence fulfils the pledge, sends blessings in ¢ime and
place where most needed,


III. That therefore obedience is the best policy for nations and individuals,
There is intimate connection between conduct and destiny, between morality
and worldly prosperity. Regard to our own interests, to divine law, and to the
future welfare of the country urge decision for God—instant and earnest decision.
“For it is not a vain thing for you, because it is your life, and through this
thing ye sliall prolong your days in the land, whither ye go over Jordan to
possess it.”


HOMILETIC HINTS


Ver. 2. The happy journey. I. The
direction indicated, “ overtake thee.”
1. Started for God and His service, or
could not be overtaken. 2. Obedient
to the guide. ‘I'he voice heard. God’s
will revealed in Scripture or could not


AND SUGGESTIONS.


be fulfilled. 8. Progress made. No

loitering, no standing still, constantly

gong on. II. The blessings which

accompany those who walk in this

direction. All good things mentioned

shall come upon them, overtake
833


4AP, XXVIII, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY.





them and rest upon them in every
stage of their journey-—‘‘ Unexpectedly
befall thee. ‘Surely goodness and
mercy shall follow thee’ (Ps. xxii. 6),
as the evening sunbeams follow the
passenger, as the rock-water followed
the Israelites in the wilderness and
overtook them in their stations (1 Cor.
x. 4). ‘O continue,’ or draw out to
the length, ‘ thy loving kindness unto
them that know thee ’ (Ps, xxxvi. 11).
There will be a continued series, a con-
nexion between them to all such,”—


Trapp.


Ver. 5. Store. Cicero saith, one
friend should wish to another three
things only, to enjoy health, to possess
honour, and not suffer necessity. He
that observeth God’s commands, shall
have all these and more.— 7rapp.


Ver. 7. The routed enemy. This is
a world of conflict. Incessant war
between truth and error. This verse
describes I. The enemy’s attack. 1.
It was united : gathered into one force ;
2. Concentrated. II. The enemy’s
defeat. 1. Nota strategic movement ;
2. But a disorderly flight (dd. morning
at Waterloo : the evening cry—“ Let
him save himself who can”). IIL.
The cause of the defeat. 1. Not by
the courage of Israel, or sagacity of


——


Divine help is sometimes most appa-
rent (d/. Armada scattered by storm).
Learn (1.) 'I'o serve God in times of
peace, and then (2.) you may safely
trust him in times of war.—JBid,
Museum.


Vers. 9, 10. Israel’s pre-eminence.
1. In relationship to God. 2. In
temporal prosperity, abundant harvest,
etc. 3. In the influence over inter-
national counsels, Ver. 10. Be
afraid. The homage of the world to
moral worth. God’s name, God’s glory
reflected in human character, will not
merely command respect, but receive
the homage of conscience, and conver-
sation—Nebuchadnezzar and Darius
and Daniel, Herod and John, Pharoah
and Joseph.


Ver. 12. Heaven God’s storehouse,
earth depends upon this storehouse—
Canaan especially required rain. God
keeps the key, opens and shuts accord-
ing to his good pleasure, to discipline
and train the people.


Vers. 12, 13. 1. God in Nature,
giving rain and fruitful seasons. II.
God in history, bestowing wealth to
individuals, exalting nations to dignity
favouring the good and confounding
the evil.


leaders. 2. But the help of God.


DISOBEDIENCE AND ITs Penatties.— Verses 15-20.


The curses are given as counterparts of blessings (vers. 16-19) in sixfold
repetition. covering all relationships of life, corresponding to verses 3-6—Learn ;


I, If men are disposed to act rightly, they may be happy. Difficulties lie
not in the Lord, in the providence or in the sovereignty of God; all things are
ready with him, but men are unwilling. Jerusalem “ would not.” Obedience
is the surest way to happiness. “ Kighteousness tendeth to life.” Walking in
the precepts we enjoy the promises of God. God appeals to us, seeks to dispose,
not to compel us to do right, “ Will ye?” If we serve him, we find that in the
way of righteousness is life, and in the pathway thereof is no death.


II, If men persist in doing wrong they may be ruined. “If thou wilt
not hearken.” 1. Ruined in business. “In city and in field,” in commerce
and agriculture (ver. 16). If we love gain and forget God, our schemes may
be upset and security taken away. “ Better is a little with righteousness than
great ba without right” (Prov. xvi. 8). 2. Reduced in daily necessities,


oo


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ;: DEUT?T RONOMY. OMAP, XXVIII.





“Cursed in basket and in store” (ver. 27). (4d gives daily bread, sends
scarcity and want at his pleasure. Life is sustained, not by bread only, but by
his will, If in the midst of plenty, we offend God, the blessings may be
turned into curses. 8, Disappointed tn famtly prospects. No fruit of the
body : or if children, sickness, and death out them down in early bloom. No
lambs for the flock, no increase of kine; God does not bless and multiply them,
but suffers cattle to decrease and disappoints expectations. ‘“ The curse of the
Lord is in the house of the wicked: but he blesseth the habitation of the just”
(Prov. iii. 33). 4. Unsafe in journeys (ver. 19). A kind providence watches
over a good man ; but the wicked, through imprudence and neglect, often meet
with mishaps. God alone can make our journey prosperous (Gen. xxiv. 21),
and for this a Christian will pray (Rom. 1. 10). Such are some of the ways
in which a man may be ruined. The very reverse of former prosperity and
& sure indication of God’s providence.


III. Hence persistence in wrong doing is most foolish. Heedless, impetu-
ous, and thoughtless, stripped of all they esteem valuable, exposed to mischief,
and deaf to divine learning, sinners go on to their doom. Conduct most reckless
and most criminal! God expostulates but in vain. Fighting against God and
their own interests! What monstrous folly! What infinite mercy to prevent
irremediable destruction. “Ye fools, when will ye be wise?”


Frest Group: Sus anp Surrerinas.— Verses 20-26,


Judgments are grouped together in series. Examine each in order. From
the first group, learn—


I, That sin brings miseries. Sin and suffering are bound together by iron
chains. ‘This is—1. A doctrine of Scripture. ‘ He that pursueth evil, pursueth
it to his own death.” “The wages of sin is death.” 2. A law of nature,
“ Ourses never come causeless.” Sin is violation of natural order, and suffering
must follow as season follows season. 38. A Divine appointment. Misery springs
not ffom the dust, but is linked by Divine decree to evil doing. Moral laws are
as certain in operation and results as natural laws. We cannot evade the issues
of conduct; the seed determines the nature of the crop, and the sowing the
reaping.


II. That the miseries of sin are often most distressing. What a list in
these verses! 1. Consuming pestilence. Cleaving unto men, cemented and
inseparable—defying the skill of the physician and the efforts of sanitary
authorities. 2. Manifold bodily diseases (ver. 22). Gerws of disease float in
the atmosphere, and are developed by the conduct of depraved men. Moral
poison destroys physical beauty and life, and covers the body with sores and
diseases. 3. Terrible drought. Destroying vegetation by “blasting and
tmnildew ” (ver. 22). Early and latter rain withheld, and the earth hard and
incapable of cultivation. Heaven above as brass, and earth beneath ag iron.
The surface of the ground reduced to powder, which is taken up by strong winds
and poured down in showers of destructive violence (ver. 24). 4. Defeat in
war. A nation ever victorious through God, bereft of his help, smitten by the
enemy ; fleeing away in disgrace ; “ removed into all the nations of the earth,”
or left on the field exposed to indignity, “ meat unto all the fowls of the air,
and unto the beasts of the earth” (ver. 26). Sin brings ruin—ruin in everything
connected with the sinner—ruin in body and soul, in family and oer We


OBag. XXVIII. HOWILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


es


best serve our own interests, and preserve our well-be'ng, for this world and the
next, by acting in conformity with God’s word.


‘When sorrows come,
They come not single spies,
But in battalions,”—


AxsovE anD BENEATH.— Verses 23-24


These words have a moral application and may typify spiritual dearth,


I. Above abundant supplies. A storehouse full of good things, ready to be
poured out. The Holy Spirit and showers of divine blessings. “JT will pour
water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground.


II, Beneath, parched ground. The ministry needs quickening. The Church
languishes. Failure of effort and lack of conversions. The vineyard of God
unfruitful and the world perishive. ‘ Popularize your societies” is the cry of
many ; we say witalize them. ~*T1 beheld, and lo, the fruitful place was a
wilderness,”


III. How to remove the sterility. It is not designed to be permanent.
1. Forsake sin. This brings blight and curse. “He turneth a fruitful land
into barrenness for the wickedness of them that dwell therein.” 2. Pray to
God. “Prayer,” says Robert Hall, “is a spring which the Almighty never
fails to touch when He has a rich blessing to communicate to His church.”
Unexpected and marvellous things may be witnessed through prayer. ‘“ Prove
me now herewith, said the Lord of Hosts, if | will not open to you the windows
of heaven and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough te
receive it,”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND 8UGGESTIONS.


Ver. 20. The Threefold Curse.
Cursing, vexation, and rebuke. 1,
Morai in its cause. “ Wickedness of
thy doings ... hou hast forsaken
me.” 2. /axtensive in its scope. “In


Ver, 22. Seven Plagues. What a
fearful thing, to fall into the hands of
the living God !


all that thou settest thine hand unto.”
3. Long in its duration. “ Until.”
4. Terrible in its end. “ Destroyed.”
“Perish quickly,”. . .“The first of these
words seems to import that God would
blast all their designs; the second
relates to disquiet and perplexity of
mind arising from disappointment of
their hopes, and presages of approach-
ing miseries ; the third respects such
chastisements from God as would give
them a severe check and rebuke for
their sins and follies.”
336


Vers. 23, 24. The pitiless storm.
1, Endangering life, blinding eyes,
filling nostrils and mouth, making it
difficult to breathe and drive in the
street. 2. Creating mtense thirst ;
the lips crack, and no water to slake
burning thirst. 8. Affording no
shelter ; often no bush, no rock, no
friendly house to hide from the fierce
simoon.—COf, Dr, Porter, and Ld
and Bk. I, 311, Thom,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY, omar. xxvu1





Sroomp Group: Tas Power or Gop my THE AFFLICTION or Mew.— Verses 27-


Once the sinner having set himself against God, he of necessity suffers in
mind, body, and estate. The primitive laws of nature become executors of
God’s power and judgments.


I. God’s power displayed in human life. God is absolutely supreme, a law
unto Himself and does what He will among men. 1. Jn the human body
(ver. 27). God, who built our body, can smite it with disease ; acute and
loathsome ; torture every nerve, and render man hideous from “ the sole of the
foot to the crown of the head.” 2. In the human mind (ver. 28). Mental
sufferings are greater than bodily. If the mind is smitten and reason dethroned,
man is down and no physician can help him up. With a healthy body, elevated
desires and happy prospects, we may triumph over physical suffering. But
when body and nk are tortured, how terrible! “A wounded spirit, who can
bear?” 3. Jn the social circle (ver. 30). Wife, house and vineyard, everything
inost dear would be touched and taken by the curse. Sin robs of family joys
and family status. Domestic comfort, reputation and property all go. Often
from heights of worldly greatness, families fall to the lowest depths of
degradation and distress, ‘‘ For, 2, our fathers have fallen by the sword,
and our sons and our daughters and our wives are in captivity for this”
(2 Chron. xxix. 9).


II. God’s power displayed in national history. Nations are but men,
governed by the providence, according to the purpose of God. He can dash
them in pieces like a potter’s vessel. God has power. 1. Over the possessions
of nations, “Vineyards” are planted by Him. Sheep and oxen; “the cattle
on a thousand hills are His.” A nation’s property may be great, constantly
accumulating, and apparently secure, but if unjustly gained, ungratefully held
or wickedly abused, God may give it to the “ enemies and thou shalt have none
to rescue” (ver. 31), “He increaseth the nations and destroyeth them; He
envlargeth the nations and straiteneth (carrieth them away) again (Job xii. 23).
2. Over the population of nations, God builds up a people in number, as well
as ir material wealth, But “He breaketh down and it cannot be built again,”
Vice poisons the blood and destroys the life; war, famine and pestilence waste
the inhabitants of nations. Posterity, to whom are committed the interests of
commerce, the defence of the throne and the glory of our name, are often cut off
by divine judgments. “I will cut off man from off the land, saith the Lord.”


Til fares the land, to hastening ills a prey,
Where wealth accumulates, and men decay.


III. God’s power irresistible in its displays. Israel would see their children
carried captives but have “no micht in their hand ” to rescue them, and would
pine away in sorrow (ver. 32), 1. Powerless to resist His doings. Power is seen in
creation, sustenance and government of the world. “He is mighty in strength,”
the force of all forces, in heaven and earth. “ Men shall speak of the might ot
thy terrible acts.” ‘“‘I will work and who shall de it” (hinder, or turn it back)
Is. xliii. 13. 2. Powerless to resist his purpose. No man, no combination of
men can prevent the fulfilment of His plan, ‘ He is of one mind, and who can
turn Him?” Can a pebble hinder the advancing tide? God moves on in
majestic power. Nations are futile in their rage and opposition. “If he cut
off aud shut up (¢¢. arrest and imprison), or gather together (call an assembly
for judgment), then who can hinder Him?” (Job xi. 10). What folly to resist
God. ‘“ Why dost thou strive against Him?” Has He done you harm? Can
you succeed? Submit, avoid the curse and secure the blessing.”


. 337


=


omar, xxv. HOM/LETIO COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY:





a AE ES)


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS


Vers, 28, 29. The dreadful power
of suffering. ‘Smite thee with mad-
ness.” God’s judgments reach the
wind as well as body and estate, make
men a terror to themselves and drive
them to desperation,

Blindness, physical and mental, loss
of sight and confounding of under-
standing. Unable to devise means to
prevent or remove calamities, and led
to adopt those which tended directly
to their ruin. How true the saying,
Quos Deus vult perdere prius dementat
“Those whom God ake to destroy,
he first infatuates.” What a warning
to nations! What an awful type of
wicked men !


Judicial Blindness, 1. When truth
is rejected. 2. Moral light intellec-
tual and spiritual withdrawn. And 3.
Moral vision entirely obscured (cf
Rom. xi: 18 ; 2 Cor. ii 4). ‘They
met with (run into) darkness in the
daytime, and grope in the noonday
as in the night (ob. v. 14).


Vers.!27-34, Elements of Distress. —


1, Personal annoyances (ver. 27).
2. Mental derangement (ver. 28),
3. Providential reverses (a) In domes-
tic life (ver. 80). (6b) In commercial
life (vers, 31-33). Distress indicating
Divine agency. Divine severity.


Tamp Group: Taz Resection anp Dearapation or Israrn.— Verses 35-46,


We have here solemn gradation of evils. Confusion and anarchy,


uniting


with oppression, produce madness of heart ; disease pursues its ravages in most
malignant forms; labour and enterprise are blasted by the curse, and the


nation sinks into total disgrace and ruin.
I, Israel would be cut off from fellowship with God (ver.


35). From “the


sole of the fnot unto the crown of the head ” they would be smitten with loath-


some and incurable disease, “


a sore botch that cannot be healed.”


Leprosy


cut off from the society of man, so Israel would be excluded from fellowship


with God.


IJ, Israe] would become impoverished at home.
would be consumed. Locusts would devour the seed.
into the field, but would reap little (ver. 28) ;


1. The fruits of the land


the planting and dressing of the


vineyard would give no wine to drink, for the worm would devour the vine
(ver. 89) ; the trees would yield no oil to anoint, but would be uprooted or


destroyed (ver, 40). 2. They would fall into
have to borrow money instead of leuding (ver. 44)


an inferior position, They would


; strangers would rise above


them in wealth and social ravk, “become tbe head, aud they would be the


tail; their condition would be the o
upon their children.


yposite to verse 13. 38. A curse would rest
Children may deteriorate throu
abies the curse of God to future generations.


h sin, and carry in their


be hid upon thy seed for ever.”


srael as a nation would be rejected, but a rempant would be saved (cf. Is. x. 22;


vi. 13; Rom. ix. 27; xi. 5),


III. Israel would be a terror to spectators. “ For a sign and for a wonder”
(ver. 46), God’s doings are not simply wonderful, but signs of supernatural


interposition, illustrations of spiritual truth,


Never was a people such a sign


as the Jews, whose seed for thousands of years have been a wonder over the


face of the earth }


IV. Israel would be brought under subjection to a foreign Power.
(ver. 86). Their kings—Jehoichin (2 Kings,


wore taken into captivity
838


XXIV.


They might carry much —


1. They —


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY, mar. XXvim.





12, 14), Zedekiah (2 Kings, xxv. 7, 11), and Manasseh (2 Ch. xxxiii. 11)—were
taken away by foreign nations. Edward III. had the King of Scots and the
King of France captives together. Monarchs with body-guards and means of
protection cannot escape the vengeance of God. How hopeless that case when
the defender shares the fate of the subjects! 2. They were forced to serve other
gods. Asin Babylon and in Popish countries. ‘Therefore will I cast you out
of this land into a land that ye know not, neither ye nor your fathers; and
there shall ye serve other gods day and night, where I will not show you favour ”
(Jer. xvi. 18).


V. Israel would become a byeword among rations (ver. 37). Jews have
been despised among Mahometans, Pagans, and Christians. There is scarcely
any part of the globe where the prediction has not been verified. ‘In short,
the annals of almost every nation, for 1800 years, afford abundant proofs that
this has been, as it still is, the case, the very name of Jew being a universally
recognised term for extreme degradation and wretchedness, and is often applied
by passionate people in derision—‘ You Jew]’” “And now am I their song ;
yea, I am their byeword ” (Job xxx. 9).


Gop’s Conrnot oven Narure.—Verses 85 and 88-42.


I, In the material department. Earth with its produce, in fields and vine-
yards—heaven with its sun and its showers, are under the superintendence of
God and governed in the interests of men. The heavens satisfy the earth and
the earth yields its increase to mea ; but all things in heaven and earth depend
upon God. “So that without His bidding,” says Calvin, “ not a drop of rain
falls from heaven, and the earth produces no germ, and consequently a.l nature
would be barren, unless he gave it fertility by his blessing.” ‘‘ How long shall
the land mourn and the herbs of every field wither for the wickedness of them
that dwell therein.”


II. In the intelligent department. Over the bodies and minds of men.
The beauty of the one and the vigour of the other. The strength of the limb
(ver. 35) and the use of reason (ver. 28) come from Him. The condition of the
parents and the fate of the children are fixed by His providence (ver. 41). God
directs and controls all forces and all agencies to accomplish His designs,
None are beyond the reach and none ean escape the punishment of God. “All
troubles,” says Bishop Reynolds, “have their commission and instructions from
Him—what to do, whither to go, whom to touch, and whom to pass over.”


PanzntaL Drsapporrtuznt.— Verse 41.


I. Parents anticipate great things from children. Dutiful conduct and
reverence, joy, advancement, honour and prosperity. Gratitude, needful help
and preservation of family name,


II. Parents are often disappointed in their children. Sometimes cut down
by early death. They often turn out badly, a curse instead of a blessing. ‘They
are taken captives by evil habits and evil company—because disloyal and un-
natural. ‘God help me, my own children have forsaken me,” said James IL.
who stands forth a type of a deserted father. “A wise son maketh a glad
father : but a fooliak son is the heaviness of his mother.” pos


oHAP, XXVILL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY :





DEUTERONOMY.


=


HOMILETIO HINTS AND B8UGGESTIONA


Ver, 85, Diseases, 1. Painful.
2. a 8 Incurable (cf Is.
i, 4-6


Ver. 87. A Proverb. 1. A fact.
2. A dishonour. 3. A punishment.
4. A witness to prophetic truth. What
a fall from the original mission of
Israel. ‘‘ Poets, dramatists, have all
taken the Jew as the personation of
what is mean, grasping, and avaricious
(“Greedy as a Jew.” ‘“‘Avaricious as
a Jew”). Yet he is not more so,
intrinsically, than we are; it is cir-
cumstances that have made him s0;
it is persecution and ill-treatment that
have crushed him. And all this is the
fulfilment of prophecies old as the
days of Moses, and yet not the justi-
fication of his persecutors,” — Dr,


Cumming. This teaches two im-
portant lessons: First, he explains
this severe persecution, permitted by
God to fall upon them because they
were set up as a model nation chosen
from heathendom, enriched with privi-
leges, glory and position. But they
were untrue, forsook God; and the
height of the dignity to which they
were raised, is the measure of the
depth of degradation to which they
have sunk for abuse of it. Secondly,
how impossible to escape the conclu-
sion that the Book of Deuteronomy is
inspired | The predictions in this
chapter, and in the ensuing one, are
so specific, so literal, that they carry
in their own bosoms the tests of in-
spiration.—{Jdem).


Fourta Group: DisoBeprence To Gop RESULTING m8 SERVITUDE s0 Max.
Verses 47-57.


Every department of national life has been under the curse; yet, in love to
His people and earnest desire to preserve them from wrath, the faithful servant
of God goes further, and pictures greater severity in bondage to heathen yoke,
Having forsaken God, they were left in servitude to man.


I, If Israel would not obey God, they would be compelled to serve enemies.
“ Because thou servedst not the Lord, therefore shalt thou serve thine enemies ”
(ver. 47, 48). 1. Serve in hunger and want. “In hunger, thirst, nakedness
and in want of all things.” ‘ Man’s life,” says Calvin, “is not shut up in bread,
but hangs on the Sovereign will and good pleasure of God.” He can withhold
bread, take away water, create natural and spiritual distress in schools, churches,
and nations, 2. Serve in vigorous oppression, “He shall put a yoke of irop
about thy neck” (ver. 49). Instead of the easy yoke of God, they would be
slaves to a cruel foe (¢f Jer. xxvii. 11, 12). Those who refuse reasonable service
to God, will have to bow to the tyranny of sin.


II. These enemies would be most barbarous and cruel. This description
might apply to the Chaldeans when compared with Moabites, Philistines and
other neighbours in Judea, but the Romans answer best to it. 1. Hnemies
which scorn the distant foe. ‘'hey came “from far,” from France, Spain and
Britain—then considered the end of the earth. 2. Mnemies which defy the
strength of battlements (ver. 52). All fortified places to which the people
escaped were taken, and the walls of Jerusalem razed to the ground. 38. Hnemtes
which have no pity for the people, “ Not regard the person of the old, nor
show favour to the young” (ver. 50), Josephus says the Romans had no mercy
for infants and spared neither sex nor age. Cruel and insensible to human
instincts, 4. Anemies of ruthless vengeance, “ Fruit of thy cattle, fruit of thy
land,” oi consumed. The invader destroyed everything within reach, every —


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. XXVIIL





district through which they passed was strewed with wrecks of devastation.
5. Hnemies of sudden approach. Swift as an eagle—the ensign of the standards
of the Roman army—pouncing violently upon its prey. It is true morally and
physicaily that ‘where the carcase is, there will the eagles be gathered
together.”


ITI. In their distress and siege Israel would be driven to horrible extremities
(vers. 53-57). 1. Famine would lead them to eat the fruit of their own body
(ver. 53). Fulfilled 2 Kings vi. 25, 28, 29; Lam. ii. 20; iv. 10; Baruch ii. 3 ;
and in the Roman siege. 2. Famine would create domestic jealousy. The
man of Inxury would envy his relatives if better off than himself ; or avoid
them in jealousy and fear lest they should discover and demand a share of his
unnatural viands. ‘In every house where there was any appearance of food,
the dearest relatives fought each other for it—even mothers their infants,”—
(Josephus). 3. Famine would destroy natural affection. The delicate and sensitive
woman would be unrestrained by natural affection and appease her hunger with
her offspring and afterbirth. In the siege of Samaria, a woman boiled her son
(2 Kings v. 28, 29), which was also done in the siege by the Romans. Famine
was so terrible, that ‘ for want of all things,” the leather of girdles, shoes and
shields, and even stale dung of oxen were eagerly devoured (cf. Ezek. v. 10 ;
Jer. xix. 9). Such were the awful consequences of forsaking God,


One woe doth tread upon another's heel,
So fast they follow.—Shakspeare.


Thus woe succeeds woe, as wave a wave.— Herrick,


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 47. Joyful Service. I. Its
Motive. God’s goodness in personal
mercies, family mercies, spiritual
mercies. II. Its embodiment in secret
and social devotion, in songs of praise,
grateful offerings and loyal obedience.
Here we have duty and favour, “ the
duty of delight,” as a modern writer
would say, labour and sunshine. “The
love which does not lead to labour will
soon die out; and the thankfulness
which does not embody itself in sacri-
fices is already changing to ingrati-
tude,”


Vers. 47, 48. The dread alternative.
God or man, with joyfulness or in want,
ete,


Vers. 49-52. Foreign conquest.
I. The foe described swift, cruel and


strong. II. The mischief he commits.
III. The impotence to resist.


Ver. 52. Confidence in strongholds.
Jews seldom ventured to fight in open
fields. They trusted to high and fenced
walls, In aspecial manner they con-
fided in the strength and situation of
Jerusalem, as Jebusites, former inhabi-
tants did before them (2 Sam. v. 6, 7).
Vain is the confidence of the sinner.
His stronghold a refuge of lies
(Is. xxviii. 15). Divine Retribution.
1. Discovers every subject. None can
hide from God. 2. Overturns every
stronghold. 8, Penetrates every place.
“Prince’s palaces are not above, the

or man’s cottage is not beneath the
judgment of God.” God is the only
stronghold in whom we should trust.
Christ is the refuge, flee to him |


Tur Giorious anp Frarrut Namz.— Verse 58.


The name of Jehovah most prominent here to check the downward course,


secure glory and regard, Pause and consider its nature and demands.


b4}


OnaP. xxvii. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY.


a


I. A Name revealed in Scripture. Not known to patriarchs, or if known
not understood in its fulness and blessing (Ex. vi. 3). It was a preface to the
law (Ex. xx. 2) and a special revelation to Moses (Ex. iii, 18-15 ; vi. 3), indi-
cating a God faithful and self-existent, absolute being, and infinite perfection ;
a Name above every name, never to be uttered without reverence, the sanctity
of which aggravates crime against it. It is the scriptural, the theocratic name
of God.


Il, A Name written in Nature. In letters of burning splendour in heaven
above and earth beneath ; “plorious” in goodness and “ fearful” in power,
In thunder, lightning, and earthquake we have displays of power and majesty.
Men speak of laws and forces of nature; true science discerns God, and spells
his name in all departments (¢/. Ps. civ.) : “For that Thy name is near Thy
wondrous works declare ” (Ps, Ixxv. 1).


III, A Name illustrated in Providence. It has been vindicated and honoured
in history—1. In displays of power. “ Twice ”—i.6., again and again in his pro-
vidential government of the world—“have I heard this, that power belongeth
unto God” (Ps, Ixii. 11). God repeats the lesson if man will only hear
(Job. xxxili. 14). 2. In displays of judgment. In Egypt and Babylon, in the
Flood, in the destruction of Sodom and Jerusalem, God’s “judgments are
manifest ” (Rev. xv. 4), 38. In displays of mercy. Mercy as well as power
belongs to God (Ps. Ixii. 12); mercy consonant with justice—mercy to the
obedient and justice to offender. “The name of the God of Jacob (the mani-
fested power and faithfulness of the God who saved Jacob in the day of trouble
(Gen. xxxii.) defend thee (lit. exalt, set thee on high and in a secure place ”)
(Ps. xx. 1). ‘hus have we a continual manifestation of this memorial name
(Hos. xii. 5), “This is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all
generations (Ex. iii, 15).


Firra Group: Osstivare REBELLION BRINGS UTTER Rurn— Verses 58-68.


These are not expressions of vindictive feeling. God delights to bless, not
to curse. But they describe natural consequences of transgression. In its
beginning, progress and ultimate issue fearful is rebellion—constant rebellion
against God.


I. Obstinate Rebellion increases calamities. Sin unpardoned develops new
symptoms, and as the evil grows greater miseries follow. 1. J¢ prolongs and
intensifies those we have. “The Lord will make thy plagues wonderful, great
plagues of long continuance (ver. 59).” God must rule. Afflictions are not taken
away until the desired end is accomplished, verses 23,20. 2, It brings others
upon us, “‘ Every plague not written will the Lord bring upon thee,” ver, 61.
(rod has infinite resources. As in the case of Job the climax is terrible. “Thou
reneweat thy witnesses (marg. plagues) against me, and increases thine indigna-
tiom upon me ; changes and war (successions and a host, #.¢., one host succeed-
ing another) are against me” (Job. x. 17).


II. Obstinate rebellion turns God’s love into anger. His procedure towarda
men is changed by their disobedience. 1. Jn rejecting His people. “ As the
Lord rejoiced to do good go will he rejoice to destroy, bring to nought and pluck
off” (ver. 63). The loss of children, the decay of prosperity and future hope
grievous, But when God withdraws His presence and providence, nothing can
sustain a church or people. Awful to be forsaken of God. To have his
countenance turned from us and against us in trouble—to have frowns instead of

842 ¢


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY,  onap. xxvin.





smiles, must be hell and not heaven. ‘ Woe also to them when I depart from
them.” 2. In scattering them abroad. “The Lord shall scatter thee among
all people,” etc. (ver. 64). Uprooted from Canaan, and driven to wander
homeless to the ends of the earth. If no true allegiance to God, country,
societies, and creeds cannot unite and secure. “The Lord scattered them
abroad ” (Gen. xi. 8). 3. In reducing them to slavery. ‘“ Ye shall be sold for
bondsmen ” (ver. 68). Once they marched triumphant out of Eyypt, but they
would return as slaves in the ships of Tyre, Sidon, and Rome (Josephus).
Those who live in luxury often lose their liberty and become reduced to
servitude—servitude disgraceful and most severe. “So they came into the
land of Egypt, for they obeyed not the voice of the Lord” (Jer. xliii. 7).


III. Obstinate rebellion endangers human life. “Thy life shall hang in
doubt before thee” (ver. 66). Endangers. 1. By grievous suffering. Diseases
of Egypt were brought upon them. Often acute physical disease, hideous and
loathsome. Sometimes mental agony, sorrow of mind extinguishing the hope of
life, or rendering it impossible to bear. “The days of affliction have taken
hold (fast hold) upon me (as armed men besieging a city) a sad contrast to
former days (Job xxx. 16). 2. By constant risks. ‘here was no assurance, no
certainty of life (ver. 66). Dangers, real and imaginary, create constant fear.
Life’s thread may break. Its length may be unexpected and strong, but time
will cut it down. ‘For live how we can, yet die we must.”—(Shakspeare.)
8. By premature death. Wickedness shortens life, ‘The evil that men do,” as
well as the good, “lives after them.” “ Deceitful men shall not live out half
their days” (Ps. lv. 23). Sin by its own nature and the righteous judgments
of God upon it, bring men to untimely ends; but piety contributes to the
length and enjoyment of life. ‘The fear of the Lord prolongeth days, but the
years of the wicked shall be shortened” (Prov. x. 27). Sinner, stop lest thy
sin rise to presumption and forbearance end in certain death! ‘“ Neither be
thou foolish ; why shouldest thou die before thy time?” (Eco, vii. 17).


IV. Obstinate rebellion destroys all remedy. Wilful opposition to the
word of God leads to judicial blindness and destruction. When God abhors, he
will soon abandon, Mighty population, regal sovereignty, military prowess and
national prestige will be smitten like a flower. No remedy, no security against
the judgment of God but submission, That kingdom is strongest, most splendid,
and most secure which makes God its sovereign. Otherwise hated, forsaken,
cast away! Divorced from God, forsaken of God. “I will love them no


more,”
Heaven gives the needful, but neglected call.
What day, what hour, but knocks at human hearts,
To wake the soul to sense of future ecenes,
~— Young,


Gop-rorsaken Lirn— Verses 68-68.


When God withdraws, nothing can sustain a church or nation, When the
ark of God was taken Ichabod was pronounced. Present affections only fore-
shadow future judgments, ‘“ Woe also to them when I depart from them.,


I. A life of bitterness and sorrow. 1. Bitterness in mind and heart. Con-
science stings and fears alarm. Sin is bitterness and gall. Lord Byron declared
that his days were “ in the yellow leaf,” the flowers and the fruits were gone,
“the worm, the canker, and the grief are mine alone.” 2 Bitterness in condi-
tion and prospect Without ease, peace and comfort now (ver. 65) ae nothing


OHAP, XXVIIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.
Sr en ee


better in the future. “I close my eyes in misery, and open them without
hope,” said the poet Burns, in dying hours,


II. A life of bondage and misery. Bondage to lust, evil habits, and fear
of death. Misery is ever linked to sin; like a scorpion, vice brings its own
torment (Rev. ix. 5). Whatever the sinner does, he finds no relief. ‘ Which
way I move is hell, myself am hell,” Milton makes Satan say. “Thy way and
thy doings have procured these things unto thee ; this is thy wickedness, because
it is bitter, because it reacheth unto thine heart,”


III, A life excluded from God’s Inheritance. “ Plucked off the land” and
driven into captivity and death. Sin drove man from Eden, and idolatry the
Jews from Canaan; so unbelief and rebellion will exclude from heaven.
Sinners cannot enter the kingdom of God on earth, and will be disinherited at —
last. What a warning to all in the bosom of the Church and under the sound
of the Gospel! How sad a godless life! “I will forsake them, and I will
hide my face from them, and they shall be devoured, and many evils and
troubles shall befall them ; so that they will say in that day, ‘ Are not thes
evils come upon us because our God is not among us? ’” (Deut, xxxi. 17)


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONE


Ver. 58. The Divine Name—1. In
its glorious nature: “glorious and
fearful.” 2. In its covenant relation ;
“the Lord thy God.” 38, In its re-
quirements upon life: “that thou
mayest fear.” The duty of fearing
God. I. What God requires of us
That we regard him (1) with reveren-
tial awe; (2) with obedient love ; (3)
with undivided attachment. II. What
we must expect at his hands if we
comply not with his requisition ; our
plagues also shall be wonderful
(ver. 59)—(1) here; (2) hereafter,—
C. Simeon, M.A.


Vers. 59-64. Great evils, 1. Smitten
by the judgment of God with sickness
severe, long and increasing (vers. 59-
62). 2. Rejected in the covenant of
God (ver. 63). “Greatly as the sin of
man troubles God, and little as the
pleasure may be which he has in the
death of the wicked, yet the holiness
of his love demands the punishment
and destruction of those who despise
the riches of his goodness and long-
suffering ; 80 that he displays his glory
in the judgment of the wicked no less
than in blessing and prospering the
righteous” (Keil). 8. Scattered by

844


the providence of God (ver. 64).
4, Forced to reject the worship of God.
“Thou shalt serve other gods ” (ver.64)
—lifeless, senseless gods, which hear
not prayer nor deliver from distress.


“ When sorrows come
They come not single spies
But in battalions,”


Ver. 683. Great must be wickedness
which provokes God to reject and hate
His people. Notice, 1. Hxclusion from
the blessings of the covenant. Driven
from the house of God, loss of out-
ward privileges and position. God
deprives sinful nations of prestige and

osition, removes their candlestick for
ingratitude, and casts them off for
wickedness. 2. Uprooted from the
land. God plants and uproots, He
can overturn a people as well as pluck
up a tree, Nations may have flourish-
ing trade and nobility grand motitoes,
but God candestroy their prosperity root
aud branch; leave them without power
to revive inwardly or outwardly, We
cannot flourish without God. “He
shall take thee away, and pluck thee
out of thy dwelling-place, and root
thee out of the land of the living”
(Ps, lii. §),


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. XXVIII.





No Repose mw a Gopiess Lirs.— Verse 65. :

When Israel forsook God He forsook them. The predictions were fulfilled,

and they were worse than fugitives and vagabonds in the earth, without settle-
ment and ease. There is no repose in a Godless life.


I. This truth is illustrated in Jewish history. The Jews have been driven
from land to land; from Russia, Poland and Spain. For 1800 years or more,
they have been homeless, restless, and wretched—a byeword and a proverb.


II. This truth is confirmed by experience. God is the centre of rest, the
fountain of bliss, and away from Him we can never find peace. “ ‘Thou madest
us for thyself, and our heart is restless until it repose in thee” (Augustine).
1. The ungodly find no satisfaction in sin. Sin is disorder, disease, and creates
dissatisfaction, bitterness, and anguish. Lord Chesterfield “run the silly rounds
of pleasure,” but had “no wish to repeat the nauseous dose.” ‘There is no
peace to the wicked ; their hearts are “like the troubled sea when it cannot
rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt” (Is, lvii. 20,21). 2. The ungodly find
no comfort in affliction. They are full of fear and of “tossings to and fro.”
Distracted with anxiety, accused by conscience and tormented with guilt, they
have restless nights and wearisome days. Sleep, the gift of God, and “ tired
nature’s sweet restorer,” never refreshes them. Phantoms of horror terrified
Tiberius and Caracalla, and fearful visions murdered the rest of Nero. ‘‘ When
I say, my bed shall ease my complaint, then thou scarest me with dreams and
terrifiest me with visions” (Job vii. 4,13). 3. The ungodly have no hope in
death. ‘No ease” nor foundation “for the sole of the foot” on the rock.
Solon’s maxim not far wrong—‘“ Call no man happy till death.” Whatever life
may be, “‘ What is the hope of the hypocrite (godless person), though he hath
gained, when God takes away (cuts off, 6, 9; Is. xxxviii. 12) his soul?”
(Job xxvii. 8). There is rest in Christ, hope in the Gospel. Come and believe-—
“ Ye shall find rest,”


Who builds on leas than an immortal base,
Fond as he seems, condemns his joys to death,


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 65. Triple sorrows, 1. A Ver.66. Lifein suspense. ‘* Hang


trembling heart, as opposed to a fixed
and courageous heart. A heart with-
out dread of detection, disgrace and
punishment. ‘Virtue is bold and
goodnessneverfearful.”—/(Shakspeare).
2. Failing of eyes. Weary of dark-
ness and light, day and night a terror.
When the eyes of the soul are put out,
the spiritual universe is midnight and
despair. ‘The eyes of the wicked
shall fail.” 8. Sorrow of mind. Men-
tal agony depriving of rest, affecting
health and spirits. ‘‘ Full of scorpions
is my mind,”—(Shakspeare).
Better be with the dead
Than in the torture of the mind to lie
Iu restless ecstacy.—Shakspeare.


in doubt, lit. “ thy life shall be hanging
before the, é.¢. shall be hanging as it
were on a thread, and that before
thine eyes."—(Speak. Com.) ‘This
might be taken as a warning. (The
sword of Damocles). ‘Take it as a fact.
1. Because naturally uncertain. 2.
Because constantly endangered. Risks
through guilt, disease, enemies, and
divine judgments. ‘Take warning, the
thread may be cut any moment. What
indifference? “ ‘Though death be be-
fore the old man’s face it may be be-
hind the young man’s back.” —(Seneca).
Serious things to-morrow cost Cesar
and Archias their lives.


348


omar. xxv, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY.





Ver. 67. A sad picture of a weary
life. Deprived of comfort— of physical
health and mental vigour under the
curse of God. Such a life intolerable.
“T loathe it” @WJob vii. 16). Let us
learnfrom this chapter that our supreme
interest is to cultivate the frieudship


and obey the word of God. Then

blessings and not curses! Blessings

here, blessings for ever !

Well may your hearts believe the truths I tell ;

"Tis virtue makes the bliss where’er we dwell,
—Collins.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XXVIII.


Vers. 1-6. Prosperity. Some years
ago, when preaching at Bristol, among
other notes | received to pray for
individuals, one was this—‘ A person
earnestly desires the prayers of this
congregation, who is prospering in
trade.” “Ah!” gaid I to myself,
here is a man who knows something
of his own heart; here is a man who
has read the scriptures to some pur-
pose.” —Jay.


Vers. 7-10. Blessing upon thee. God
gives us what we have, not so much
that we may have it, but that we may
do good. Kverything in life, even the
best earned rewards, are seeds sown
for a future harvest.—Bengel. Ver. 9.
Keep. 'the virtue of Paganism was
strength ; the virtue of Christianity is
obedience.—Hare.


Ver. 18. Above. As long as time
endureth there will be distinction of
rank, not simply for the weal of the
great, but for the economy and safety
of the world.—(“. Davies). True
elevation does not consist in the
elevation of nature, in the material
or exterior hierarchy of beings. ‘l'rue
elevation, an elevation essential and
eternal, is one of merit, one of virtue,
Birth, fortune, genius, are nothing
before God.—Lacordaire.


Vers. 28, 29. Madness is the last
stage of human degradation. It is the
abdication of humanity. Better to die
® thousand times.— Napoleon I.


Ver. 30. House. If men lived like
men indeed, their houses would be
temples — temples which we should
hardly dare to injure, and in which

846


it would make us holy to live.--
Ruskin.


Ver. 81. Rescue. As the net does
not spring up without catching the
bird, can ye imagine that when de- —
struction passes by, ye will not be
seized by it, but will escape without
injury.— Hitzig.


Ver. 34. Mad for sight. A man
in great misery may so far lose his
measure as to think a minute an hour.
—Locke,


Ver. 86. King. The lot of a de-
throned king, who was born a king
and nothing more, must be dreadful
The pomp of the throne, the gewgaws
which surround him from his cradle,
which accompany him step by step
throughout life, become a necessary
condition of his existence.— Napoleon 1,


The king’s name is a tower of strength,
Which they upon the adverse party want,
—Shakspeare


Ver. 87. A proverb, Reputation
is gained by many acts, but is lost by
one.—(Bacon). It is hopeless to re-
cover a lost reputation.—/dem.


The purest treasure mortal times afford

Is spotless reputation ; that away,

Men are but guilded loam, or painted clay.—
Shakspeare.


Vers, 45 46. Wonder.


Think not the things most wonderful
Are those beyond our ken ;

For wonders are around the paths,
The daily paths of men.— Hawkshaw.


Ver. 47. Joyfulness. I have often
read my duty and my sin in this versa


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; DEUTERONOMY.


OHAP, XXIX,


eee tea eaten pioneer tinier ianeorensipesinementisensimiasaaamsisinsitiooniiasernmninciaaieninn


Notwithstanding innumerable proofs
of His munificence how deficient our
songs in number, and how languid in
performance! In the commonest en-
gagements of life, and in our daily
enjoyments was sweet ingredient
mingled, it would really enhance the
worth of everything, however otherwise
inconsiderable-—Dr. W. Hamilton.


Vers. 58-57. Hat. During a famine
in Italy a.p. 450, parents ate their
children. Eaters of human flesh—
(Anthropophagi) — have existed in
all ages.


Famine has a sharp and meagre face.


Return, my senses range no more abroad,
He only finds his bliss who seeks for God.—
Parnell,


Vers, 59-61.


One woe doth tread upon another’s heel
So fast they follow.


Long continuance,


—Shakespeare.


Thus woe succeeds woe, as Wave & wave.
—Herrick.


Ver. 63. Rejoice to destroy. The
wrath of man is the rage of man ; but
the wrath of God is the reason of God,
—Bp. Reynolds.


Not thou, O Lord, from us, but we
Withdraw ourselves from thee.


*Tis death in an undress of skin and bone—
Dryden. —French,


Ver. 66. Hang. My life hangs by
a single thread ; but that thread is in
@ Father's hand—J. H. Avans,


Ver. 58. Fear. Disobedience is
the beginning of evil, and the broad
way to rain—D. Davies.





CHAPTER XXxIX.


Oxrricat. Notzs.—The discourse is continued—the subject of that is the covenant of Israel
with God—its privileges conferred and obligations imposed. Besides (ver. 1), not a new
covenant, but repetition, renewal of the old at a suitable time.


2-9. Obligation to obey on account of what God had done for Israel, All Israel. Repre-
sented by Elders (cf. ver. 10). Temptations. Testings, provings (cf. iv. 34; vii. 19). Not given,
They felt no want and did not ask. ‘This complaint not te excuse weakness, but to direct them
in right course. I (ver. 5) Jehovah introduced as speaking. Clothes and shoes preserved
classified with the gift of manna, therefore better understood, not as a natural supply from flocks
and herds, but as a miraculous act. Know (ver. 6). Practical knowledge of God, design of
this goodness, ver. 7; cf. ii, 32; ili. 1; ver. 8; ef. iii 12, 13, 9 Prosper. Lit, act wisely
(xxxii. 29; Jos. i731 K. ii. 8. “The connexion of wisdom in oonduct and prosperity in
circumstances ia noteworthy ” (Sp. Oom.).


16-15. Summons to enter the covenant afresh that they may really be God’s people. Your
tribes, lit. your captains, your tribes, your elders, etc. The word “ tribes” apparently denotes
all not in office. All were represented if not present, Stranger represents all foreign servants
bought with money (Ex. xii. 44) or taken in war. Little ones represented by parents or
guardians, Menial servants not excluded. None exempt from the terms of national covenant,
which embraced not only those living, but posterity (ver. 14).


16-29. Once more denouncing rejection in ease of apostasy, or breach of covenant. Ver
16, 17 not parenthetic asin the A.V. Ver. 18 stands in close connection not with ver. 15, but
with what imme:iately precedes. The people are reminded (vers. 16, 17) of what they had
witnessed in Egypt and on the journey, of the vilenees of idolatry, and that experience is urged
(ver. 18) as a motive for shunning that heinous sin (Sp. Com.) Idols (ver, 17), it. clods or stocks
which can be rolled about (Lev. xxvi. 30). Wer. 18. Root, a picture of destructive fruit of
idolatry. Gall, hemlock (Hos, x. 4; Am. vi. 12), Wormwood (Jer. ix. 15; Lam. iii. 19), both
terms indicate distress and trouble resulting from ein; ver. 19, bless, conyratulate himself ;
imagination, Ué. in firmness, hardness of my heart (from Hebrew word, to twist together, to be
tough or firm). Add, a proverbial expression, rather difficult, denoting the addition of indulg-
So EN! ape el earl ay malas daa dae Poe


OHAP. XXIX. HOMILETIU COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.
SESE


20-21, Such cannot escape God’s anger, which, like smoke, breaks forth in fire (Ps. bxxiv. 1);
blots out (ch. ix. 14, xxv. 19, Ex. xvii. 14).


22-23, Effects or sin would blast the once rich and flourishing region s future generations
astonished would ask tke meaning of this devastation (ver. 24), and would receive the reply,
the strokes of God had smitten the land and its inhabitants, Ver. 29 expresses humble
submission and solemn warning. Secret, hidden things belong to God, counsels and purposes
concerning nations, reasons of nis dealings with them, together with time and methods, &e. ;
revealed injunctions, threatenings, and promises are things with which we have to do whicb
we should teach our children,


Sprarrva, Dutness.— Verses 1-9.


God had done marvellous things for Israel, yet they were unchanged and


disobedient ; insensible to miracle and unable to discern the purpose of God in
his dealings with them.


I. God performs striking events in man’s history. Israel’s history was
eventful from beginning to end. 1, Wonderful deliverance. Egypt was
plagued, they were set free ; some were smitten, they were preserved. “I gave
eople for thy life” 2. Continual guidance. They knew not, could never
Lage discovered the way, but they were not lost. “I have led you ” (ver. 5).
God guides in the residence, journeys, and enterprises of life. 3. Daily support
(vers. 5 and 6). Food and raiment, Their little stock, increased by Egyptian
gifts and the spoils of Amalekites, by a distinguished act of grace was preserved
for forty years. 4. Victory over enemies (ver. 7). So now God delivers from
fear, temptations, and persecutors. 5. Acquisition of inheritance (ver. 9).
Land taken from their enemies to enrich them. “Land is a part of God’s
estate in the globe ; and when a parcel of ground is deeded to you, and you walk


over it, it seems as if you had come into partnership with the original Proprietor
of the earth."—H. W. Beecher.


II. These striking events reveal God to men. “That ye might know that
Tam the Lord your God” (ver. 6). They manifest God, and are designed to
educate and train us to obedience. 1. In terrible Judgments. “'The Lord is
known by the judgment which he executeth.” 9% Jn signal mercies. God
bestows favours to lead us to repentance and faith. Turn from speculations to
facts, Our life is not shaped by fate, nor directed by chance. It is crowded


with mercies and judgments—events which reveal the hand of God, illustrate
the blessing of obedience and the danger of sin,


III. Men do not always understand these events. Israel had not “a heart
to perceive and eyes to see,” notwithstanding their wonderful history and varied
experience. How does this happen? 1, Because they are thoughtless. We
must think, to feei—seek, to know. We can never comprehend without thought,
nor discern God without meditation. “'The works of the Lord are great, sought
out by them that have pleasure therein.” 2. Because they are alienated in
feeling. If we take no interest in a person, we do not wish to know and serve
him. If our hearts are alienated from God, we are blind to his manifestations
in nature. We lose power “ to retain God in knowledge” (Rom. i. 28), become
void, spiritually stupid, whatever our boasted science and philosophy. 3. Because
judicially blind. Neglect or abuse any faculty, it is taken away. Shut your
eyes and you cannot see, close your hearts and you cannot feel. Vision without
perception, hearing without instruction, is the result of sin and the appointment
of God. “Go unto this people and say—Hearing ye shall hear, and shall not


vuderstand,” ete. (Is. vi. 9; Acts xxviii. 24, 27).
848


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. XxXIX.





IV. When men will nct understand these striking events they are guilty,
No excuse whatever. ‘There was no want of evidence and no lack of instruction.
They could not say let God speak louder, fuller, or oftener. Every form of
lesson, in every available method, was given. 1. Zhe events are revealed to the
senses. Israel saw the destruction of their enemies. The pillar of cloud and
the pillar of fire—the glory of God were visible. But nothing will touch the
heart if the eyes are closed. “ Unto thee it was shewed that thou mightest know
' that the Lord he is God.” 2. The events are interpreted by God’s Word.
Newspapers are needful, but an intimate acquaintance with scripture will help
to solve the problems and discover the meaning of life. Providence and
scripture are pages of the same volume, one expounds what the other performs.
“Seek ye out of the Book of the Lord and read” (Is, xxxiv. 16). 3. The
events may be understood by prayer. God teaches when we apply to Him—gives
knowledge and wisdom to those who lack and seek (Jas, i. 5-7). In this school
did Joseph and David get their learning. If dull, God will teach us, and ‘“ who
teacheth like him?” So patiently, so gratuitously and so efficiently. His
lessons are grandest in their nature and most vital in their interests, Let us
listen and learn; let us see and understand. If we close our eyes to the
wonders of life and our hearts to the appeals of the gospel we may be given up
to spiritual hardness and helplessness. “ Make the heart of this people fat, ete.’


Men’s BLuypNEss IN SPIRITUAL THINGS.—Verse 4


Consider this complaint—

I. As uttered by Moses against the people of his charge. They had “seen”
with their bodily eyes all the wonders that had been wrought for them. They
anderstood not. 1. The true character of that dispensation. 2. The obligations
which it entailed upon them.


II, As applicable to ourselves at this day. 1. By the great mass of nominal
Christians the nature of the gospel is very indistinctly seen. 2. The effects of
it are very partially experienced. Address—(1.) Those who are altogether
blind. (2.) Those who think they see. (3.) Those whose eyes God has opened.
—C, Simeon, M.A.


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 1, 2. Renewed covenant. 1. human life. Temptations, trials to


This needful for us. (1.) When its
conditions are violated. @) When
laced in fit circumstances, Israel in

oreb and about to enter the land.
(3.) When leaders are taken by death.
Moses, about to die, anxious to ex-
pound and enforce the law, urges to
obedience. 2. This displays God’s
goodness to us. Deep concern, con-
 tinual watchfulness and activity, repe-
tition of instruction and grief at
unbelief. ‘O that there was such a
heart in them” (Ch. v. 29).


Ver. 8. Divine methods of human
training. Elements of education m


teach dependence and strengthen faith,
Signs which discover law and reveal
God’s presence. Miracles, indicative
of supernatural power to control events
and impress the heart. But tnsight is
required to receive and practice the
lesson. Be “men who understand the
times.”


Ver. 4. A great danger. Lest the
great things of this life blind men to
spiritual interests and spiritual peril.
‘hus become a bait by which they are
caught and destroyed (Rom. xi. 8).
“ Unwillingness to see is punished by
incapacity of seeing. sheer


OHAP, XXix.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





punishment to spiritual perversity is
spiritual blindness.” This explains
the indifference of many who con-
stantly hear and constantly reject the
gospel—is a mark of God’s anger and a
foretaste of more terrible punishment.
What God has inflicted God alone can
remove. None can open the eyes of
the blind but He who ‘- closed them.


Ver. 5. Clothes. Not the worse for
wearing, but grew as their bodies did,
some think. They needed not to
trouble themselves with those anxious
thoughts of heathens, what they should


prince served and supplied in such
state as these Israelites were.—
Trapp.


Ver. 6. From this verse we learn
that during their desert journeys of
forty years the Israelites abstained
from all kinds of yayin and shaker,
unfermented and fermented, innocent
and inebriating. Hence those “do
greatly err, not knowing the scrip-—
tures,’ who either deride abstinence
as a novelty, or condemn it as an im-—
practicable or dangerous habit of life. —
—Temp. Com,


eat, drink, or put on, Never was


Summons to Renewep ConsecratTion.— Verses 10-15,


Israel urged to enter into covenant again, This implies two contracting
parties, Hence God is present, and they stand before Him in representative
capacity.


I. This consecration is urgent. “This day.” A day of solemn events and
remembrances ; of self-examination and pressing duties; of high hope and
inspiring enterprise. Life has its bright and dark days. Its friendships, trials,
and obligations. There should be no delay. This very hour is “ big with life’s
futurities.” Procrastination may ruin.


II. This consecration is representative. All were summoned to attend,
Leaders, “captains of tribes,” elders and officers, must set an example, and
think it no dishonour to renew their covenant with God. Women and children
must not be forgotten, but numbered with those present. Little ones are fit to
be joined in covenant to the Lord. Strangers as well as sons of Israel; servants
as well as free men; those absent and those present, posterity for generations to
come—all concerned. ‘This an indication of favour to Gentiles, a type of the
covenant of grace, ‘“ ‘I'he promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all
that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call.”


Iif, This consecration will exalt and establish the nation. “That he may
establish thee to-day” ver. 13. 1. By restoring to God. ‘A people unto Him-
self” to fear, love and obey Him. “ Be unto thee a God,” according to his

romise and purpose. his personal relationship is most needful, specially de-
ightful to God, and constantly set forth in Deuteronomy. 2. By creating @
sense of obligation to God. In covenant we pledge ourselves to remember God
and cherish a sense of duty. We forget obligation, require deeper feeling and
renewed devotion. Personal faith in God and national dependence upon Him
are stronger than iron ships and granite walls. Without these we have no
superiority, no permanency, no power to establish and preserve a vhurch or a
Becpias “Righteousness exalteth a nation, but sin is @ reproach to any
people, .


850


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


OHAP, XXIX,





HOMILECTIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver, 10. Stand. As subjects to
swear allegiance—an assembly to wor-
38 See army to fight. A solemn
and noble position !

“They also serve who stand and wait.”

God examining man, “This day”
—a day of thankfulness, regrets, in-
teresting recollections, uncertainty,
anticipation. The position indicated
implies :—I. That we depend upon
God’s bounty. II. That we are con-
tinually open to His _ inspection.
III. That our future destiny is in His
hands. Application—Let us this day
stand before the Lord. 1. [Tumble peni-
tents. 2. Sincere believers, 3. Faith-


Ver. 12. Lnter into covenant. More
than repeating it, coming near to it or
mere profession of it. Hutire, real en-
trance, sharing its benefits and going
into its obligations, “'I'he expression
is very remarkable. It is one of those
proofs of the exceeding greatness of
the love and condescension of God,
which are so often found in the Bible.
He might command simply and tell
the creature. The obligation of that
command is on you, whether you like
it or not. But he asks man freely to
accept what eternally is his duty, to
enter into covenant with him; that is,
openly to accept his service, that he


ful servants.—Bib. Museum. may bless us.” —( Cumming.)


Dancers To BE SuHunNED.— Verses 16-21,


Moses now warns against breaking the covenant into which they have
entered ; he describes the fearful results of apostasy.


I. Idolatry with its abominations. Their experience should have taught
them how worthless, how helpless idols were in Egypt and on the march to
Canaan. 1. Abominations which were prevalent. Exypt was addicted to such
evils, and many were tainted through dwelling there. 2. Abominations which
were fascinating. “ Ye have seen abominations” in other nations; still hanker
after them, and are almost drawn away. ‘‘ Idols of wood and stone, silver and
gold,” are more attractive than the invisible God. If the lessons of experience
were treasured up and utilised, we should avoid many dangers. ‘‘ Experience
is an excellent schoolmaster.” —Carlyle.


II. Apostasy with its evils. ‘Lest there should be among you man or
woman,” &c. (ver. 18). 1. Apostasy beginning with individuals. The lump
is what its particles are, the nation as its individuals. Personal influence and
character affect the community. “The worth of a state, in the long run, is
the worth of the individuals composing it” (J. S. Mill). “One sinner destroyeth
much good.” 2, Apostasy bitter in results. “A root that beareth gall and
wormwood ”—a root deeply planted, firmly strengthened, and mischievously
productive ; quick is growth and stupifying in nature. Sin, like poison,
destroys the life of a nation. The bread of idolatry, sweet in the mouth,
becomes bitter in the experience: what is pleasant in the taste convulses the
system with pain. Its riches will sicken, turn to moral poison, “and he shall
vomit them up again ” (Job xx. 14-16),


III. Presumption with its risks. ‘“ And it come to pass that he bless him-
self” (ver. 19). ‘I‘his supposes that one may think himself secure, even amidst
danger ; promise impunity though persisting in impiety; daring presumption,
an affront to God and a certain ruin! 1. Zhe method of presumption. (@) False

romises. “I shal! have peace,” when there is no peace. (b) Intense blindness,
Fe blesses himself, whan the words of the curse are thundering in his ear.
851


CUAP, XXIX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; DEUTERONOMY.


——








(c) Abominable wickedness, Walking in the imagination of his own heart,
when God urges obedience to his commands, Indulging in lust, “adding
drunkenness to thirst” and sin to sin. 2. 7he consequences of presumption.
“The Lord will not spare him” (ver. 20). He will be detected, arraigned, aud
convicted ; escape is impossible. He will be—(a) Exposed to divine retribution,
“the anger of the Lord,” &c. ; (b) Shut out from covenant blessings (ver. 21) ;
(c) Unforgiven in offence ; (d) Forgotten in existence. No perpetuation of
name, no posterity to succeed him. “ According to all the curses written in
the book ” (ver. 21). The covenant has curses as well as blessings: God is just
as well as gracious. If we presume upon good when indulging in sin, we shall
be awfully deceived. “He that presumes steps into the throne of God”
(Dr, South). “ Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins; let them
uot have dominion over me.”


Tue Improus Boaster.— Verse 19.


I. Boasting in abominable wickedness. Glorying inshame. 1. Walking
in a course of self-indulgence. 2. Enticing others by his example. Asserting
their security, and leading others to think as they do. “ They say still unto them
that despise Me the Lord hath said, Ye shall have peace; and they say unto
every one that walketh after the imagination of his own heart, No evil shall
come upon you.” Jer. xxiii, 17.


HI, Boasting with resolute purpose, “I walk in the firmness (hardness) of
my heart ”—sin hardens by its deceit{ulness and continuance. The “ conscience
is seared” (branded as with a hot iron) by burning lusts, 1 Tim. iv. 2. ‘The
heart is obdurate and unmoved by warnings and curses, “ Hardened through
tle deceitfulness of sin.”


III, Boasting ending in utter ruin. Men rejoice in iniquity. “All such


rejoicing is evil,” most fatal, There is no evasion, no escape. “ The Lord will
not spare him,” “All the curses shall lie upon him.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 16, 1%. Ye know, &c. The
discipline of experience. Precepts and
instruction useful but practical wisdom
only learnt in the school of experience.
Israel were taught valuable lessons in
Egypt and the wilderness. Have we
learned courage and confidence in con-
flicts and victories? What have we
gained in discipline of heart and mind ?
“Give me understanding and I shall
keep thy law.”


Ver. 18. The heart turned. 1.
Apostasy in its origin “the heart,”
“ An evil heart of unbelief.” 2. Apos-
tasy in its results—(a). Turning away
from God. (6). Joining idols. God
admits of no rival. “Take heed, breth-
ren, lest there be in any of you an evil
heart of unbelief, in departing from
the living God.”

Wormwood, Sin a bitter reot, bear-

352


ing deadly fruit as in Achan, Jos. vii.
25, and in those who turned to idols
and seduced others. ‘The apostle
allluding to this text says, “ Looking
diligently lest any man fail of the grace
of God (fall short), lest any root of
bitterness springing up trouble you,
and thereby many be defiled.” Heb,
xii. 15.


Ver. 19. Danger of carnal security.
I. The astonishing delusion of sinners
On every side we behold—1. Their
fearlessness ; 2. Their self-complacency.
8. Their confidence. II. Their awful
doom. 1. Infallibly certain. 2. In-
expressibly severe. Learn (1.) To com-
passionate the ungodly world. (2.)
To be on our guard against being in-
fluenced by its advice. (3.) To be
thankful if God has made us to differ
from it.—C, Simeon, M.A,


HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY;: DEUTERONO.MY. OHAP. XXIX
 ————————OO


Warnines To Posterrry.— Verses 22-28.


When punishment comes upon them for wickedness, all thoughtful people
around them will be convinced of the righteous judgments of God in the
fulfilment of His word.


I, Posterity influenced by present conduct. The nation is organic—one
whole community. In the covenant, those present represented those absent.
So future generations share in our privileges, reap the consequences of our
decisions and sins. 1. The land may be affected. Canaan was afflicted with
“ plagues and sicknesses,” consumed with fire, and overthrown like Sodom.
The garden of the Lord was turned into desolation and waste. The sterility of
Palestine is the stranger’s wonder (Volnsy’s “ Ruins”), and a historic witness
and warning to nations, “He turneth . . . a fruitful land into barrenness
for the wickedness of them that dwell therein” (Ps. evii. 33, 34). 2. The people
may be affected. “Rooted out and cast into other lands” (ver. 28). (Our
children will be better or worse, upset or confirmed in virtue, by our moral-
conduct. Physical features are characteristic of races: so moral features are
stamped upon descendants. Calculate upon remote results. ‘Generations to
come ” may be astonished, afflicted, and cursed by our actions. “ The evil that
men do,” as well as the good, “lives after them.” “Thou recompensest the
iniquity of the fathers into the bosom of their children after them.”


II, Posterity so concerned will enquire into the reasons. The condition of
the nation the reverse of what it had been—read in the light of history and
Aue the change astonishing. Hence the question, “ Wherefore ?” (ver. 24).
God has reasons for retribution. These reasons may be known from His word,
when kpown they should check our wickedness, Learn: 1. The natural con-
nection between suffering and sin. They forsook God and served idols (ver. 25),
sins are reproduced in posterity, bound by an indissoluble chain of causation
to the future. ‘I'o-day’s actions are the result of yesterday’s, and the cause of
future conditions. 2. The visible proof of this connection in providential
history. Divine retribution manifest the sins of nations and the judgment of
God upon them. ‘The sterility of Palestine explains the broken covenaut.
Its barren hills and mute appeal—its awful silence and impressive scenes, utter
the curse of God and turn spectators into enquiring penitents. “The curse is
poured upon us, and the oath that is written in the law of Moses, the servant of
God, beeause we have sinned against Him” (Dan, ix. 11, 18, 14; ef 1 Kings
ix. 8,9; Jer. xxii. 8, 9).


Nationat Derrcrion anp Grievous Reraisvtrion.— Verses 22-28.


I. National defection. ‘“ They have forsaken the covenant,” etc. (ver. 25).
1. Springing from individual sin (ver. 18). Nations live, act, and decay through
individuals, Do not overlook the parts in the whole, the one in the millions.
“ Individuality is the root of everything, good or evil.” 2. Manifest in universal
apostacy. “They went and served other gods” (ver. 26), The grand object of
Israel was forgotten, and its privileges were bartered away. ‘‘ Gods whom they
knew not,” and to whom they were under no obligation, were served instead of
the true God—the God of their fathers to whom they owed everything they
possessed. “ Hath a nation changed their gods, which are yet no gods? But
my people have changed their glory (Jehovah the glory of Israel, Ps. ovi. 20;
Rom, i, 23) for that which doth not profit (idols, ver. 8) Jer. ii, 11,


OHAP, XXIX, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; DEUTERONOMY.





-—





II. Grevious retribution. Nations rise to power and influence, fall into sin
and suffer decay. Rome, after the prevalence of luxury, pride and cruelty,
Spain, after persecution of truth and exclusion of the Bible. Egypt, once a
powerful empire, ultimately “the basest of kingdoms” for its idolatry.
1. Aetribution eatensive. In the whole land. 2. Retribution terrible. Anger
of God kindled, the people uprooted, cast out and suffered great indignation.
3. Retribution complete. Land neither sown nor fruitful, stricken and accursed.
The people idolatrous, homeless and rejected. The Jews forsook Jehovah, defied
His providential arrangements and brought eternal blight upon a land “ flowing
with milk and honey.”

“Buch acts


Of contumacy will provoke the Highest
To make death in us live,”—Milton,


Diving Secrets.— Deut. xxix. 29;


This passage suggests


I. That there are in the universe zertain domains accessible to none but God.
This passage holds true. First—Jn reference to material creation. There are
secrets which Nature has not whispered in the ear of her most ardent lovera,
Second—In reference to the decrees of Providence. Cross-providences, eta,
“ Clouds and darkness are round about him.” Social inequalities, ete. Third—
(n reference to the mysteries of redemption. ‘Great is the mystery, ete.”
“The angels desire to look into these things.”


II. That impenetrable secrecy is compatable with paternal benevolence.
All nature proves this, Family mercies prove this. Never make (od’s secrets
a plea for neglecting His bounties.


III. That divine secrecy is no argument for human disobedience. “Those
things which are revealed belong unto us.” Here we have three ideas. First—
An acknowledgment of a Divine revelation, Second—The confession of our re
lationship to God. He has given us laws, etc. Third—An tmplication of our
power to obey the Divine requirements. The “ revealed” things “ belong unto
us, for obedience,” ete.


IV. That inquisitiveness into secret things is a fruitful cause of scepticism
Man will pry into the forbidden, One kind of inquisitiveness (Eve’s) has in-~
flisted fatal misery on millions! Let us leave God to deal with His own
decrees, to manage the boundless realm of causes, and to work out His incon«
ceivable purposes. It is right that there should be subjects above our compre
hension, could we comprehend all, we should be gods and not men.

Brethren! Seek not to penetrate the secret recesses of God’s tabernacle.
“Who can by searching, find out God?” He has permitted us to enter the
antechamber. Let us learn to reverence, to labour, and to wait. In due time
the King will admit us further. We shall be taken to higher altitudes, and

“There we shall see His face,
And never, never gin,”


Dr. J. Parker.


Srorer Tumnas.— Verse 29.


This seems to be an answer to a question which the people might naturall
put after some threatenings. After all miracles, mercies, and corrections, sh
we be 3 wicked as to provoke God to destroy us? Will our posterity become

04


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY., CHAP, XXIk.


NN


80 profligate as to bring upon themselves such unexampled calamities? Moses
replies, ‘‘The secret, therefore.” Such events are hidden in future. You
know enough to avoid punishment and secure favour. Render present obedi-
ence and busy not yourselves about things beyond your knowledge.


. 16 That there are things revealed which we know and ought to practice.

The things which are revealed belong to us.” 1. Truths to be received. 'I'ruths
concerning God, man, Jesus Christ—doctrines to create wonder and admiration,
to excite joy and stimulate study. 2. Duties to be performed. Duties to God,
ourselves and our neighbours—duties which make life easy and happy, which
solve doubt and please God when performed. If this will not satisfy, curiosity
would disquiet, it we had the powers and capacities of angels.


II. That there are things which canuot be discovered and should not engage
our attention. “Secret things.” Mysteries of nature, events of providence,
and circumstances of social and individual life which puzzle the wisest. We are
finite in capacity and only know in part. The unknown is a universe of endless
wonders, the revelations of which are in the wise keeping of God. ‘Such
knowledge is too wonderful for me.” ‘The first lesson Pythagoras taught was
silence. We must restrain curiosity and check pride. Act our part and not
speculate. For “he giveth not account of any of his matters.” ‘“ How un-
searchable are his judgments (decisions), and his ways (modes of executing),
past finding out (undiscoverable) Rom. xi. 33.


III, That our welfare is secured only by practising things which are
Tevealed. “That ye may do.” Kevelation is given, not to indulge curiosity,
but to provide a remedy for our blindness and misery. Light enough to make
faith rational, duty plain, and unbelief without excuse. ‘ Were the curtain
lifted further from holy mysteries, man would be lost in hopeless bewilderment”
(Hare). “Things revealed” should be the precious portion “ for us and for
our children.” ‘To believe and obey here will be our preparation and safety for
that world in which we shall know as also we are known.’

Thy God hath said ’tis good for thee

To walk by faith and not by sight,
Take it on trust a little while,

Soon shalt thou read the mystery right,
In the bright sunshine of His smile.— Keble,


Toe ADVANTAGES OF SogiPtuRAL KNOWLEDGE.


Consider—I. That there is a limit with respect to our knowledge of God and
of Divine things. There is much mystery with regard—1. Doctrines, 2.
Promises; 3. Divine Dispensations, IL. That within the boundary of that
limit there is much with which we can and ought to be acquainted ; “ the things
which are revealed, etc.” —Consider—1. Where the revelation of these things
is to be formed ; 2. Of which it consists ; 3, For whose advantage it was given.
III. That the experimental knowledge of that which is attainable will be
accompanied with practical results,—#. Zottenkham, M.A.


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 22-28. 1. The cursed land,
9. The disinherited people. 3. The
stranger's wonder. 4, The solemn
warning. ‘Thus the law of Moses
leaves sinners under the curse, and


rooted out of the Lord’s land; but


the grace of Christ towards penitent
believing sinners plants them again
upon their land, and they shall no
more be pulled up, being kept by the
power of God (Amos. 9, 15).—Ains-
worth,

$55


OBAP, XXIX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; DEUTERONOMY.


aa, 4


Ver. 26. God the portion of His
people. “ Whom he had, &c,” Heb.,
signifies portion, lot, and may be
rendered, “There was no portion to
them: that is, the gods they served
could neither supply their wants nor
save their souls; they were no por-
tion” (A. Clarke). A contrast to
Jebovah,


Ver. 28. Cast them with a violence,
with a vengeance ;—in the Hebrew
word cast hath an extraordinary great
letter :—sling them out as out of a
sling (1 Sam. 25, 29).—Trapp.


Ver. 29, Learn 1. God’s ways are
not comprehended by His short-sighted
creatures. 2. God is not bound to
explain His ways to any of His
creatures, 3. God gives means to in-
struct His creatures in things needful.
Therefore cease to strive and cavil; learn


to submit, trust solely. Secret things.
God hath three sorts of secrets ; first,
the secret of His counsel and decrees :
secondly, the secrets of His providence
and outward administrations ; thirdly,
the secrets of his spirit and grace.
From the two former God hath locked
out the holiest of men as the apostles
challenge, Rom. xi. 34, and Davide in-
timates, Ps. iii. 2 (Caryl). The writer
of Reminiscences of Robert Hall says
I requested him to print a sermon from
Deut, 29.29. “Why, Sir, I did not
reserve any notes of it; I almost
forgot it. Do you remember how I
treated it, Sir?’ “ Yes, Sir, I think I
recollect. First, you noticed the de-
crees of the Divine Being; secondly,
the mysteries of Christian truth ;
thirdly, the concerns of human life.’
“Aye, I remember it now, Sir; I
believe you are right,”


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XXIX.


Ver. 4. Ears to hear. As it is
difficult to strike the right tone and
key to make a deaf person hear, it was
difficult to find such forms of thought
and expression as would make their
way into the ear of their mind,


Ver. 5. Clothes. Clothes are for
necessity ; warm clothes, for health;
cleanly, for decency ; lasting, for thrift ;
and rich, for magnificence.— Dr. Fuller,


Ver. 6. Know. He shall never
want mercy who does not wanton
mercy.— W. Seeker. To bless God for
mercies is the way to increase them.—
Idem.


Poor soul! God’s goodness hath been great
to thee ;
Let never day nor night unhallow’d pass,
But still remember what the Lord hath done,
—2 King Henry VI.


Vers, 10-15. Covenant. Consecra~
on makes not a place sacred, but only
solemnly declares it so.—Dr. South,
Consecration is going out into the
world where God Almighty is, and
using every power for His glory. It
is taking all advantages as trust finds
356


—as confidential debts owed to God.
It is simply dedicating one’s life, in its
whole flow, to God’s servic.—H. W.
Beecher.


Ver. 18. Wormwood. And certainly
the more a man drinketh of the world
the more it intoxicateth. — Bacon.
Our God. No religious things can
satisfy a living religious soul. Life
craves life for its satisfaction ; the
living soul cries out for the living
God.—Dr, Allon.


Ver. 19.—Drunkenness to thirst.
Thirst teaches all animals to drink,
but drunkenness belongs only to man,
—Fielding.

Pleasure is good, and man for pleasure made 3

But pleasure full of glory as of joy,

Pleasure which neither blushes nor expires,
—Dr, e £. Ye oung,


Ver, 21. Ourses. The noblest
reward of nature is nature itself ;
and the extremest punishment of vice
is vice itself—Zd. Bacon.


Know then this truth, enough for man to know,
Virtue alone is happiness below,
—Pope.


.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. XXX.

cigars le hh SS ee
Vers. 23-27. The land. See Thom- of God —Bp. Beverid i

: : . | — Bp. Beveridge. Tn His pur-

fon Ld. and Bk. Volney’s “ Ruins of poses and His dispensations He is

Empires,” Bk. 2. equally and perfectly independent,

‘ infinitely exalted above the supervision

‘ Med a ies things. A cockle- or direction of His creatures.— Hodge.

sh might as we attempt to bring And he who waits to have his task marked out


the ocean into its little shell as a i :
Shall di d leave his
man attempt to understand the ways Th aod areas tee








CHAPTER XXX.


‘Carricat Notzs.—Israel were rejected and exiled on account of apostacy, but not absolutely
cast off for ever. If they would return to the Lord he would turn his favour towards them again,
and gather them out of dispersion. .


1-8. Mind, bethink themselves, not mere recollection, but consideration of their conduct and
condition. Return (ver. 2) from idolatry to the service of Jehovah ; in penitence and obedience,
Thy captivity, ver. 8. Not to bring bick the captives, but to end distress and have mercy upon
them, Job xlii. 10 ; Ps, lxxxv. 2; Jer. xxix. 14.


4-8. Consequent upon deliverance would be the gathering of Israel from all parts into their
land in greater numbers. ‘This, partly fulfilled in Assyrian and Babylonian captivities, refers,
according to some, to future restoration of Jews to Palestine. ‘But application is found in the
spirit, not in the letter. The multiplication promised consists in realising the promise to
Abraham that his seed should grow into nations (Gen. xvii, 6), t.¢., not ‘‘ Israel according to the
flesh,” but “Israel according to the spirit,” whose land is not restricted to the earthly Canaan or
Palestine” (Keil). Ver. 7, after conversion the curses resting upon them would fall upon their
enemies, Gen. xii. 8. They would again return and obey, and rejoice in full privileges and
covenant blessings,


11-14. Hidden literally not too wonderful, not too difficult to understand or practice of. ch.
xvii, 8; not too distant, in Heaven inaccessible ; nor beyond the sea (Mediterranean) too far
away. Goforus- Who able to fetch it? No excuse of ignorance or inability to plead. Nigh,
ver. 14, in the written and authorised word; subject of common conversation and daily
examination,

15-20. Moses sums up the whole in the words of ver, 15, as in ch. xi., 26, 27. Good prosperity
anc salvation; evil adversity and distraction (Ketl) urges them to love the Lord, walk in his
ways, and not permit themselves to be torn away into idolatry. For he, +.¢., that is thy life,
the condition of thy life and its prolongation in the land, viz., “to love the Lord,” of. Ps. xxvii, 1 :
John xi. 25 ; xvii. 3; 1 John, v. 20,


Penrrent Return to Gop.— Verses 1-7.


The threatenings of the preceding chapter would not utterly destroy Israel.
The mercy of God is in store for them, rejoices against judgmeut and gives
room for repentence. These words may be taken as a prediction or a promise.
As a promise they belong to Israel and to all who repent and turn to God.
Repentance is described, which is the condition of promise as:


I, Return springing from remembrance of sins. “Call to mind.” Misery
leads to reflection and reflection ends in self-reproach. When dreams of ambi-
tion are dissipated and conscience accuses, then the mind turns inward, preys
upon itself and regret for the past ensues (Judas). “Jam no longer the Great
Napoleon,” said the exile of St. Helena. The mind, the disposition, is changed,
which leads to change of relation to God, “repentance toward God” and to
amendment of life—David and the prodigal. ‘Remember this and shew your-
selves men ; bring it again to mind, O ye transgressors!” be


OHAP. XXX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


ee


IJ, Return most sincere, “ With all thine heart.” (ver 2) No return without
change of heart. Lot’s wife moved slowly forward and left her heart behind.
Orphah stopped short at the moment of decision. Thus many go halfway,
divide the heart with the world and God. The heart must be given and made
contrite. “The sacrifices of God are a broken and contrite spirit” were written
over the bed of Augustine to remind him of sincerity in life. “ Rend your
heart and turn unto the Lord.”


III. Return graciously encouraged. Many blessings are mentioned to in-
duce return. 1. They will become objects of special pity. “'lhe Lord will
have compassion, &c.” (verse 3). 2. ‘They will be gathered from other nations
and fixed in their own land. Penitents are not only delivered from misery but
restored to happiness and divine inheritance. 3. They will be increased in
number (verse 5). Multiplication would give security and superiority.
Through children joy and prosperity. 4. They will be weaned from idolatry
(verse 6). Circumcised in heart—-an inward change which sets forth sanctifica-
tion and obedience of life. 5. They will be relieved from curse—curses trans
ferred to their enemies (verse 7). When God undertakes for his people,
opposition is vain. Omnipotence will reverse our condition, restore from ruin,
and pour out blessings most abundant and complete.


Circumcision or Hrart— Verse 6.


Consider—I. The blessing to be bestowed—circumcision of heart. 1. Pie
truths which circumcision taught, and the blessings of which it was the pledye,
are the birthright of every real child of God; 2. All these blessings are com-
municated to every genuine member of the Christian Church through Christ.
A circumcised Saviour affords a pledge of—(1) A perfect obedience on behalf
of His people; (2). The putting away of the guilt of sin; (3). The personal
and internal circumcision which distinguishes all the real children of God. 3
God, as sovereign, retains to Himself the application of these blessings. 4, Their
extension to the seed of those who partake of this spiritual circumcision is a
further illustration of G@od’s sovereignty and benignity towards His people. II,
Its immediate result : love to God. i. The source of this love : God Himself,
2. The ground on which he lays claim to it—(1). His absolute excellencies :
(2). His particular relations, 8. Its extent and intensity. We must love G
with all our heart. III. Its ultimate issue ; everlasting life. A life of—41,
Enjoymeut ; 2. Activity ; 8, Growth ; 4, Permanency. lLearn—1. The due
distinction between the symbolical and spiritual ; 2. ‘he blessed character of
true religion. —J. Hill, M.A.

I do not shame


“To tell you what I was, since my conversion
So sweetly tastes, being the thing I am.”—Shakspeare,


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS,


Vers, 1, 2, Important steps; con- Ver. 1, 7. Learn—1. Repentance
sideration—return to obedience. De- is needful to be restored to God’s
scription of true penitence. 1. Return favour. 9. Repentance prevails with
to God, in sorrow, humiliation and God to show mercy. 3. Repentance is
confidence, 2. As our God to whom open to the most distant and degraded
we owe personal allegiance and whom sinner, 4, Repentance is the gift of
we are resolved to obey universally and God. He works in the mind, seeks out
heartily in future. ‘Behold we come the lost, and exalted Jesus to give
unto 'I'hee ; for thou art the Lord our repentance and remission of sina to
God,” or iii, 22.) israel (Acts v. 81). “ Repent ye


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





_ therefore and be converted, that your


sins may be blotted out.”


Ver.2,8. Return, dc. I. Attitude
indicated. Inattention to God’s charac-
ter, word and claims. ‘lhe back is
upon God and not the face (.Jer. ii. 27).
2. Criminal negligence. Like a servant
who disobeys orders, pays no regard to
your command and keeps his back
turned upon you (Jer. xxxii, 33.) 3.
Obstinate disobedience. Men always
aciive and represented in scripture as
walking in some way. Wicked walk
“in the way of their heart, contrary to
God.” II. Reasons for changing this


CHAP. XXX.


———<—__- —


attitude. “Shalt return, &.” 1,
God worthy—in himself: “ the Lord”
self existent, the centre and source of
excellence. In his relation to us “ the
Lord thy God,” to dignify and enrich.
“My soul,” said John Brown, of Had-
dington, “hath found inexpressibly
more sweetness and satisfaction in a
single line of the Bible, nay in two
such words as these ‘thy God’ and
‘my God’ than all the pleasures found
in the things of the world since the
creation could equal.” 2. God warrants
return, He will have “ compassion
upon thee.” 38. Scripture encourages
return (Isa, lv. 7.)


Sians oF TrvuE REPENTANCE. — Verses 8-10.


I. True Repentance is accompanied with salutary fear.
The penitent does not trifle, but trembles at the word. He is


hearken,” ete.


“Tf thou shalt


afraid to offend. When God speaks, he listens to learn and obey.


II, True repentance leads to reformation of conduct. “Thou shalt return”
ee 8). No murmuring, hatred, and departure from God, but right views,


eelings, and relation to God,
arise and go to my Father.”


Re-tracing one’s steps, turning again.


“T will


III. True repentance is evidenced by sincere obedience to God’s will. “Turn


with all thine heart and keep his commandments” v. 10).
God’s authority acknowledged, and His will supreme.


Self-will destroyed,
The heart rightly


affected, the Uife rightly directed, “ Bring forth fruits meet for repentance.”


IV. True repentance meets with divine acceptance.
will make thee plenteous rejoice over thee for good” (ver. 9).


“The Lord thy God


Sins forgiven,


deliverance from enemies, restoration to lost blessinys, and divine favours
enjoyed. Men unfit to be forgiven, without sorrow for sin, incapable of mercy,
if insensible to wrong doing, and resolved not to amend. We are only prepared
for blessings ourselves and useful to others by deep personal repentance.


Paul, Luther, Bunyan instances.
every work of our hand.”


Then are we


6


plenteous, prosperous in


Tae Know.epecr or Duty Simpre anp Easy.— Verses 11-18.


‘I'he people are encouraged and reminded by necessary instruction placed in
their reach. God had revealed His will, and made the performance of it easy.
Ignorance is inexcusable, and disobedience unreasonable.


I. It is not hidden in obscurity and mystery. Heathen oracles shrouded
in mystery; signs and wonders given in the grove of Dodona; the cave of


Trophonius; the temple of Delphi; and the oasis of Ammon.
commands of God are simple and duty clear.
a dark place of the earth” (Is. xlv. 19).


“The word is very nigh unto thee ” (ver. 14).


II. It is accessible.


. But the
“T have not spoken in secret, in


1. Not


in heaven above. Shut up, beyond reach, but delivered and published in our


359


CHAP. XXX HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY.


hearing. 2. Not too distant from us. ‘* Beyond the sea”—to be fetched like
heathen wisdom from far off lands. 3. It cs nigh. In our moral constitution,
the word of God and the sound of the gospel. No long course of ceremonies
aud round of duties to obtain peace. “Confess with the mouth and believa
with thine heart.”


III. It is practicable. “That thou mayest do it.” The word is clear, and
available to be obeyed. Its obligations are not impracticable, beyond our power
to fulfil, To now will not avail ; we must loyally do the command. Creeds
may be orthodox and accurate; but the law and the gospel must be put into
the heart and the life.





Great Princretes, oR Law APPLIED BY GosPEL.


The passage is not cited by St. Paul merely in the way of illustration, much
less as accommodated to suit the purposes of the argument on hand, regardless
of its significance in its own context. We have in Romans an authoritative
interpretation of what the words of Moses do really and principally, if not
obviously signify. The prophet spake, the apostle expounded, by one and the
selfsame spirit. Those who believe this will not question its authority, and
consequently not the correctness of the sense assigned by the latter to the words
of the former.—Speak. Com.


I. God has clearly made known His will to man. ‘This commandment.”
A law of Divine authority. Not to be mutilated, adjusted and treated at
pleasure. Neither self-contradictory nor impossible to understand. But essen-
tial, plain and reasonable in requirement.


II. It is therefore needless for man to search for what is made known
Such a revelation puts an end to all efforts for that which is revealed. We
ueed not climb the sky, nor cross the sea. 1. This would imply ignorance,
which is not excusable, for the word is nigh, spoken by human lips, and clear
as day. 2 This would imply obstinacy. A rejection of God’s revelation, as
much as if Moses or Israel had tried to obtain by human wisdom what God had
made known.


III, It is man’s best interest to believe and obey God's will. We can never
guide and justify ourselves. Christ puts an end to self righteousness and brings
a righteousness through faith, 1. Zhis allays our anxiety. “Say not” in
doubt, perplexity and unbelief, “who shall go up,” etc. Why search for
a thing that is near? 2. 7his satisfies our moral need. It sufficeth intellect
and heart—accords with our mental constitution and moral condition. 3. Jé ¢8
the only method of salvation. he word is required by all, within the reach of
all, and must be appropriated by all. Its rejection is not due to physical or
mental incapacity but to want of will, lack of faith, ‘Confess with thy mouth,
believe in thine heart and thou shalt be saved.”


IV. That man may believe and obey—the gospel brings him help.
Righteousness by works precluded. Human obedience could not reach the
required standard. Faith not works the method of God’s righteousness. Law
says do this and thou shalt live ; gospel, “believe and thou shalt be saved.”
Paul interprets the law, as Israel, as all men will look upon it when “ circumcised
in heart.” Christ is the only, the all-sufticient hope for the sinner. He delivers
from despair and a broken law—brings peace to the heavy laden and confers
that “righteousness which is unto all and upon all them that believe.”

O how unlike the complex works of man,
Heaven's easy, artless, unincumber'd plan {
Inscribed above the portal from afar,
Conspicuous as the brightness of a stax,
Legible only by the light they give,
Hy Stand the soul-quick’ning words—Belteve and live /—Oowper Truth 21-31.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


OHAP. xxX.





HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS,


Vers. 11-14. The Bible in stself.
The text shows. 1. The closeness with
which the word of God addresses the
soul, and the paternal familiarity of
its style: “the word is very nigh unto
thee.” II. That His word is to be
avowedly our counsellor, “in thy
mouth,” III. That it is to be em-
braced by our affections, and dwell in
them; “in thy heart.” IV. That
obedience to it is the necessary proof
of a believing reception of it; “that
thou mayest do it.”— Biblical Museum.


Ver. 12. Say. The anxious fol-
lower after righteousness is not dis-
appointed by an impracticable code,
nor mock by an_ unintelligible
revelation: the word is near him,
therefore accessible; plain and simple


and therefore apprehensible; and we
may fairly add, deals with definite
historical fact, and therefore certain
fe ford on Rom. x., 6.). The law of
hrist is substantially the same as that
of Moses, only (1) exhibited more
clearly in its spiritual nature and ex-
tensive application and (2) accompanied
with the advantages of gospel grace,
is practicable and easy.—(Jamieson),


Ver. 14. In the heart for our personal
salvation in the mouth for God’s glory
and the salvation of others. In the heart
and not in the mouth is cowardice ; in
the mouth and not in the heart is
hypocracy. The gospel believed is
fountain in the heart; the gospel con-
fessed ig the streams through the
mouth.— Robinson.


Tur ALTERNATIVE CHOICE.— Verses 15-20.


Moses is extremely anxious for the
He urges, persuades, and entreats ; makes a final effort


force them to do right.


welfare of his people. But he cannot


to win them over. ‘See, I have set before thee, etc.”


I. Obedience to God’s command leads to life.
(ver. 16). Under law and gospel this is the immutable order.
Without Him life is a shadow, a blank.


God the source of life.


we live.” 2, It secures outward blessings to sustain life.


“That thou mayest live”
1. Lt pleases
“In Him
“Thy God shall


bless thee in the land.” “Godliness hath promise of the life that now is.”


“ He is thy life, and the length of thy days” (ver. 20).
which is life, and His loving kindness,


which is better than life (lives).


8. It gains divine favour,
Lives


which are longest and happiest—all lives put together (Ps. lxiii, 3).


II. Disobedience leads to death.


“ Ag righteousness tendeth to life,” is full


of real enjoyment, of infinite and eternal pleasure, “go he that pursueth evil


pursueth it to his own death” (Prov. xi. 19). J
Sin, a constant warfare with God, can never


curse of God (ver. 19).


hopes wither away and the curse ruins.
It cannot be avoided ; is the only possible result of
the shadow follows the substance, or the avenger of
sure will sinners find evil and death at last.


surely perish ” (ver. 18).
disobedience. As sure as
blood pursued the manslayer, so


8. Death of which warning has been given. /
Warning with deepest anxiety and most passionate appeal.
know; you see—“ Forewarned, forearmed.” F 1
prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hideth


ae ” (ver. 15).
© excuse, you
evil and hide in Christ.
himself, etc.”


aN


III. Hence the urgent request for right choice.


(ver. 19). 1. You are free to choose.


power of


1. Death most dreadful. The
succeed ;


2. Death most certain. “ Ye shall


“See, behold, I have set before


Flee impending


“Therefore choose life”
God. interferes not, nor trifles with the


free choice. We are alone before God, individually responsible, and


must decide for ourselves the question on which eternal life or death depends.


361


ns


ONAP, XXX, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY.





2. You are urged to choose. Our Maker and Preserver commends his love,
claims our loyalty, and commands us to choose. “ Choose life.” 3. There
should be no delay. “This day.” The appeal from supreme authority to the
noblest part of our nature and for our highest interests. ‘‘ Choose ye this day
whom ye will serve.”


I. Great moral truths are put before men. “ Good and evil, life and death,
blessing and cursing.” Not simply to decide for business and profession, but to
adjust claims of heaven and earth. Grand opportunity. Lost spirits not the
chance }


II, Men’s destiny will be decided according to their attitude towards these —
truths. Future results follow from present action. In worldly matters fortune
made or marred, positious gained or lost by earnest decision. Paley at college
shakes off habitual negligence, rises at four o’clock to study and write immortal
books. “TI will be a hero,” was the turning point in Nelson’s destiny. A decided
“No” to evil, a firm purpose gives strength and security (Joseph and Daniel),
Eternity—life or death, heaven or hell hang on your decision.


IIT. A solemn appeal is made for right decision. Right and good are re-
vealed, commended and offered. They cannot be ignored or destroyed. A
choice must be made. Direction and help offered. Ponder well. Ruin inevitably
follows sin and indecision. ‘‘ Therefore choose life” (ver. 19).

Our doubts are traitors ;


And make us lose the good we oft might win,
By fearing to attempt it. —Shakspeare,


Two Paruways or Lirg.— Verses 16, 17-20.


God is the centre and sum of happiness—the author of our being, and should
be the object of pursuit. Some cleave to God and others forsake him. Hence
two pathways set forth.


1, Some are forsaking God, ver. 17. The soul made for fellowship with God,
apart from Him is a world without sun. Yet what forgetfulness, departure
and practical atheism in life! 1. Through alienated affection. “If thine heart
turn away.” We have affections as well as intellect. ‘These influence our
jedbment and discernment of truth. God seeks to instruct the heart, not the
1ead, to captivate and improve the affection, ‘An evil heart of unbelief”
leads to apostacy from God, Heb. iii. 12.


2. Manifest in wilful deafness, “Thou wilt not hear.” The voice loud as
thunder, but the will fixed and stubborn, conscience resisted and warning
refused, ‘They are like the deaf adder which stoppeth her ear.”


3. Indicative of weak attachment. “ Drawn away” by counter attractions,
If the heart not rightly fixed, attention is misdirected, then instability, feeble-
ness and falling away. “Turn not aside from following the Lord, but serve the
Lord with all your heart.”


4. Resulting in degraded idolatry. “ Worship other gods and serve them.”
—God out of our thoughts ia i. 28) and dethroned from heart and life, the
creature will be set up. The conserving principle is destroyed ; degradation,
gross idolatry, and pollution ensue.


“God forbid that we should forsake the Lord to serve other Goda,”


When to our own devices left, we frame
A shameful creed of craft and cruelty,


: HIOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. XXX
(SE asta Sa aaah ali! a Sk i SS I I A
I Others are loyal in obedience to God. “ Love the Lord thy God—obey
«His voice—cleave to Him” (ver. 20). 1. Love, the spring of obedience. This
its essential principle. Authority cannot kindle love, and service without love
is slavery and disloyalty. 2. Love, the rule of daily life. “To walk in His
ways.” Love is the dominant power in all activity aud enterprise. Obedience
is not for a season, but constant and universal. ‘Blessed is he who doeth
righteousness at all times.” 3. Love, resulting in God’s favour. “ Thy God
- shall bless thee.” Bless thee with preservation from danger; “the Lord
reserveth all them that love Him”—with peace, “ great peace have they which
love thy law ””—with perpetuation of life and attendant blessings, “bless thee
in the land and prolong thy days.” God's favour converts power and external
ssessions into blessings. Without this, fairest prospects and largest estates
ose their charm—without this, no certainty of any possession and not a day’s
lease of life. “ He is thy life and the length of thy days.” -


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 16. His ways 1. The path-
way. Safe, pleasant, and attractive.
2. How to enter tt. Love and obedience.
* Love the Lord ” and “‘ keep His com-
mandments,” 3. The benejits of walking
in it. “Live, multiply and blessed
in the land.” “Show me thy ways
O Lord, teach me thy paths.”


Vers. 15-19. Life and death set
before the young. I. In what sense
life and death may be justly set before
you. 1. You are faithfully informed
that the course you adopt and pursue
through life will terminate at last in
al immense and tremendous extreme,
as distant from the opposite as life is
from death. 2. The nature of the two
ways is closely pointed out to you.
II. The manner in which they are
proposed to your choice. There are
some things—1. To alarm; promote
self-jealousy and fear; the intrinsic
depravity of your hearts ; the fact that
so much evil appears under semblance
of good; prejudiced views of real
religion. 2. ‘l'o encourage: you never
can be ata loss in deciding what is
best. 38. To direct and admonish:
beware of early levity, of bad habits,
of ensnaring connections, of trifling
with religion. III. Some considera-
tions to enforce the importance of your
choice. (1.) Privileges from earliest
days. (2.) Special personal considera-
tions. (8.) Influence of posterity.—
Bib. Museum.


Ver. 19. Two witnesses. Heaven
and earth. Moved, “ called to record’


in solemn manner.” ¢f. 4,26; 81, 28.
1, Because they indicate the presence
of God. Heaven the throne and earth
the footstool of God. 2. Because they
help remembrance of events. Localities
identified by the mind, spectators of
scenes testify to the faithfulness of
God and the sin of man. 3. Because
influenced by the conduct of man.
In his creation and fall they have felt
the results and long for his redemp-
tion (Rom. viii. 19-23). Ohoose life.
Divine advice. 1. The problems of
life too difficult for us to solve.
2. God offers to be our guide; gives
help and direction. 8. It is our duty
to obey. When He speaks we should
listen, obey and reverence His word.
4. It is madness to reject divine
instruction, “‘ Ye shall surely perish.”


Ver. 20. Three steps. Love—obey
—cleave, “ Without close attachment
and perseverance, temporary love, how-
ever sincere and fervent, temporary
obedience, however disinterested, ener-
getic and pure, while it lasts, will be
ultimately ineffectual. He alone who
endures to the end shall be saved.” —
A. Clarke. Cleave. Notice. 1. God
the object of life. 2. The strength of
attachment. 3. ‘I'he constancy of pur-
suit. ‘ My soul followeth hard after
(cleaveth unto) Thee” (Ps. Ixiii. 8).


Grace leads the right way ; if you choose the
wrong,

Take it and perish, but restrain your tongue ;

Charge not, with light sufficient and left free,

Your wilful suicide on God’s decree.


863


CHAP, XXXL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY,





ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAP. XXX.


Ver. 2, Return. When wrong has
been done among men, the only way
to obtain again the favour of those
who have been injured, is by repent-
ance. No man who has done evil in
any way can be restored to forfeited
favour, but by just this process of re-
pentance—by a process involving all
the elements of shame, grief, remorse,
reformation, confession that are de-
manded in religion.— Barnes,


Ver. 11. Not hidden. “We ought
not to attempt to draw down, or sub-
mit the mysteries of God to our reason;
but, on the contrary, to raise and ad-
vance our reason to Divine truth—
Bacon.


Ver. 14. Do tt. “Sir,” said the
Duke of Wellington to an officer of
engineers, who urged the impossibility
of executing the directions he had re-
ceived, ‘I did not ask your opinion,
I gave you my orders, and I expect
them to be obeyed.” Such should be
the obedience of every follower of
Jesus, the words which he has spoken
are our law, not our judgment or


fancies. Even if death were in the
way it is—

Not ours to reason why—

Ours, but to dare and die,
and, at our master’s bidding, advance
through flood or flame.—Spurgeon.


Vers. 15-19. This day. It is re-
corded of Archius, a Grecian magis-
trate, that a conspiracy was formed
against his life. A friend, who knew
the plot, despatched a courier with the
intelligence, who, on being admitted
to the presence of the magistrate, de-
livered to him a packet with this
message, “My Lord, the person who
writes you this letter conjures you to
read itimmediately—it contains serious
matters.” Archius, who was then at
a feast, replied, smiling, “ Serious
affairs to-morrow,” put the packet aside
and continued the revel. On that
night the plot was executed, the
magistrate slain, and Archius, on the
morrow, when he intended to read the
letter, a mutilated corpse, leaving te
the world a fearful example of the
effects of procrastination—J. A.
James.





CHAPTER XXXI.


CrrricaL Remares.—Moses had finished the interpretation and enforcement of the law. But
his work is not quite accomplished, he therefore makes final arrangements.


1-6. Encouragement to Israel,


Went Heb. continued to speak and prepare himself, His age


not likely to render him a sufficient guide in future, though his natural force was unabated
(cf. xxxiv. 7.) God also had intimated his approaching death and forbidden him to go over


Jordan (Num, xx, 24),


7-8. Joshua becomes leader.
that his authority might not be
fear—looking only to themselves.


9-13, Moses commits the Law to Levites.
release (ver, 15). 1, Taber (Lev. xxiii, 24),


But God will go with them and
strong, he will not fail thee.” (cf. Josh. i. 5, Heb. xiii. 5.)


Joshua will lead them, Hence ‘‘ Be


Encouraged in the same words as the people, In the sight ofall
questioned, Fearnot. Many dangers and great reasons for


To be read at the end of seven years—the of
Appear (ver. 11; ef. xvi. 16; Neh. viii. 12 seg.)


Read, Josh, viii. 34 ; 2 Kings xxiii. Law—not the whole Pentateuch, but summaries,


14-18.
would sleep (lie down) with his fathers,
(of. Ex. xxxiv. 15 ; Judg. ii. 17.)
suffer them to fall into deep troubles.


Moses informed of his Death. Called


with Joshua into the tabernacle (v. 15) he


but the nation would apostatise go a whoring.
Break the covenant and God in anger would hide his face and


19-23, Moses commanded to write a song as “a witness for God against them.” Waxen fat (qf.
xxxii. 15; Neh. ix. 23 Hos, xiii. 6, Forgotten (ver. 21), “Being in verse it would be more
easily learned and kept in memory. The use of songs for such didactic purposes not unknowm


to legislators of antiquity, and was familiar to


(Ece, vi. 8 and Col. iii, 16)”—Speak. Com.
864


theologians of later times of Social History


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY, OHAP XXXI.
Ce ace eet er

24-27. The song finished and put into the ark of covenant. The book commenced before

- Ex, xvii. 14, gradually increased and now finished, %.¢., in full, wholly complete. In the side.


(ver, 26) for greater security and reverence. Only tables of stone in the ark (1 Kings viii. 9).
Ver. 27. Words by which Moses handed the book to the priests.


28-39. Rehearsal toassembledelders. Gather civil authorities of the congregation specially to
‘ear ths ode. Know partly for past experience and partly for gift of prophecy. He prono
the words audibly to the representative and they to the people of the song following.


A FaREwELL ADDRESS.— Verses 1-6.


Moses had spent 40 years in Pharaoh’s court, 40 years in Midian, and 40 as
leader of Israel. He is about to leave his people, but gives specific instructions
and makes certain arrangements, from which learn—


I. God’s workmen are often taken away in the midst of usefulness. The
work of Moses not finished but he had intimation of death. 1. Through old
age. “1 am an hundred and twenty, &c.” Old comparatively for “his eye was
not dim, nor his natural force abated.” Age brings infirmities, and incapacitates
for work. “It is the worst time we can choose to mend either our lives or our
fortunes,” says one. Not the time to begin the service of God, who deserves
our energy from our youth, ¢f 2 Sam. xix. 35: Ecc. xii.1-7. 2. Through special
Providence. Sometimes punishment for sin. Moses and Aaron forbidden to
enter Canaan, Num. xx. 12. David could not build the temple. Or accidents
and sudden death cut off men when prominent, in the prime of life and the
splendour of fame, and likely to be useful. Men who leave a blank not easily
filled up, a heavy loss to the Christian Church and the world. Let each fulfil
the os of life and be able to say, “I have finished the work which thou gavest
me to do,”


II. God’s work is carried on by successors, Moses dies, and Joshua succeeds,
“ God buries his workmen, but carries on his work,” says Wesley. 1. Successors
divinely called. Joshua specially chosen out of all the tribes of Israel. God’s
servants not self-called, nor put into office by friendship and worldly favour.
“ There is nothing in which a king would be more absolute than in the choice of
his ministers. And shall we dare to contest and take away this right from the
King of Kings?’ Quesnel. 2. Successors specially qualified. Joshua specially
gifted and trained by service. More than natural endowment required.
“None but he who made the world can make a minister of the gospel,” said
Newton. None selected for important work enters it at his own charge. God
equips and helps.


III. God gives encouragement to those who carry on his work. Fellow workers
may fall, but God compensates for loss. 1. By his presence, “ He will go over
before thee,” ver. 3. If under the inspiration of Alexander, Cesar, and other
great leaders, soldiers have performed exploits, what can we not do with God
present! Failure impossible with him! 2. By his promise. Presence animates,
but accompanied with promise often makes soldiers irresistible. God’s promiseg
may be trusted, God’s bonds given and sealed with his own hand. “ He will
not fail thee, &c.” 8. By his help. Promise must issue in performance. God
is strencth for burdens and a shield for battles. His grace makes the heart
stout and the arm strong. ‘ He giveth power to the faint, and to them that
have no might he increaseth strength.”


A Guoriovs Past.— Verse 4,


1. A godly people will always have a glorious past. Israel’s past, England’s
past. A Christian man looks back upon a wonderful past-enlightenment, for-
365


OHAP, XXXI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





giveness and adoption, great peace, great joy, and great hope. Nothing little
in redemption. God’s gifts like himself. “Great and marvellous are thy
works.” 11. This glorious past should not be forgotten. ‘he great things of
God should be remembered, considered, and prompt to obedience. They are
helpful for the present, pledges of God’s faithfulness and power and types of
future mercies, ‘‘ The Lord shall give them up before your face, that ye may
do uzto them according to all the commandments which I have commanded
you,” ver &.


Lrrr’s Conruicrs.— Verses 3-6.


Israei about to engage in arduous warfare. God would help them, theretore —
they must not be discouraged. I. Life a warfare. A soldier’s life hardness
endured, 2 Tim, i 3. Discomforts in camp, field duties, tedious marches,
great and numerous foes to overcome (Sihon and Og), territories to gain, and a
purpose to be accomplished.


II. We are not sufficient in ourselves for this warfare. In us no good
thing. Our sufficiency for everything from God. 1. We are weak. Need
strength and defence. Divine grace alone makes the heart stout and the arm
strong. “We have no might against this company.” 2. We are timid,
“ Fear not,” “ Cowardice hath made us by-words to our enemies” (Shaks.), and
a disgrace to our captain. Swedenborg says, “Charles II. did not know what
that was which others called fear.” Fear not, nor be dismayed; be strong and
of good courage.” 38. Weare afraid. Danger frightens, enemies overawe, and
we forebode evil. We fight with shadows and waste our strength. “ Thou
shalt not be afraid of them; but shalt remember what the Lord thy God did
unto Pharaoh, &c,” Deu. vii. 18. .


III. In God we may have confidence to help. “The Lord thy God, he doth
go with thee.” Not much behind, nor too far before, with thee, to guide,
Prov. xx. 24; xvi. 9; provide, Heb. xiii, 5; and help, Jos. i. 5. Confidence;
1. In the word of God. The promise counteracts tendency to doubt and faint, —
fitted to produce and support assurance, 2. In the faithfulness of God. He
never modifies, retracts, nor forgets his word. He wills and intends to fulfil it.
Nothing can make him recede from his merciful purpose, nor cause him to
repent or violate his pledge, ‘‘ The strength of Israel will not lie nor repent ;—
for he is not a man that he should repent.” 3. In the presence of God. “Hae
will go over before thee,” ver 8. God with Moses, God with J oshua, God with
every good man—with thee. Grand words to begin an undertaking and
conquest, to encourage in life’s dangers and toils! ‘“ Understand, therefore,
this day that the Lord thy God is he who goeth over before thee, &c.,”
Deu. ix. 8. 4. In the strength of God. He increases our might, makes us
more than ourselves, more than a match for any foe. “There shall not
any man be able to stand before thee all the days of thy life,” Jos. i. 5.
eae se war against thee shall be as nothing and as a thing of nought,


Tue Cuosen Leapen.— Verses 7, &


In the choice of Joshua, Moses displays his greatness and intense anxiety
for his people. No excessive grief, nor unavailing remorse. He appoints &
successor not out of his own family or from his own choice, but according to
God’s will (¢f Num, xxvii. 15),

866


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY « DEUTERONOM y OHAP, XXX





I. A leader specially qualified for the work. Joshua was honoured and
qualified in an eminent degree. 1. 7rained under Moses. He was the winister,
the servant of Moses (Jos, i. 1), With him on the Mount (Ex. xxiv. 13), and
® companion in the camp. 2. Qualified by God. Filled with the spirit of
wisdom, courage, and the fear of God (Deut. xxxiv. 9). As leader under a
theocracy he was to act as the minister of God, wait for instructions from God,
and shepherd or lead the people as the flock of God (Num. xxvii. 17).


II. A leader publicly chosen. “In the sight of all Israel” desiznated to office,
By a solemn rite set apart (Num. xxvii. 18). 1. To indicate the solemnity of
the charge. 2. To set forth its responsibility. 8. To identify himself with the
people. 4. To gain the sympathy of the people. ‘ Encourage him, for he shall
cause Israel to inherit it” (Deut. i. 38).


ITI. A leader specially encouraged. Though courageous and resolute he re-
quired help. ‘The work was new, long, and arduous, He felt inferior to Moses, and
knew the perverseness of the people. 1. Divinely guided, Jehovah would go before
him. What help and inspiration in this thought. ‘“‘ There is no inspiration.so
great as to feel the influence of a spirit greater and nobler than our own. When
we listen to his voice, when we are ready to do his will, our whole nature is
liberated and exalted, and out of this the greatest and noblest work comes”
(Dr. Allon). 2. Divinely assisted. ‘He will not fail thee.” Joshua not
faint-hearted, but humble; hence cheered, often encouraged to “be strong.”
If God be with us, what account those against us! Who can defeat Divine
wisdom or overcome Omnipotence! In God’s work God’s servants never alone,
never forsaken. Joshua took the reins of government and led the tribes to the
conquest of Canaan. Brave in counsel and brave in war, he trusted in Cod
and accomplished his charge. Be you courageous, hold the divine commands
sacred and in spite of opposition yield full and hearty obedience, This is true
wisdom and gains true success. “ Then thou shalt make thy way prosperous,
and then thou shalt have good success (do wisely) ” (Jos. i. 8).


“ He holds no parley with unmanly fears,
Where duty bids he confidently steers,
Faces a thousand dangers at her call,
And, trusting in his God, surmounts them all”


HOMILETIO HINTS AND 8UGGESTIONS.


Ver. 2. Thou shalt not go over. never shall the covenant of his faith


i. Best men not infallible, may sin.
2. Consequences of one sin most
serious. 3. God impartial and just
in punishing sin.


Vers. 3-6. I. A disheartened people.
Great leader lost. Great work to be
done. Our work to dethrone enemies,
enter lands, establish and maintain
the worship of God and the Kingdom
of Christ. ‘The children of Judah
could not drive them out.” II, A
sufficient God. “With thee” in
presence; “before thee” in pro-
vidence ; abiding in strength “ not
fail thee.”—‘ The mountains may
depart, and the hills be removed ; but


fulness fail.”


Vers. 6-8. Antidote tofear. ‘“ Fear
not.” I. He is able to help thee: He
will not fail thee, in adversity or
prosperity—will guard thee against
the immediate dangers of the one, and
the seductive influences of the other.
II. He is willing to help thee: not
able merely, but willing also, III. He
has promised to help thee: and his

romises are always sure. Learn (1)
Rely on God’s power; (2) Trust in
his promises (Biblical Museum).—
God’s Providence the ground of con-
tentment (of. Heb. xiii. 5). “ He will
not fail , nor forsake yep L

867


OKRAP. XXXL


AUMILETIO COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





Then cherish no distressing care—“one
hair white or black ’—“ cast your care
upon him.” 2. Then cease to devise
your own plans, We scheme for our
children and our business, tempt pro-
vidence and take destiny into our own
hands, God’s will supreme. ‘“ Com-
mit thy way to him, &c.” 3. Zhen
exercise implicit faith in God; (1)
whose promise is sure; (2) whose
power 18 omnipotent; (3) whose
providence is universal. Be strong.
“The Septuagint in this and the fol-
lowing verse have play the man, and
be strong. From this St. Paul seems
to have borrowed his ideas (1 Cor.
xvi. 13.) Stand firm in the faith;


play the man, act like heroes; be
vigorous.” —A. Clarke.

Vers. 7,8. Appointment of Joshua
to succeed Moses, Consider: 1. ‘Ihe
concern of Moses for the people com-
mitted to him. In this he acted as—
1. as a true patriot; 2. a faithful
minister, II, The gracious provision
which God made for them: 1. He —
selected a suitable person for the
office ; 2. He prescribed the mode of his
ordination to it. (Num. xxvii. 15-17; —
3. He promised him all needful as-
sistance in it. Learn (1) the blessed-
ness of the Christian Church ; (2) the
duty of advancing in every possible
way its best interest.—C, Simeon, M.A —


Tar InnertreD Votume.— Verses 9, 13, 19, 22, 24-26,


Moses now commits the law which he had written into the hands of the
priests and elders, the religious and secular rulers of the congregation, to be —
read and preserved for future generations,


I. The Law to be written.
safe method of transmission.
tradition,
propagated.
children and a statute book for all.
the archives of the nation.


“* Moses wrote this law.”
More secure, complete, and diffusive than oral
In this method titles and estates are handed down, arts and sciences
e literature of Israel as a story-book for


Hence written and carefully preserved in
“ Write in a book.”


This law has to rank in th


This a natural and


II, The Law to be read. _ Strict are regulations on this point, 1. Read at
festivals, Four instances given (Jos, viii. 30; 2 Chron, xvii. 7; xxxiv. 30;


Neh, viii. 7).


tabernacles,”


a. “In the year of release”
discharged, debtors acquitted, and all had leisure to read.
special occasions should be devoted to Bible reading,


Most appropriate season


(ver. 10). When servants were
i Spare time and —
b. “In the feast of


» a8 revealing the source and purifying


the nature of their joy—connecting the design of the law with the spirit of the


festival.


law and review His mercies,


2. Read in public assemblies,
Bible reading important part of religi
reverence and edification—a privilege to


“In the place” of assembly (ver. 11),


ous worship—needful for instruction,
meet in God’s house to
3. ead to all classes,


expound the
Old and young, and


strangers within the gates (ver, 12). All classes interested—home-born and


aliens, bond and free, must be taught the word of God.
no fear of giving the law to the common
that they may hear, love, and obey God.


III. The law to be preserved (vers, 24-26).
to preserve for that and future nations,


in the ark for greater reverence and


“That they may hear, learn, and obe


security,
y” (ver. 12). Men apt to forget what


There is no hesitation,
people, It is their right and privilege


What was written, was needful
A second copy of the law was deposited
1, Preserved as a rule of life,


God requires, Philosophy and reason do not supply a standard of duty. In —


the Bible, and the Bible alone, have we a
# book to make us wise unto salvation.


guide sufficient and unsurpassed—
2. Preserved as a witness against


disobedience. Memory may fail and teachers die ; but the law abides firm and


868


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY, CRAP. XXXL
eee ee ee re ee ee ee
faithful in its testimony. Solemn to have God’s law and neglect it—to turn the
blessing into a curse and the best of books into a witness against ua, Every


sermon we hear, every chapter we read, will help or finally condemn, “ Take
heed how ye hear.”


Tue Brste m Narionat History,


I. As the Basis of its Religion. Natural religion is founded on reason or
the light of philosophy. Systems of belief are often refined speculations of
mind, conflicting, uncertain, and insufficient. Revealed religion is spiritual,
vital, and safe. The Bible alone reveals God and moral duty, explains religious
worship, and offers moral renovation. It is the foundation of faith and practice,
and hope for the present and future life,


II, As the Friend of its Education. The Bible proves the necessity and the
value of education. It fosters and promotes intelligence among the masses,
helps to rear noble institutions, to enlighten and refine society. It has given
the world new ideas and impulses not found in the province of letters. Superb
themes for poetry, painting, and fine arts, and thus the highest enjoyment and
most exalted thoughts have been furnished by the Bible.


III. As the Sonrce of its Progress. In the Bible are strong innate principles
to civilize and elevate. Where these principles are practised we find refine-
ment, free institutions, and the blessings of liberty. Morals are purified, com-
mercial enterprise encouraged, cruelties and war abolished. ow much is
England indebted to the Bible? What is the condition of countries where the
Bible is fettered, exiled or unknown? It is source of progress in learning
legislation, and religion. It is not dead or effete yet. Its mission is great and
sublime. It is emphatically the Book for the people, the Book for the nation,
and the Book for the age.


This lamp from off the everlasting throne,

Mercy took down, and in the night of time

Stood casting on the dark her gracious bow,

And evermore beseeching men, with tears,

And earnest sighs, to read, believe, and live-— Pollok, Bk. 1


HOMILETIC HINT8 AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers, 7-13. Methods of propagating
Scripture. By writing or printing,
by public reading or expounding. Let
us be thankful for a complete and
printed Bible, The heritage of the
past and the trust of the present,
“Unto them were committed the
oracles of God.”

The Bible and the children. Reveal-
ing God to children, prescribing duties
to children, fostermg the spirit to
erform these duties, and ensuring the
appiness of children. The Bible an
entrancing book to children, in its
spirit, examples, and lessons, The
Bible in the family. he Bible should
be read in the family. When read


2a


rightly it promotes domestic comfort,
cleanliness, industrious and provident
habits ; it purifies the affections and
fills the dwelling with joy in poverty
and depression of trade.—(“ The Cot-
ter’s Saturday night.”)—‘‘'l'he voice
of rejoicing and salvation is in the
tabernacles of the righteous.”


Vers, 10-12. Directions here given
for public reading of the law. 1. To
be read at “the feast of tabernacles,”
the greatest of all their festivals, when
harvest and vintage being completed,
they had most leisure to attend to it,
This feast was celebrated in “the
year of release,” the most ae time

6


OHAP. XXXL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


eee


that could be chosen for reading the
law ; for then the people were freed
from debts, troubles, and cares of a
worldly nature, and at liberty to
attend to it, without distraction. 9,
The law was to be read by Joshua,
chief governor, and by others who had
the charge of instructing the people.
Thus Joshue. himself read to the con-
gregation Jos, viii. 84,35; Josiah and
Ezra, 2 Chr. xxxiv. 30; Neh. viii. 2.
But Jehoshaphat employed priests and
Levites (2 Chr. xvii. 9). This public
reading was in part the duty of the
king, the Jews say, who began it, and
that afterwards it was taken up by the
priests. 8. 'The law was to be read in
the hearing of all Israel (ver. 11).
(1) Pious Jews who had copies doubt-
less read in their own houses, (2)
Some portion was read in the syna-
gogue every Sabbath day (Acts xv. 21).
(3) In Jehoshaphat’s time it was read
by his command in the different cities
of Judah, and the people were in-


structed out of it by the priests and
Levites, but (4) at every year of re
lease the law was read, not only
publicly to all the people, but through-
out, and read from an original copy,’
which served as a standard by which
all other copies were tried. 4. The
whole conzregation must assemble to
hear the law. Hence learn (1) that
when our debts are remitted and we
are brought into the liberty of God’s
children we shall then delight to hear
and obey our delivering Lord in every
call of duty. (2) The word of God
being our only rule, should be read
and known of all; how cruel the
attempt, and how contrary to the
Divine will, to keep it locked up from
the people in an unknown tongue, and
to establish ignorance by law! (3)
Nothing should engage us more soli-
citously than the early instruction of —
our children in the knowledge of the
holy Scriptures, which alone can make
them wise unto salvation—J, Wilson,


A Sotemn Meetina.— Verses 14-16, 23.


Moses commanded to


present himself with Joshua in the tabernacle, the


circumstances in which they met, and the charge they received, made the meeting


memorable and solemn.


I. The persons who met, made the meeting solemn. Not the congregation,


but the leaders,
meet together in private prayer or
Prayers more ardent and. appeals
three,


II. The place in which they met
nacle, the special dwelling of Jehovah,


Numbers interest, excite and create enthusiasm, When few
Sunday class, the occasion is often solemn.
more effectual. God meets with two or


made the meeting solemn. The taber-
filled with his glory, the cloud outside


and inside. The utmost done to invest the place with peculiar sanctity. Re-
peatedly is the injunction given : “Ye shall reverence my sanctuary.” In our
sinful and weak condition we need manifestations to excite awe, and glory
tempered with clouds to encourage access,


III. The purpose for which they met made the meeting solemn. 1. Moses
to receive intimation of his death, ‘Thou shalt die,” Solemn message! but
no grief nor murmuring. His chief concern for a successor (Num, xxvii. 16).
He was not unprepared, but resigned, ready and responded to the call. Could
we face a sentence like this? Our death will be a personal approach to God,
“Set thine house in order.” 2, Joshua to be inaugurated to office, Publicly
designated before. But a higher sanction required to encourage the leader
himself, and beget the respect and obedience of a fickle and perverse people.
We should ever listen to the voice of God and feel that his equipment is need-
fal for every enterprize. 38, Both to hear of future apostacy, Moses would
grieve es intercede ; Joshua would be aware of danger and strive to avert it


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OHAP, XXXI








Bad predictions, casting shadows of fear in the hour of death and upon the
entrance of office. But whatever brings us near to God, and prepares for the
events of life or death is profitable.

"Tis the sunset of life gives me mystical love,

And coming events cast their shadows before.


—T. Campbell,


Tue Darx Prospect—Verses 16-21.


What human insight could pronounce such a future, especially when the
moral condition of the people and present signs seemed to contradict 1t What
human legislator would give laws and predict that his subjects would break
them! What a proof is this of the divine origin of this sacred book !


I, The chosen people turning into apostates. Disowning their ‘relation “ to
go @ whoring after other Gods.” 1. Unfaithful in special trust (ver. 20).
Received the land, yet neglected to drive out its people, the least unfaithful-
ness may bring a curse, as the weakest footstep or the slightest breath may
cause an avalanche to entomb a village. 2. Ungrateful for innumerable favours
(ver. 20). Fed upon the gifts and forgot the giver. Indulged in sensual enjoy-
ments, abused prosperity, “ according to their pasture so were they filled ; they
were filled and their heart was exalted ; therefore have they forgotten me”
(Hos, xiii. 6).” 8. Rebellious against divine laws, ‘Break my covenant.”
Forgetful of dependence, proud of their position, they were a law unto them-
selves, Having thrown off allegiance to God, “ they turn unto other gods,”


II. Divine Goodness turned into Divine Wrath. “Then my anger shall be
kindled against them,” ver. 17. God’s relations to us and dealings with us,
according to our conduct. 1. Anger most severe. ‘ Many evils and troubles
shall befall them.” 2. Anger most destructive. ‘They shall be devoured.”
Fearful aspect of God. “ Consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in
pieces, and there be none to deliver.” 3. Anger im recompense to sin. “Are
not these evils because God is not among us,” ver. 17. Sin ever brings its own
retribution, and presumptuous sins defy God’s authority. He justly casts off
those who rebel against him, withdraws protection and prosperity, and leaves
them to suffer the consequences of their own sins, “I will punish them (visit
upon) for their ways, and reward (return to) them their doings, Hos., iv. 7.


III. Special Chevks failing in desired results. Ver. 21. The example and
influence of Moses, the anointing and authority of Joshua, the declaration of
law, and the presence of death itself, were expedients to prevent evil. Restraints
are needful for the individual and the nations. But when men’s hearts are
“fully set in them to do evil,” neither affliction, the checks of conscience, nor
the restraints of providence will hinder. ‘“ A stubborn and rebellious genera-
tion, a veneration that set not their hearts aright,” ever wavered in allegiance,
and whose spirit was not stedfast with God,” Ps. Ixxviii. 8.


IV. Severe punishment without remedy. Indications of God’s displeasure
were many, but the greatest punishment was the “hiding of his face from them
on that day.” In the darkest day, in the greatest trouble we may rejoice in
the light of his countenance. But if God hide his face from us, and forsake us,
prayer avails not, our sun is turned into darkness and life into mourning.
1. Hnquiry can find no escape, ver. 17. Are these evils not the result of
God’s withdrawal? Let us consult and try to discover escape. Intense anxiety
and earnest search in vain, “Thou shalt not escape out of his hand.”
2. Future prospect affords no escape, ver. 18. Future condition would be
worse than the present; sin and servit-We, judgment and apt a


OHAP, XXXL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY,





their history, but changed not their disposition, Judg, ii. 19. God was
provoked ; his anger was kindled. “They were devoured (consumed with
affliction) and troubles befell (found) them because forsaken of God, ver. 17.
Buch is the dark prospect of the sinner. God warns and urges escape. “Stand
in awe and sin not,”


“ Take heed, for God holds vengeance in His hand }
To hurl upon their heads that break his law.”—Shakespeare:


A Sona ror tHE Peorte— Verses 19-26,


Laws, history and proverbs often put into verse. The valour and praises
of famous men often sung at feasts. National songs are retained in the
memories and stir the deepest feelings of a people. This song of Moses
(ch. 2), composed by divine inspiration, to be learnt by Israel and taught
their children in every age. Poetry and prose, the energy of heart and tones
of voice should be consecrated to God. “Teaching and admonishing one
another in Psalms and hymns and spiritual songs,” ete,


I. The song in its form. “Write this song.” This the best method for
preserving and transmitting divine revelations to mankind, more natural, secure,
complete and diffusive than oral testimony.


II, The song in its design, 1. Zo reverse God’s mercy (ver. 20). In making
the covenant bestowing the land, and giving prosperity. It commemorates
God’s sovereign mercy and rich provision for his people. “Put it in their
mouths” that it may stir their hearts. “Sing unto the Lord.” 2. To justify
God's proceeding, “That this song may be a witness for me.” In forewarning
of danger, checking tendencies to fall into it, and persuading to love and obedi-
ence. The word tells truth, points out duty, and will witness for God in
apostacy ard punishment, 3, To humble the people. The song reminded of
dependence, “ was well suited to inspire the popular mind with a sense of God’s
favour to their nation.” A nation sinful, rebellious and unworthy. If it did
not prevent apostacy it would lead to penitence and humility, “It shall not
be forgotten.”


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS,


Ver. 16. Thou shalt sleep (may lie
down). Old Testament conception of
death. 1. Life a period of work. 3,
Death a rest, a lying down. 3. But
there will be a rising up, an awakening
from this sleep (¢f Ps. Ixxvi. 6; Dan.
xii. 2; 1 Thess. iv. 13; 2 Peter iii. 4),
4. This resurrection a gathering to
yood men. Death not dominion for
ever, cuts not off from Holy patriarchs
and companions—“ ‘hou shalt be
gathered unto thy people” (Num.
xxvii. 13).


Ver. 19. A witness for me. 1. Of
his kindness in giving them so many
blessings, 2. Of His patience in bear-
ing so long with them. 3, Of His


372


clemency in giving them such fair and
plain warnings, and, 4. Of His justice
in punishing such an unthankful, per-
verse and incorrigible people.—J.
Wilson,


Ver. 20. Notice—1 Selfish indul-
gence. 2. Sinful pride. 8, Abomin-
able idolatry associated with—(a)
debasing service ; (6) Open rebellion ;
(c) Divine provocation—sins most un-
natural, most dangerous, ‘“ How shall
I pardon thee for this ? Thy children
have forsaken me, and sworn by them
that are no gods, When I fed them
to the full they committed adultery,”
(Jer. v. 7)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. XXXI.








Tuy Farrurv, AMANnuENsIS.— Verses 11, 24-26, 30,


I. The work in which he was engaged. “ Write ye this.” Ancient kings
copied the law. Monks in the Scriptorium, careful and devout, exact and
conscientious, have preserved learning and handed down Manuscripts. Let us
be thankful for the alphabet, printing, and the arts of civilization !


II, The method in which he prosecuted the work. 1. Patient in spirit.
Slow process, not like printing, to write. 2. Preserving in effort. ‘“ Unti they
were finished ” (ver, 24).— Ven. Bede. 8. Mindful of the endin view. Under
soleinn sense of responsibility for correctness, knowing the future consequences,
yet he completes and preserves the work, 4. He recites what he writes, vocalises
the word, “ speaks in their ears” (ver. 28), to help the memory and impress thie
heart. “The manner of reading among the Orientals is not less peculiar than
the style of their writing. Generally speaking, the people seem not to understand
a book till they have made it vocal. ‘They usually go on reading aloud, with a
kind of singing voice, moving their heads and bodies in time, and making a
monotonous cadence at regular intervals; thus giving emphasis, although not
such as would please an English ear” (¢f. Acts viil, 27-40).


Tur Sotemn WARNING AGAINST FUTURE IDoLATRY.— Verses 27-80,


Israel is again admonished of duty, solemnly forewarned of sad consequences
of defection aud to this very day this song is strong proof to Jew and Ueutile
that Moses spoke by inspiration of God.


I, Divine Foresight of Israel’s Sins. “I know that after my death, &c.”
(verse 29). Israel would decline from God, corrupt themselves, provoke God’s
anger and bring fearful calamities upon themselves. God knows all future events.
Nothing surprises him or happens unknown, Eternity is unveiled before him
and nothing is concealed from him. “Thou knowest my down sitting and
mine uprising and understandest my thought afar off.”


II. Solemn Warning of certain results of Israel's Sins. Self degradation,
divine provocation and a series of calamities enough to cause bitter reflection |
All this warning in love, to deter from sin, Threatenings should alarm, rouse
to repentance aud return to God. When evil is foreseen we should lide our-
selves (Prov. xxii. 3). Disciples fled from impending evil (Matt. x. 23). Paul
hid himself from threatened destruction (Acts xvil. 4; xxiii, 17), ‘‘ Noah
moved with fear, prepared an ark for the saving of his house.”


III. Solemn Warnings disregarded and threatened results experienced’
The testimony of song, the death of Moses, and the checks of providence did
not prevent from sin. ‘Ihe presence of good men imay restrain, but not eradicate
evil, ‘lhe expedients of God may fail. The very sins at which men are
astonished may be committed, and they may rush madly on to sufferings. ‘Is
thy servant a dog that he should do this great thing.” No force without, not
even the divine law—as law merely—commanding and punishing can conquer
the will. God alone by his spirit and grace can renew and control. “ Keep
back thy servaut from presumptuous sins,”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND 8&UGGESTIONS.


Ver. 21. God’sintimate knowledge imagmation, the purposes and desires)
of future evil, 1. Jn its root. Their only evil continually (every day)”
imagination, “ Every imagination of Gen. vi. 5. 2. In its fruits, Troubles
the thoughts of his heart (Heb. whole which befall them. “As a man that

873


CHAP. XXXL


nie


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ;: DEUTERONOM Y.





knows what roots he hath in his garden,
though not a flower appears, yet can say
when the spring comes, this and this
will come up because he knows the
garden and:knows what roots are there :
so the Lord knows our thoughts afar
off, because he knows the principles
that are within, and knows what they
will do when occasion serves; he is
privy to that root that beareth gall and
wormwood ” (¢f. xxix. 18).—7Zrapp.


Vers, 21, 27, 29. God’s service.
1. Relaxed in practice. 2. Perverted
in simplicity, 8. Secularised in spiri-


tualty, and 4, Debased in dignity. Sad
sight ! Offensive to God ! Imagination,
thought, and purpose, corrupt, evil and
only evil. ‘he root ot violence and
oppression, wantonness and luxury
(Jas. i. 15; Mt. xv. 19.) “I know thy
rebellion” verse 27. Not an uncon-
cerned spectator, but as one injured
and affronted, as a tender father sees —
the folly and stubbornness of a dis-
obedient child who displeases and


grieves him.
He that shuts love out, in turn shall
Be shut out from love, and on her threshold
lie
Howling in outer darkness.—Tennyson.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XXXII.


Ver. 2. Old. Life is the ordinance
of God. Nothing more shows Divine
Sovereignty than the time and place of
our birth, the duration of our life and
the circumstances of our death._—
G. S. Bowes.


Vers, 3-6. Work. Whatever be the
meanness of a man’s occupation, he
may discharge and prosecute it on
principles common to him with Michael
or Gabriel, of any of the highest
spirits of heaven.—( Binney.) Courage.
Ver. 6. Is there one whom difficulties
dishearten—who bends to the storm ?
He will do little. Is there one who
will conquer? That kind of man never
faila—(John Hunter.)


Vers, 7, 8. Joshua chosen.


God sends his teachers with every age

To every clime ana every race of man,
With revelations fitted to their growth
And shape of mind.—(Zowell),


Vers. 9-18, Delivered. Tradition
is the treasure of religious thought,
amassed by ages upon the platform of
positive revelation.— Vinet.

The Protestant bible lives on the
ear like a music that can never be
forgotten—like the sound of church
bells, which the convert hardly knows
how he can forego. _Its felicities often
seem to be almost things rather than
mere words, It isa part of the national
mind, and the anchor of national
seriousness; . . . . the memory
of the dead passes into it, The potent

874


traditions of childhood are stereotyped
in its verses. ‘The power of all the
griefs and trials of a man is hidden
beneath its words. It is the repre-
sentative of his best moments, and all
that there has been about him of soft,
and gentle, and pure, and penitent,
and good, speaks to him for ever out
of his English bible—Newman.


Vers. 14, 15. Accidents occur no-
where so little as in the lives of men
who have determined the history and
progress of man, Jfoses, the man of
God, was a man made of God for
men.— Fairbairn,

Call Joshua.


The old order changeth, yielding place to
new;
And God fulfils himself in many ways,
—TZennyson.


Vers. 16-18, 20, 21, 27,29. Jt shal
come to pass.


Time, as he courses onwards, still unrolle

The volume of concealment; In the future,

As in the optician’s glassy cylinder,

The undistinguishable blots and colour

Of the dim past collect and shape themselvea,
Upstarting in their own completed image —
To scare or to reward.—&, T, Coleridge.


Vers. 24-26, nd of writing.


Do not for one repulse forego the purpose
That you resolved to effect.— Shakespeare.


Vers, 19-30. Song. “Give me the
making of the nation’s ballads,” said
Lord Chatham, “and I care not whe
makes the laws,” .


HIOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. XXXII,
whet th ore, ASE EE 2 A ee Ea


CHAPTER XXXIL


The song oomposed by Moses and recited to the people asa witness against them. It
embraces the whole future history of Israel, and bears all the marks of prophetic testimony in
the perfectly ideal picture which it draws on the one hand, or the benefits and blessings couferred
by the Lord upon His people ; on the other hand of the ingratitude with which Israel repaid
God for them all” (cf. De/itz). The poem divided into six parts.


1-3. Introductory, importance of doctrine delivered. Heaven and earth invoked not as
matter of rhetoric, not to witness for God as ¢f. iv. 26; xxx. 19; xxxi. 28, but indicative of
the whole universe, which would be affected and sanctified by the righteousness of Gow manifest
in heaven and earth. Doctrine. Let my doctrine, a prayer. Rain with soft penetrating
influence (Is, lv. 10-11). Greatness equivalent to glory in Ps, xxix. 1; xcvi. 7, 8.


46. The righteousness of God placed in contrast with the corruption, perversity and folly of
Israel, Rock—first time God so called in scripture and used six times in this song. A name
often found in phrases (for Heb. Zsur) like “strength” (Ps, lxxiii. 26; exli. 1), or “ Mighty
One” (Is.*xxx. 29). Perfect blameless, without fault. On contrary Israel acted corrupily
{ver. 5). They have, The verb is singular. Render. “It (i.e. “the perverse and crooked
generation,” understood from the context) hath corrupted itself before Him “ (of, Is. i. 4) ; they
are not his children, but their blemish,” 4c. the generation of evil doers cannot be styled
God’s children, but rather the shame and disgrace of God’s children” (Speak. Com.) Crooked
(of. Mt. xvii. 7; Luke ix. 41.) Foolish (ver. 63 of. 4, 6; Pa. xo. 12) Bought, acquired thee
for His own. Made a nation.


7-14. Innumerable benefits conferred. Blessings given from the very first days of old (ver. 7).
Divided (ver. 8) by His providence, Set bounds, reserved for His people a fit inheritance
“according to the number,” proportionate to the wants of the population. Portion (ver. 9), lot
or piece of land; here a figure applied to the nation (¢f. Ex. xv. 16; xix. 5). (Ver. 10-14)
Helpless and hopeless condition of Israel, and love and care which God displayed. Waste, lit.,
in the land of the desert and the waste (“formless waste” as Gen. i 2) howling wilderness,
amid ferocious beasts. Apple guarded as the tenderest part (of. Ps. xvii. 8; Prov. vii 2).
Eagle noted for its care and affection (Ex. xix. 4; Is. xiii. 9), 12, So the Lord alone delivered
Israel and trained them. 18. Ride high positions in which they gained dominion (¢f. xxxiii. 29).
Honey, richest provisions from fruitful fields and unlikely places,


15-18. Base ingratitude for benefits. Jeshurun only found here and in xxxiii. 5, and
Is, xliv. 2. A description of a nation right and just, “not the character which belonged to
Israel in fact, but that to which Israel was called.” An epithet intended to convey keen
reproof. Fat. The figure of an ox, fat and intractable in consequence (Is. x. 27: Hos. iv. 16).
Forsook, rejected. Esteemed, lit. to treat as a fool, to despise (Mic. vii. 6). Rock in Palestine, a
refuge from enemies, Jealousy (ver. 16), language from matrimonial relationship (Ex. xxxiv. 14 ;
Is, liv. 5; Jer. ii 25), Devils (ver. 17), false gods, malignant and destructive (Lev. xvii. 7).
Not toGod, Marg. NotGod, é¢, which were not God. Gods who had not benefitted them.
Newly up, from near, from Moab, Amon and Canaan in a local sense ; or in contrast to Jehovah,
who had manifested Himself of old (ver. 7).


19-22, God’s rejection of Israel. Abhorred, despised, cast them off. Provoked by sins.
Davghters, women had full share (Is. iii. 165 Jer. vii. 18). See, I will show what their end will
be at last.—(Ainsworth). No faith, no dependence upon them Ver. 21, The terms, “not God”
and “vanities” (nothings) were preferred, and God moved to anger. God would therefore
excite them to jealousy, and ill-will by a “no-people” and “foolish nation,” 14¢., transfer
blessings upon them instead of Israel. (Ver. 22) When kindled divine anger would burn to
lowest hell, the deepest destruction of sheol, the lower world, consume earth’s produce and set on
fire foundations of mountains.


23-28. Evils threatened many and severe, like arrows which warriors shoot at foes
(Ps, xxxviii. 8; xci 5; Job vi 4, Burning heat, 4.¢., fever of pestilence, famine, plague, wild
beasts, poismnous serpents and war, would bring them to verge of destruction. (Ver. 26) Scatter
them away avi viot out their remembrance. (Ver. 27) Were it not that I feared. i.e, that I
should be provoked to wrath when the enemy ascribed the overthrow of Israel to his own
prowess and not to my judgments.—(Speak. Com.) Hand over hand was high, t., lifted up,
shown itself mighty. For the reason they deserved not to be spared.


29-33. The reasons which lead to severity. They were foolish. Latter end, te which they
were obstinately rushing, é.¢., destruction if not averted. (Ver. 30) Chase. If wise, conquest
would be easy and the promise (Lev. xxvi. 8) fulfilled. But abandoned for ae

7


OHAP, XXXIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY,








“sold” and “delivered up.” (Ver. 81) Their rock, gods in whom heathens trust, were felt te
be unequal to Israel’s God or Rock. Judges. “Having experienced so often the formidable
might of God, they knew for a certainty that the God of Israel was very different from their own
idols,”—(Calvin), Their vine worse than the vine of Sodom, universally corrupt, like Sodom and
Gomorrah in wickedness. Bitter (of. 2 Kings iv. 89-41; Is. v. 2-4 3 Jer. ii, 21). Figures
which express that “nothing could be imagined worse, or more to be abhorred than that
nation.—(Calvin).


34-43. God’s purpose to have mercy upon Israel when chastened and humbled. This wickedness
before mentioned and judgments upon it. Store remembered and sealed up in a bag as a treasure
carefully kept (Job xiv. 17; Hos. xiii 17). Vengeance, active vindi-ation of authority. Slide,
they will totter and fall, firm as they think themselves to be (Ps. xxxviii. 17; xciv. 18),
(Ver. 36) Judge (cf. Ps. cxxxv. 14; 1 Pet. iv. 17). Repent himself, have compassion, help them,
None, proverbial for all men (cf, 1 Kings xiv. 10; xxi. 21; 2 Kings iv. 8 ; xiv. 6), bond and
free ; none to help, (Ver. 37) Idols utterly worthless, to which Israel had brought sacrifices and
drink offerings. Rise up (Jer. ii. 28). (Ver. 39) “See now that I,Iam.” Experience enough
to convince them that idols were impotent and that Jehovah alone should be feared. Kill
(1 Sam. ii. 6; 2 Kings v. 7). God smites and heals (Job v. 17; Hos. vi. 1; Is. xxx. 26;
Ivii. 17). (Vers. 40-42) These verses are closely connected. The full stop in the A.V. at the
end of verse 40 should be removed, and the passage should run thus: For / lift up my hand to
heaven and say, as I live for ever, tf I whet, etc. In verse 40, in which God is describing as
swearing by Himself (of. Is. xlv. 23 ; Jer. xxii. 5; Heb. vi. 17). The lifting up of the hand
was ® gesture used in making oath (cf. Gen xiv. 22; Rev. x. 5, 6).— (Speak. Com.)
(Ver, 43) Rejoice in God’s retribution upon enemies in his wiping out the guilt which rested
upon people and land and thus exterminating idolatry.


44-52, A supplement added by the author, who inserted the song to the law. Hoshea —
(Num. xiii. 16). Set, give serious attention, Life (ver. 47), basis of all enjoyments and length
of life. (Ver. 48) Self-same day on which Moses rehearsed this song, and on which
announcement of death renewed (Num. xxvii. 12-14), “In form this repetition differs from
previous announcement, partly in the fact that the situation of Mount Nebo is more fully
described (in the land of Moab, etc., as in chap. i. 6 ; xxviii. 69), and partly in the continued use
of the imperative and a few other trifling points. These differences may all be explained from
the fact that the account here was not written by Moses himself.”—(Delits),


Tae Impostance or Divine Insravcrion.— Verses 1-6,


The metaphors of this inimitable song of singular beauty, very suggestive and
powerful. In many ways is the importance of Divine instruction set forth,


I, By its lofty theme. Israel’s God is made known in wonderful attributes,
“T will publish the name of the Lord. 1, / ’erfect in character, No injustice
and iniquity found in him. A rock of omnipotence and immutability. Perfect
in holiness, word and work. A God of truth—we charge God foolishly, but He
never errs, forgets nor retracts, “He cannot lie.” “Our rock, and there is
no unrighteousness in Him.” 2 Glorious in majesty. “Greatness,” royal
splendour and power must be ascribed to him, We cannot add to His greatness,
His perfections are infinite, We may acknowledge it and give Him glory due
so His name, _ It is not the bright light of eternity, but the glory seen in the
perfection of His works, the faithfulness of His word and the wisdom of His
administration, 38. Righteous in government. “All His ways are judgment,”
mysterious and incomprehensible, but “the ways of the Lord are right,”
(Hos. xiv. 9). 4. Immutable in urpose, We are inconstant and foolish, He -


unchangeable in plan, counsel an ways, “With whom is no variableness nor
ghadow of turning.”


II. By its adaptation to our moral condition. We need such a God to
redeem and comfort, in whom we may trust and live. 1, As “ the thirsty
earth” (Ps, Ixxii. 6). We need the rain, divine influence to soften our hearts
and lives, We are barren and unfruitful in the works and ways of God.
Ignorant of His truth and will, until “the doctrine drops as rain.” 2, As “the
grass, my sre fertilising showers to refresh, quicken and cause the seeds of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY. OHAP, XXXII.





knowledge to grow. This doctrine of God is like the dew, gentle and insinuating,
powerful and productive, The word “shall not return unto me void, but it
shall accomplish that which I please, eto.” (Is. lv. 10, 11),


III, By its interested witnesses. Heaven and earth appealed to as august
spectators. Such appeals often in matters of high importance (Ps. 1 3, 4;
Is. i 2; Jer. xxii. 29). This not a splendid instance of poetical apostrophe, but
indicative of an interested universe. A summons to all intelligent beings to
listen to the grand truths unfolded by this inspired ode. ‘The doctrine concerns
all mankind and should be known by all mankind. If neglected heaven and
earth will witness to their stupidity and disobedience. ‘“ Heaven shall reveal
his iniquity and the earth shall rise up against him” (Job xx. 27).


IV. By its benevolent design. A charge is made against Israel, whose
character was the reverse of that of Jehovah, whose condition was helpless and
deplorable. God deals in rectitude and love, and the writer is an example in
tender expostulation and heavenly aim, to the poet and the minister. 1. 70
impart wisdom. ‘OQ! foolish people and unwise.” Doubly foolish in forsaking
God, who bought, made and established them. “ Fools indeed, to disoblige one
on whom you have such necessary dependence. To forsake your own mercies
for lying vanities.” ‘Who hath bewitched (fascinated, demented) you?”
Gal. ili. 1. 2. To rectify judgment. “A perverse and crooked generation.”
Perverted, froward, and untractable in thought and purpose; crooked, irregular
and disorderly in life. God seeks to enlighten and correct them. “That ye
may be blameless and harmless (sincere) in the midst of a crooked and perverse
tation, among whom ye shine, as lights (luminaries or beacons) in the
world” (Phil. ii. 15). 3. 70 restore the divine image. Likeness to God is the
characteristic of His children, Sin defiles and degrades as spots in the face or
dirt on the garment. It corrupts and destroys like putrefaction in the body.
_ Grace delivers from sin, restores the divine image and makes us “sons of God.”
4. To kindle fervent gratitude. Israel’s base return for redemption and
advancement, innumerable privileges and unprecedented honours. “Do ye
thus requite the Lord?” We condemn the Jews, yet imitate their conduct.
God has delivered and exalted us, yet we do not feel that gratitude is required,
reasonable and just. God daily loads with benefits that we may render in
return (Ps, exvi. 12). Appeals to our sense of right for a natural and willing
return for mercies so constant and so great.


Tue ReveLation oF Gop.— Verses 4-6.


The doctrine of this song is a revelation concerning God. A declaration of
his name—a name expressing his qualities and distinguishing him from all other
gods, ‘I'his name must be published, for if the name drop out of use, the being
who owns it may be forgotten. 1. In the splendour of his perfections,
Jehovah the Great I am—independent and self-existent. The infinite, eternal.
and immutable God. Perfectly just and infinitely holy. Each attribute is
capable of distinct contemplation. All blended together constitute divine
excellence, like colours of light in the rainbow. 2. Jn the rectitude of his
moral government, “His ways are judgment,” that is accord with rectitude.
He is essentially and absolutely just. Leason asserts that he can have no
motive for injustice. Deeply fixed in the centre of conscience is this truth.
The Bible continually sets forth that “there is no unrighteousness ‘n him.”
“ Just and right is he,” in person and procedure. “A sceptre of righteousness
is the sceptre of thy kingdom.” 3. In the assertion of his rights. “Is not he


thy father that hath bought thee?” 1. Rights as Creator.—“ a he not
7


sHAP, XXXII HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; DEUTERONOMY.

a
made thee?” 2, Rights asa Covenant God, “ Thy father.”—We owe to him
homage, love and obedience. “'Thou O Lord, art our Father and Redeemer,
thy name is for everlasting” (Is. Ixiii. 16). Let us think of God as here
revealed, the absolute and the relative God, until our hearts are stirred to


gratitude, reverence and devotion. ‘“ Behold God is great and we know Him
not.”





-


Return, my senses, range no more abroad,
He only finds his bliss who seeks for reg
—ParneR,


Toe Dew or THE Worp.—Ver. 2.


“Distil as the dew.” Who hears the dew fall? What microphone could —


cc


reveal that music to our oss unpurged ears?” The dew distils in silence.
So does the speech of God. In stillness God’s love is condensed into dewlike
communications ; not read, nor heard, but known by direct power of the spirit
upon the soul. Not much in noise, turmoil, and bustle. Dew falls in wider
silence, in quiét places of sorrow and sickness ; more in the desert than in hot
harvest fields or neat gardens, from which we have been called. ‘Zhe dew distils


in darkness, Not in the darkness of external trial merely, but in times when we —
cannot see anything ; when we do not seem to be walking in darkness, but, like


Micah, “sé# in darkness,” too feeble even to grope ; times of reaction and


weariness after special work, after great or exciting success, even after unusually —


vivid spiritual blessing. You look out some dark night: there is no storm, no
rain, not the least token to your senses of what is going on. In the morning
you see every blade and leaf tipped with a dew drop, everything revived and
freshened, prepared for the heat of the day. So His words fall on your souls in
darkness, not with sensible power ; nothing flashes out from the page, nothing
shines to shed pleasant light on your path. You do not hear sound of abundance
of rain, but the words are distilling as the dew and preparing you for day. The


dew falls not in one mass of water, but innumerable Jitéle drops. What one —


drop does not reach another does, It is not one overwhelmingly powerful word


which does this holy night work in the soul, but the unrealized influences of —


many, dropping softly on the plants of the Lord ; one resting here, another
there; one touching an unrecognised need, another reaching an unconciously
failing grace. “ Hach drop uncounted hath its own mission, and is duly sent to
its own leaf or blade.” Sometimes God’s dew goes on falling many hours of
night. Watches seem long and starlight does not reveal it. But none is lost ;
some is already doing hidden work as it falls around the very roots of our being,
some ready to be revealed in sparkling brightness when the night is over;
lessons learnt among the sliadows to be lived out in the sunshine, 7 he object of the


i


dew is to maintain life in dry places and seasons, In rainless regions this _


better understood, Any dry week in summer we see enough to understand the
beauty of the figure, ‘This speech is spirit and life to souls, however feebly, yet
really alive to God. Dew does nothing for stones, nor a dead leaf. It falls on
little fading plants, whose leaves absorb life, renewing moisture, and closed
blossoms open out again with fresher fragrance than before. Dryness is more to
be dreaded than darkness. Be trustfully content to let the dew fall in the dark.
Believe the Word, when you read the dim page or lie still through long hours of
the night, with no power to meditate on half-recollected verses tliat cross the
mind and leave no influence.—F BR, Havergal.
Softly the dew in the evening descends,
Cooling the sun-heated ground and the galeg
Flow'rets all fainting it soothingly tends,
Ere the consumings of mid-day prevail.
Sweet, gentle dewdrops, how mystic you fall,
Wisdom and mercy float down in you all.
“a —Rev. W. H. Havergal, Last Hymn, 1870.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; DEUTERONOMY OHAP, 364 |b,
HOMILETIO HINTS AND 8UGGESTIONS,
Ver. 2. My doctrine. 1. Its na- 2 An abiding security, Proteciion
ture.—Rain, dew, small rain, and and safety from burning, heat of the
showers, 2. 1ts operations, Drop, sun and hostile invasion of enenies.


distil. Hain, emblem of Holy Spirit.
_ 1. A timely blessing. When inheri-
_ tance is weary. “ He shall come down
like rain upon the mown grass.” 2.
Bestowed in special seasons, “ Early
and latter rain” In youth and man-
hood in conversion and maturity. 3.
Beneficial in results. Softens earth
and prepares it for seed. “Thou
makest it soft with showers.” ‘Thou,
O God, didst send (shake out) a plenti-
ful (gracious) rain, whereby thou didst
confirm (refreshedst) it, when it was
weary, Ps, Ixviii. 9.

Dew,an emblem. 1. In origin. “ As
« dew from the Lord that tarrieth not
for man, nor waiteth for the sons of
men.” 2. In method of operations,
(a) silently and imperceptibly. Not
with observation, not in “the thunder
of his power”; (5) Efficiently and beau-
tifully. Vigour and freshness to the
Church, “the dew unto Israel.” Not
in sweeping, destructive showers, but in
gentle, penetrating influence; (c) re-
sulting in good orevil. The savour of
life or of death—cursing or blessing,
Heb. vi., 7. “My speech, etc. My
familiar, friendly, and affectionate
speeches, shall descend gently and
softly on the ear and heart, as the dew
moistening and refreshing all around.
In hot regions dew is often a substitute
for rain ; without it no fertility, where
rain seldom falls, In such places only
can tlie metaphor here used be felt in
its perfection.”—A. Clarke. No doubt
these various expressions point out
that great variety in the Word or
Revelation of God, whereby it is suited
to every place, occasion, person and
state; “being profitable for doctrine,
reproof, and edification in righteous-
ness. ’—Ibid,


Ver. 4. God a rock. 1. An tm-
movable foundation for hope. Founda-
tions of rocks, hidden, unsearchable to
mortal eye, depths past finding out.


“A hiding place from the wind, cc vert
from the tempest,” &c. (Is, xxxii, 2.)
“ An image ot God’s omnipotent power,
immutable purpose, faithfulness in
mercy, truth and love,” Ps. cxix. 89,
90. “A firm and everlasting refuge,
a ‘Rock of Ages,’ Is. xxvi. 4, One
age passeth away, and another, and a
third, etc., but the rock remains.
“The name of the Lord is a strong
tower” (Prov. xviii. 10); “ munition of
rocks” (Is. xxxiii, 16) ; “rocks so deep
no pioneer can undermine them; s0
thick, no cannon can pierce them; so
high, no ladder can scale them”


(Zapp).


Ver. 5. Spots of God's children.
Impatience, anger, idolatry, sectarian
bitterness and prejudices, etc. Sin

enerally. 1. Spots of deepest dye.
fot on surface, but ingrained lke
leopard’s spots and Ethiopian’s skin.
2. Spots which corrupt—all flesh cor-
rupt—universal prevalence of disease,
“the whole heal sick and the heart
faint,” voluntary debasement and
death. 8. Spots which cannot be
washed away by man. Noteven “with
nitre” and “much sope,” Jer. ii, 22.
Only the blood of Christ can take away
the stain and make whiter than snow.”


Ver. 6. Reqguite. Ingratitude for
mercies innumerable, distinguished,
affectionate, and long continued.
“Good turns aggravate unkinduess,
and our guilt is increased by our
obligations. It is ingratitude that
makes a godly man’s sin so heinous,
which otherwise would be far less than
other men’s, since his temptations are
stronger and his resistance greater.”
Trapp. Thy father? Consider. I.
That God sustains a fatherly relation
towards us. See him our Father in :
1. The work of Creation, 2. The
redemptive plan, 8. The workings of
Providence. IL That a rae we

7


OHAP. XXXIL HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; DEUTERONOMY.


SS


owe him peculiar duties: 1. As our regard to our fellow men. They are
Father we ouglit to be like him. 2. of the same family as we are. Then
We ought to obey him, 3. We ought there should be: 1. Family union; 2.
to love him, ILI, ‘hat this relation- Family correspondence; 8 Family
ship involves certain duties with love, (Bib, Museum.)


RECOLLECTION OF Past Mzrcres.— Verses 7-14,


“ Remember days of old,” from the beginning until now what God has done—


Proper review, true enquiry into past history will lead to gratitude and trust, —
I, Special inheritance allotted to Israel by Divine Wisdom. God the Great


Proprietor made and peopled the earth. 1. Zo each nation He assigned its
portion. “ Divided to the nations their inheritance.’—From the sons of Noah
separate nations were formed (Gen. x. 32). In growth and settlement they
were not left to chance, permitted to scramble, nor to prey one upon another,
Powerfal states should never invade weak ones. Forced acquisitions are unjust,
insecure ; become sources of restlessness, corruption and revolt. “He hath
determined the bounds of their habitation” (Acts xvii. 26). 2. To Israel He
had special reference in this arrangement. Placed in the midst of the earth,


Canaan was admirably suited for their residence. From this common centre, the —


report of God’s wonders and the glad tidings of Salvation were easily spread to


every part of the glube. 8. In this arranaement the interests of the people


themselves were secured. The land gradually gained—its tribes depossessed
“according to the number of the children of Israel.” They were preserved—


became the most favoured, the most important nation upon earth. By position, —


training and divine wisdom made depositaries of revealed religion and prepared
the world for the Messiah.


II. Special Honour conferred upon Israel by Divine choice. They were


the Lord’s portion, and the lot of his inheritance. “The Lord hath chosen —


Jacob unto himself, and Israel for a peculiar treasure ” (Ps, cxxxy. 4). Separated
from heathens, elevated by privileges they were chosen “a special people unto
himself, above all people that are upon the face of the earth ” (Deut. vii. 6).
Others were aliens, tley were children, sons of God. Honours bestowed, special


relationship indicate obligation to God. We are not to engross divine favours,
but intended to be mediums, diffusers of it; not only to be blessed ourselves, —
but to be blessings to others. “I will bless thee and make thy name great ;


and thou shalt be a blessing.”


IIT. Special training of Israel by Divine Grace. The beautiful figure sets


forth Jehovah’s care and method of training his people. 1. He sought them in
solitude. What sovereign grace! Few and lonely God desired and chose them.
“At this present time also there is a remnant according to the election of
grace.” 2. /le instructed them in ignorance, Out off from surrounding
nations, God alone taught them: in laws and ordinances, rulers and pro; hets,
events painful and pleasing. ‘He gave also his good spirit to instruct them ”
(Neh. ix. 20). 38. Me guarded them in Journeys, Led them about, not in the
most direct, but im givzag way, backwards aud forwards, None are carried to
heaven, directed in the way without hindrance, deflection and trouble. “I
will bring the blind by a way they know not; I will lead them in paths they
have not known.” 4. He preserved them in danger. “He kept him.” He
healed the serpent’s bite; defended in assault: frustrated divination and


enchantment; “reproved kings for their sakes, saying, Touch not mine an-


ointed, and do my prophets no harm.” 6. Trained them in love. God’s


680


HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY s: DEUTERONOMY. CHAP. XXXIL





diligence and tender compassion set forth. As the least touch of the eye
would be painful, so God feels when the humblest is illused, afflicted or assailed.
“ He that toucheth you toucheth the apple of his eye.”


_IV, Special exaltation of Israel by Divine Providence. “He made him
tide, etc.” In Egypt they were oppressed and enslaved; in Canaan exalted
and honoured. 1. Jn victory over our enemies. “With a high hand” were
redeemed (Ex. xiv. 8); and by the might of God did they conquer numerous
foes. “TI will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the earth and feed
thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father.” 2. In superabundant provision.
The fields gave their increase and the rock its honey ; oil from olives on rocky
clefts, butter of kine and milk of sheep; lambs well-fed and cattle of finest
breed ; bread of the finest wheat and drink of purest grape “that he might
eat.” Most abundant, most fruitful are the rewards of obedience. The service
of God is a land of beauty and productiveness. “He maketh peace in thy
borders and tilleth thee with the finest of the wheat” (Ps. xvii. 4-14; Ixxxi. 16).


Tue Royat SummrrupE— Verse 11.


The king of birds combines more admirable qualities than any other fowl, and
forms a royal similitude. It has strength to mount above all, swiftness to out-
strip all, an eye that penetrates the very fountain of light, affection that draws
forth its blood for its young, and a sagacity almost human in instructing and
disciplining them, which is specially noted in our text.

Notice four things without doing violence to the similitude, 1. God uses
Divine admonitions. “ As the eagle stirreth up her nest.” When time for
young to leave nest, she moves it with gentleness and affection; she sees them
sleeping, and unwilling to leave their first home, makes a noise, strikes her
wings avainst surrounding branches, and then, having awakened them, disturbs
them still further, and finally “stirreth up,” turns the nest inside out, and
compels them to take to crags of rocks, or boughs of trees. ‘Thus did God to
Israel, by moving the heart of Pharaoh against them when at ease by the flesh-

ts of Egypt. God now stirs up his people, who are unwilling to think of
tier things, and refuse to hear the call, “Rise and come away.” Sickness and
death invade the dwelling, a darling child blighted in bud, or husband or wife
dies in vigour of life, yet in vain. The sails of commerce rent ; business blighted,
schemes frustrated, and property wasted, to destroy the nest. God admonishes
by knocking the world from under them, and places them in altitude to look for
a better. “ Arise, this is not your rest.” 2. God uses Divine allurements. The
eagle “fluttereth over her young,” “hovers over them, and excites them to
imitate her, and take their flight.”—Cruden. Thus the Lord moved Israel ta
leave Egypt, and thus speaks of their restoration from Babylon, and their con-
version to Christ. ‘I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness”
(Hos. ii. 14, 15). He declares unwillingness that any should perish, reveals
anxiety, aud more than parental love for our salvation. Like the eagle rising ta
the sun, the Lord Jesus teaches us to rise to a better, brighter world. Enough
in the Gospel to woo from sin and the world. Can you find a better portiow
than God and heaven ?


Rise, my soul, and stretch thy wings,
Thy better portion trace,

Rise from transitory things
Towards heaven, thy destined place.


8. God assures of Divine assistance. ‘“ When the eagle sees its young weary
or fearful, it takes them upon its back and carries them.”—Cruden. ie “bare


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY, cuap. Xx.{1.


os


Israel on eagle’s wings, and brought them unto himself” (Ex. xix. 4) 8o


strength is made perfect in weakness , God upholds and makes grace sufficient. —


But as the eagle “ rejects as unnatural” its young that do not fix their eyes


upon the bright orb of day, and rise, so God may swear “they shall not enter —


into my rest.” 4. God promises Divine protection. The eagle bears its young


on its wings for protection as well as aid. The archer must first penetrate the —
body of the old bird before he can touch the young. Naturally it is more out —


of danger than other birds when in its proper element; security is doubled —


when on 2ts mother’s wings. Difficult to kill an eagle. If down on earth, with
its head on turf, and longer at fountains, then a noble mark and easy prey.
Just as the heaven-born soul, if in his proper place, and after his proper cbject,
is out of reach of the wicked—above the world, with its pomps and vanities,
which fade away in the distance—fiery darts of Satan must penetrate Jehovah’s
wings before they touch him. ‘The way of life is above to the wise, that he
may depart from hell beneath.” We see, then, why God disturbs with the ills
of life that we may obey his call. He sends winds and rain, takes away the
warm down of earthly comforts, and pulls down our tabernacles, that we may
leave to dwell in mansions above.—ftev. William Jackson.


Gop’s Work or Grace IN THE REDEMPTION oF Man.— Verses 10-12.


I. The Condition of the Sinner. Set forth in expressive terms. 1. In &
distant state. If fownd he must be lost. Lost to God, of no service to him;
t» self, missing the great end of life; to others, of no benefit, but injurious,
2. In a barren state—‘“a desert place,” ‘I'he world, the unregenerate soul, a
moral waste, sterile without God. 3. Ina dangerous state. ‘“ Howling wilder-
ness,” great, terrible, and filled with “ fiery serpents” (Deut. viii. 15 ; Jer. ii. 6).
Howling with the roar of beasts and the blasts of tempest. 4. In a hopeless
state. Away from the camp and company of God. Without a star in heaven


or a footprint on earth. Fit emblem of the wretched, unregenerate condition of —


the sinner.


_


IJ. The Method of Deliverance. Strikingly illustrative of God’s method of —


redeeming men, 1. God seeks. “ He found lim.” He seeks discovers mun in
departure and sin. “ Adam, where art thou?” His people are “sought out” —


(Is. Ixii. 12), ‘‘ Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you.” 2. God guides
“ He led tim.” When he seeks he is sure to find, bring to himself, guide through
life and duty to heaven. “I did know (care for thee and love) thee in the
wilderness, in the land of great drought ” (Hos, xiii. 5.)


III. The Place of Destination. “A land flowing with milk and honey,” “the


ae nl ve


city of habitation.” No home, no rest nor shelter in the wilderness, A country —
prepared and in reserve. God brings the believer into a large and wealthy —
place of highest hopes and joys—a place where unpropitious circumstances yield —


unexpected blessings, But heaven the fulfilment, the perfection of all.
From verses 11, 12 learn—


I. Needful disturbance. “As an eagle stirreth up her nest.” 1. As to


our outward condition in the world. 2. As to our selfrighteous confidence.


8. As to our departure from life,


II, Divine example. “Fluttereth over her young” to exite and teach them
by pee The eye does more than the ear. God must be seen by example


cHaP. xxx. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.











of parents, teachers and ministers. God in Christ, humanised example. Render
religion attractive that men may see it.


And as the bird each fond endearment tries

To tempt her new-fledged offspring to the skies 3
Employ each art, reprove each dull delay,
Allure to brighter worlds, and lead the way,


ITI. All sufficient assistance. “Spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them,
beareth them on her wings.” ‘his to aid and secure them. Not always aware
of her design, away she sails with them and shakes them off her wings. She
follows after, hovers near them, and when their pinions flag and they cannot
fly, she darts and places herself under them, prevents their fall, succours their
weakness and refreshes them for another flight. Our dependence is entire, but
“our sufficiency is of God.”


IV. God's sole agency. “So the Lord alone did lead him, and there was no
strange god with him.” God conforms himself to our modes of apprehension and
expression, This necessary, but not degrading. He speaks unto us as unto
children, with whom imitation is everything ; and levies a tax upon the world of
nature to furnish images of himself. He assumes relation of parents, the
affection of a father, the tenderness of a mother. He borrows images from
animals, and especially the feathered tribes. “As a hen gathereth her
chickens.” Observe a divine agency—the Lord led him. See also exclusive
application of this work. ‘The Lord alone did lead him.” A resemblance of
the manner in which it was done. “So the Lord, etc.” How? “As an eagle
stirreth up, etc.” Three things here ascribed to the mother eagle, not in pro-
viding for her young, but in educating them—in teaching them to fly she
stirreth up her nest, fluttereth over her young, spreadeth her wings, taketh them
and beareth them on her wings ‘This applicable to God in dealing with us, and
preparing as to seek things above.—(Condensed from Jay.)


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 8, 9. The most high divided
nations. 1. God originally divided
nations their inheritance. 2. Divine
purpose is revealed in this division.
3. Israel was discovered and distin-
guished from all other nations. A
nation, the depository of God’s will,
from which the Church and the Christ
were to spring. Recognise a brother
in every human being, for “God has
made of one blood all nations upon
the face of the earth.” In the worst of
times God has preserved a few for
hisuself.


Ver. 9. The Lord’s portion. His pur-
chase. 2. Hisconquest. 3. His glory.
4. His heirs. Zhe value God sets upon
His people. As bought by blood, re-

enerated by grace, and designed for
eaven. “ What an astonishing saying.
As holy souls take God for their portion,
so God takes them for His portion.


They are infinitely happy in and satis-
fied with God; He represents Himself
as happy in them, ‘This is what is
implied on being a saint. He who
seeks an earthly portion has little
commerce with the Most High.”—A.
Clarke.


Ver. 10. I. The primary applica-
tion of the text as a summary of all
that had been suffered by the Israelites,
and all that had been done by God on
their behalf. II. The peculiar manner
in which it adapts itself to our own
times and to our own cases, 1. We
have the picture of the believer in his
natural state, in a desert land. 2.
In his regenerate state, found of God,
and instructed. 3. In his guarded
state, “ Kept.”—Hy. Melvill.


Ver. 11. The method of Divine
training. I. Its object. To secure
833


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOM:.





development of our own powers, by
action wise, divinely prompted, self-
reliant, and adapted to constitution
and circumstances. II. The means.
Gentle, affectionate, stimulating, and


development; the process of devel«p-
ment is discipline; the result of dis.
cipline is a full and many-sided
manhood.”


For human weal, Heaven husbands all eventa


exemplary. ‘The purpose of life is


[sraEt’s InaRatirupE, APosTaACY AND PunIsHMENT.— Verses 15-25.


Israel requited God for benefits, by forsaking him, and serving worthless
idols. God is offended by their conduct and resolves to punish.


I. Base Ingratitude to God. “Do ye thus requite the Lord ?” The heathens
deemed ingratitude a sin so great as to include every other. Lycurgus asked
why his laws did not notice it, replied, “I have left it to the gods to punish.”
1. Ingratitude displayed in self-indulgence. “Thou art waxen fat, thou art
grown thick.” 2. Ingratitude begetting pride. “ According to their pasture,
so were they filled ; they were filled and their hearts were exalted, therefore
have they forgotten me” (Hos. xiii.6). 3. Ingratitude ending in rebellion. “Wax-
ed fat and kicked.” Like pampered and well-fed cattle they grew insolen
became wanton and ungovernable. “They were disobedient and rebell
against Thee and cast Thy law behind their backs” (Neh. ix. 25).


II, Shameful Apostacy from God. “Then he forsook God who made him.”
Departure from God a tendency in fallen nature. But the sin is aggravated by
light, privileges and advantages of instruction. 1. Forsaking God who made
them. No regard to our Creator, no thought for the end of our being. How
deplorable to ignore our maker—source of intelligence and joy—“ in whom we
live and move and have our being.” 2. Sacrificing to gods which cannot help them.
Gods which were strange, new and vanities-—-Gods whom their fathers feared
not and to whom they owed no obligation whatever—Gods termed “‘ abomina-
tions” and “devils,” repulsive in their nature and destructive in their in-
fluence. 8. Exciting to jealousy God who loved them. “They provoked him
to jealousy with strange gods.” “This jealousy,” says Calvin, “rests upon sacred
Ae spiritual marriage tie, by which God had bound the people to Himself.”


III. Terrible punishment from God. God will severely visit his people for
their apostacy. ‘‘The Lord saw it,” abhorred and resolved to reject Israel.
This punishment is set forth in the form of righteous judgment—Retribution
not always adequate, nor invariable, but real and manifest--an instinct of
justice in the divine nature, a law of providence and of conscience. ‘ Be sure
your sin will find you out.” 1. Zhey had offended God and other nations should
offend them. ‘‘ A foolish nation” would provoke them to anger (ver. 21). A
people whom they deemed foolish, or who really were foolish though they
thought themselves wise, would eventually be received against their wish.
2. They had provoked God, and God would provoke them to jealousy. Gentile
nations, whom they despised, not only conquered them and became their
masters, but entered a covenant from which they were excluded (¢f Matt.
xxi. 43; Rom. x. 19). 38. Zhey had rejected God, and God would reject them.
“JT will hide my face from them” (ver. 20). God would withdraw his favour
and transfer it to a despised nation. As they had turned their back upon him
he would turn his back upon them (¢f Jer. xviii. 17; ii. 27). They thought
lightly of God, forsook him and then made substitutes for him, A picture of
gin’s progress, the sinner’s folly and the way to righteous judgment. ©

884


em


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. ocnmarv. xxxu.





= * a


Diving Ancrr.— Verses 19-27,


These may be figurative expressions, but cannot be explained away, to make
the Supreme Being incapable of feeling against sin and the sinner, destitute of
pleasure or displeasure, without concern for His glory, or the welfare of the
universe,


I. The anger of God is caused by the sins of men. “ They have provoked
me to anger.” It exists in Divine perfections, and is manifest in Divine govern-
ment. God’s eye is a flame of fire, and its lofty jealousy rests upon every form
of sin, negative and positive. ‘For the wrath of God is revealed (displayed in
Judicial vengeance) against all ungodliness (impiety, non-recognition of God)
(Ro ea he (deviations from truth and moral rectitude) of men”

om. i, 18).


II. Execution of anger is reserved to God Himself. “J will provoke,” “J
will move,” agent’s secondary causes. God is the avenger. We are not to usurp
His place, and recompense evil for evil. He knews how to punish without
ay and without injustice. ‘“ Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the


III. Anger, when roused in God, is terrible in its effects. Most severe
judgments are threatened (vers, 22-25). 1. Judgments extensive in operation.
Sweeping the earth, penetrating the lowest hell, and like a fire of universal
conflagration. 2. Judgments irresistible in might. ‘Set on fire the founda-
tions of mountains,” Strong fortresses subverted, holy cities destroyed, and the
Jewish Constitution overturned. ‘ Who knoweth the power of Thine anger ?
Even according to Thy fear, so is Thy wrath,” ¢.¢., equal to all that a man can
fear from it (Ps. xc. 11). 3. Judgments destructive in results. Swept together,
heaped up, and falling upon young men and maidens, children and old men—
swift as arrows, and hot as fire; in the field and in the home destruction came.
It falls upon men like wild beasts upon victims—to crush, destroy, and carry in
triumph. ‘This is not an overdrawn picture of the danger and the anger of God
against presumptuous sins. “Consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you
in pieces, and there be none to deliver ”—


For guilt, no plea! to pain, no pause, no bound !
Inexorable all ! and all extreme.
— Young.


IV. The anger of God is often restrained by mercy. “ Were it not that 1
feared the wrath of the enemy” (ver. 27). God can make a full ond, but desires
not the death of sinners. In the midst of wrath He remembers mercy.
1. Restrained in regard for His own honour. “ Lest their adversaries should
say, ‘Our hand is high,’” etc. If God destroyed Israel, the enemy would take
the credit to themselves—become proud and boastful. Hence He regards His
own name; will not permit its profanation and pollution (¢f Ex. xxxii. 12;
Numb. xiv. 13; Isa x. 5). 2. Restraint im the interests of His people.
Unworthy as they are, “a nation void of counsel,” He was concerned for their
welfare, (a) For their protection. ‘Their adversaries would injure them,
behave themselves strangely ; but He defends, restrains the wrath of man, and
causes remainder to praise Him, (6) For their correction. He desires to teach
and make them wise (ver. 23). ‘ My people is foolish ; they have not known
Me.” (c¢) For their continuance (ver. 26). No desire to blot out their name,
but to perpetuate their existence, oo and bless them for ever.


OHAP. XXXII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY.





Tue Dancers oF ProsPerity.— Verses 15-18.


Consider I. How men are affected by abundant prosperity in their social


capacity, and with respect to their general worldly interests.


History is full of


instances to show how national character has deteriorated as the wealth and


power of a nation have increased.
prosperity.


IL How our churches are affected by such
Note the various religious errors of the century ; antinomianism,


&c. Note also the pride of enlightenment, which is the besetting temptation


of the present day.


III. How the injurious tendencies of long good fortune


may be corrected. Let us: 1. Constantly recollect with gratitude the source and
giver of our prosperity ; 2. Use our resources and advantages as God intends
they should be used; 8. Not desire prosperity for :tself.—A. Thomson, M.A.


Another outline may be given.


I. Prosperity is not real happiness. Nature knows nothing of moral distino-


tions; treats all alike.


But distinguished rank, long life, abundant wealth and


ripe scholarship, do not satisfy inward craving. A millionaire may be miserable.
“ Prosperity is like salt water, the more you drink of it the thirstier you are”


(Talmage).
II. Prosperity profits very little


The wealth of empires cannot add to


stature of body or mind, nor secure health and virtue. It is insecure and


exposes to envy.


“Envious at the prosperity of the wicked.”


Earthly


possessions—vanity—do not fill, protect nor continue,


III. Prosperity is spiritually dangerous.


“The prosperity of fools shall


destroy them,” (Prov. i, 32.) 1. In leading to self-dependence. 2. In begetting


contempt for God.


Be watvhful and humble.


“Tightly esteemed the Rock of his salvation.” 3. In
causing apostacy for God. . ‘Then he forsook God.”
“Tn all time of our wealth, good Lord deliver ua.”


Guard against selfishness.


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 15. Jeshurun. A dishonoured
name given to Israel several times (ch.
xxxi.16, xxiii. 5, 26), meaningupright,
righteous ; a term also of endearment
and indicating close relation to God.
1. They forsook God, who is just and
right and had chosen them to walk in
righteousness (Is. lxiv. 2.) “ By placing
the name of righteous before Israel, he
censured ironically those who had fallen
away from righteousness, and by thus
reminding them with that dignity they
had been endowed, he upbraided them
with the more severity for their guilt
of perfidy.”—(Calvin). 2. They de-
graded themselves. Forsook the ways
and the God of their fathers, became
corrupt in manners, unworthy of con-
fidence, and abominable in conduct.
“A rebellious people, lying children,
children that will not hear the law of
the ee (Ia, xxx. 9.) Waxed fat and


kicked. ‘The figure is admirably sup-
ported, through the whole verse. We
see first, & miserable, lean steed, taken
under the care and into the keeping of
a master, who provides him with an
abundance of provender. We see
secondly, this horse waxing fat under
this keeping. We see him thirdly,
breaking away from his master, leay-
ing his rich pasturage, and running to
the wilderness, unwilling to bear the
yoke or harness, or to make any returns
for his master’s care and attention.
We see fourthly, whence this conduct
proceeds, from a want of consciousness
that his strength depends upon his
master’s keeping, and a lack of con-
sideration that leanness and wretched-
ness must be the consequence of leaving
his master’s service and running off
from his master’s pasturage. How
easy to apply these points to the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY.


OHAP. XXXIi





Israelites ! and how illustrative of their
former and latter state! and how
powerfully do they apply to many
called Christians, who having increased
in riches, forget that God, from whose
hand alone those mercies flowed.”—
A. Clarke.


Ver. 17. Not to God. 1. Man, a
religious being, will worship, must
have a God. “If there be no God,
we must invent one,” cried a leader in
the French revolution. 2. Right con-
ception of God restrains, elevates, and
preserves. 3, When God is cast off,
abominable wickedness and awful
degradation ensues. Things that are
no Gods, devils chosen as substitutes.
“Saying to a stock, Thou art my
father ; and to a stone, Thou hast
brought me forth.” (Jer. ii. 26.)


_ Ver. 18. Unmindful. 1. Men out-
wardly prosperous, but spiritually des-
titute. 2. Men enjoying every favour,
but acknowledging no obligation to
God. 3. An offence most unnatural,
unreasonable, and provoking. “Thou
hast forgotten the rock of thy salvation,
and hast not been mindful of the rock
of thy strength.” (Is. xvii. 10.) ‘“ My
people have forgotten me days without
number.” (Jer. ii. 32.)


Ver. 19. Lord saw. Divine in-
spection of Human Life. 1. God
remembers the sins of men, Remem-
brance minute, constant and universal,
2. Men think God is indifferent to
their sins, Forget him in thought
and disregard him in conduct. 3.
When men disregard God in their
ways, they become more sinful in their
lives. Proud and corrupt, false and
unjust, “children that are corrupters,
they have forsaken the Lord,” Is. i, 4,


“For want of faith,
Down the steep precipice of wrong he slides,
There’s nothing to support him in a haat
— Young.


Vers, 21-22. Mine anger. 1. An
element of wrath in Divine Govern-
went. 2. This wrath may overtake


take men they cannot escape.


men suddenly. 3. When it does over-
“ When
@ great ransom cannot deliver thee.”


Vers, 23-25. God’s arrows. Judg-
ments from the gods represented by
arrows in Scripture and _ heathen
writers. Apollo is pictured as bearing
a bow and quiver full of deadly arrows,
and in answer to prayer coming to
smite the Greeks with pestilence (Hom.
IL. I. v, 43). 1. Innumerable in variety.
Famine, pestilence, wild beasts, poi-
sonous reptiles, and war. 2. Direct
in their atm. Never fall on wrong
persons, never miss the mark. 3.
Deadly in their effect. Wounds of
poisoned arrows intensely painful and
internal. No greater suffering than
arrows “sharp in the hearts of the
King’s enemies,” (Ps, xlv. 5). “The
arrows of the Almighty are within me,
the poison whereof drinketh up my
spirit (destroying vital energy, certair
death)” (Job vi. 4).


Vers. 26-27. Influence of Man’s
conduct on the Divine Mind. If God
sees, he must, speaking after the man-
ner of man, feel and act. I. Man’s
sin rouses Divine opposition. God’a
anger not a passion but a principle,
not against existence but against the
sins and sufferings of existence. Op-
position, hatred and sin revealed in
judgment upon individuals and com-
munities, II. MMan’s sin restrains
Divine procedure. Jealousy indicates
love. “The wrath of God,” says
Meyer, “is the holy love of God (who
is neither neutral nor one-sided in his
affection) for all that is good in its
energy is antagonistic to all that is
evil.” ‘The expression the wrath of
God simply embodies this truth that
the relations of God’s love to the
world are unsatisfied, unfulfilled. The
expression is not merely anthropo-
pathic, it is an appropriate description
of the Divine pathos necessarily in-
volved in the conception of a revela-
tion of love, restrained, hindered and
stayed through unrighteousness ”
(Martensen’s Christian Dog.) 1. If
not loved and obeyed he feels wronged,

387


GWAP. XXXIL, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY.





therefore does not show mercy. 2. If hope, the wicked tremble, for Divine
wronged or insulted he does not wrath is only artially poured out in
revenge himself, lest the enemy should this world. It will be perfectly dis-
rejoice, his people be destroyed, and played in the final judgment,

his glory tarnished. Let the righteous


Marks or Wispom.— Verses 28-80,


God complains of Israel’s folly. If they had been more considerate, wiser,
they would have foreseen and avoided evil. “A prudent man foreseeth the
evil, and hideth himself; but the simple pass on, and are punished.”


I. Wisdom gives understanding in the events of life. Wise men value and
improve life. Their wisdom is not intuitional, abstract, and speculative. “ The
inspiration of the Almighty giveth him understanding” (Job xxxil. 8). Hence
it is sound and practical ; fixed on a right end (Phil. iii, 13), and regulated by
right principle (Ps. cxix. 105). The prudent man regards the events of life,
discerns the signs of the times, learns coming judgments from the Word of God,
and prepares to meet them. It is reckless folly to walk blindly, carelessly, in
the midst of greatest evils. ‘Mea that had understanding of the times to know
what Israel ought to do” (1 Chron. xii. 32).


II. Wisdom is superior to natural strength in the conflicts of life. “One
chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight ” (ver. 30). A few taught
by God are “mightier than they in arms.” As Gideon (Judges vii, 22) and
David’s worthies (2 Sam. xxiii. 8). ‘‘ Knowledge is power” is Bacon’s famous
aphorism. Physical and mechanical forces increase the power of man. Intellect
wisely applied gives moral ascendancy. But “‘a wise man is strong; yea, &
man of knowledge increaseth strength ” (Prov. xxiv. 5); by faith and dependence
upon God “ puts to flight the armies of the aliens.” “The battle is not to the
strong.” “ Wisdom is better than strength.” ‘“ Athanasius against the world!”
“ Wisdom is better than weapons of war” (Eccles, ix. 18).


III. Wisdom leads to consideration of the end of life. “That they would
consider their latter end” (ver. 29). We know not the end, but it will come.
To each, time will close. The last day, the most solemn of all, fast approaches.
Instinct leads animals to prepare for the future. Worldly wisdom urges readiness
for emergency. God loudly speaks in Providence, and warns in Scripture,


a


ee


“© that they were wise.” ‘Oh, that My people had hearkened unto Me, and


Israel had walked in My ways” (Ps. Ixxxi. 13).


Be wise to-day; ’tis madness to defer 3
Next day the fatal precedent will plead ;
Thus on, till wisdom is pushed out of life.

— Young.


Gop’s Rerroor or Human Fotty.— Verses 28, 29.


I. As a fact men are extremely foolish. Sinners are shortsighted, regardless
of the inevitable consequences of their conduct, 1. Zhey are wilfully tgnorant.
“That they understood.” We are naturally ignorant, limited in thought and


being ; but not forced to err and sin. Ignorance may be removed by Scripture —


and ‘the Holy Spirit. But the careless worldling, immersed in pleasure and
playing with trifles, is a man without understanding, and like the beasts that


perish. Wilful ignorance is the centre of all evil and the precursor of ruin. —


“ Fools die for want of wisdom” (Prov. x. 21), 2. They are strangely concetted.
Trust to reason ; resist Divine teaching because authoritative and practical and
would ow own guides, “ Vai man (empty and ignorant) would be wise”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY. CHAP. XXXIL





(Job xi. 12), forgets that all knowledge is disjointed, partial, and worthless,
without the fear of God. Sages of antiquity “professing themselves wise
became fools” (Rom, i, 22). “Seest thou a man wise in his own conceit ? There
1s more hope of a fool than of him” (Prov, xxvi. 12), 3. They are habitually in
diferent. Accustomed to sin, deaf to the voice of God; nothing stirs or
restrains. Rooted habit has become ruling principle. The heart not kept,
ppante not rightly centered, control is lost over actions, “ O that they would
consider !”


II. God seeks to make foolish men wise. He does not compel, but reproves,
expostulates, Wisdom in its very nature cannot be given by force. ‘“ Wisdom
is the principle thing, therefore get wisdom, and with all thy getting, get un-
derstanding.” 1. By striking provi Such mentioned here (vers. 24, 25).
Affliction and misfortune, inward darkness, distress, and insanity. Providences
which alarm and make us think. Providences which create joy and gratitude,
all overruled for good and designed to instruct. 2. By inspired teaching. The
Bible, an inspired guide, declares the providence and justice of God. A teacher
unerring, free, and common to all. “ Written for our learning,” and recording
events which are warnings. “All these things happened unto them for en-
samples (types), and they are written for our admonition, &c.” (1 Cor. x. 11).
“O that thou hadst hearkened to my commandments !”


THE CONSIDERATION OF Deatu.— Verse 29,


I Take account of the general insensibility of men to the grand fact that they
are mortal. Note: 1. How little effect the fact that whole races are dead since
the beginning of time till now has upon us, 2. How seldom we are struck with
the reflection that many things and small things too might cause our death.
8. How soon a recovery from danger sets aside the serious thought of death.
4. How schemes are formed for a long future time, without any thought of possi-
ble death. II. See what can be brought in explanation of this, 1. ‘The insertion
in the human mind, by the Creator of a principle counteractive in some degree to
the influence of this prospect of death. 2. ‘The fearful, radical depravity of our
nature. 3. The perfect distinctness of life and death. 4, Even the certainty
and universality of death. 65. Our utter inability to form any defined idea of
the manner of existence after death. 6. A general presumption of having long
to live. 7. The endeavours of men, by occupying their whole thoughts with
other things, to preclude a thought of their en III. Briefly remonstrate
against it. ‘T'o end our life is the mightiest event that awaits us in this world,
and it is that which we are living but to come to. To have been thoughtless of
it, then, will ultimately be an immense calamity. (John Foster).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 28, 29. The Folly of Men.
I. Men are not wise. 1. They prefer
sliadows to substance, worldly happi-
ness. “ What shadows we are an
what shadows we pursue” (Burke).
2. ‘hey avoid not danger when before
them. 38. Admit facts, yet live as if
they were not facts. II. God’s provi-
sion to make men wise. Life the
school of God, who provides teachers
and gives lessons. 1. In tender appeal.
2. In wonderful events, In patience,
perseverance and affection, “ who
teaches like him ?”


Ver. 29. Latter End. End of certain
actions, end of sin, end of life gener-
ally considered not. “ What will ye
do in the end thereof?” (Jer. v. 31),
“She remembereth not her last end ;
therefore she came down wonderfully
(in astartling, singular way)”(Lam. i. 9).


“ Heaven gives the needful, but neglected
call,
What day, what hour, but knocks at


human hearts,
To wake the soul to sense of future
scenes.”


OHAP, XXXII AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY
UTE Ener nnnnn na nD sE=E ISIE EEE IIEEEIEnREn EEE


Gop a Rock or Conripence.— Verse 31.


The gods of the heathen not wise, powerful and gracious, like Jehovah.
Enemies and friends can prove that He alone is worthy of confidence.


I. Men chose a rock in whom to have confidence. Wealth, the world and
our fellow-creatures. Friends lack sympathy, prove unfaithful and pass away,
confidences vain and false, abound and disappoint. Broken reeds which fail,
pierce and wound the hand that leans upon them (Is, xxxvi. 6).


II. God alone is worthy of confidence. A rock the most abiding and un-
changing object in nature, God the same yesterday, to-day and for ever.
Noue like him proved. 1, By testimony of friends. Who enjoy shelter, com-
fort and rest. “ Who in the heaven can be compared unto the Lord?” “ Not
any rock like our God” (1 Sam. ii, 2), 2. By the testimony of enemies.
“Qur enemies themselves being judges.’ Compelled by dear experience to
acknowledge God’s power and supremacy. Egyptians (Ex. xiv. 25), Balak and
Balaam (Num. xxiii.), Philistines (1 Sam. iv. 8). “O, Galilean, thou hast
conquered !” was the forced confession of the Emperor.


III. God as a rock of confidence should be recommended to others
Accessible to all ; no steep rugged height to climb to reach it—a fit shelter
from the wind and covert from the tempest (Is. xxxii. 2). Millions h
sheltered and yet room. Blessedness beyond description to those who flee and
find. “Blessed be my rock; and let the God of my salvation be exalted”
(Ps. xviii. xxxi., 46; Is, xvii. 10.


DeEMoRALIZATION OF Men.— Verses 32, 33.


I. In falling short of the end of Existence. Israel well-pleasing to God at
first, a noble vine became a degenerate plant (Isa. v. 2-7 ; Jer. ii. 21). Like
the vine of Sodom emblems of utter depravity (Isa. i. 10; Jer, xxiii. 14), Not
merely frail, but morally corrupted, degraded; unprofitable and unable to
answer the end of existence ; not living “to the praise of his glory,” but for
selfish, useless ends, Sin is degradation of character, perversion of life’s purpose.
Other creatures fulfil their mission. All God’s works praise him. But all men
“have sinned” (Jew and Gentile, best and worst) and come short of (failed te
attain to, disqualified for) the glory of God (Rom. i. 23).


II. In becoming pernicious in life. These terms most expressive, indicative
of principles and practices most abominable, 1. Offensive in character.
“ Grapes of gall ;” worse than wild grapes, bitter and vexatious to God and man.
2. Mischievous in conduct. “ Poison of dragons,” secreted malice, ready to
dart forth upon others. “They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent
(to sting) ; adder’s poison (most destructive) is under their lips” (Ps. cxl. 3 ;
cf. Ps, lviii, 4; Rom. iii, 13, 3, Fatal in influence. Asps a species of snake
whose bite is immediately fatal. “ Nothing could be imagined worse or more to
be abhorred than that nation” (Calvin), But this wickedness ripens for judg-
ment, The thought of Sodom’s destruction is suggested. Those who imitate
Sodom bring forth the worst fruits of impiety, and will perish like Sodom,
When great cities sink and great nations morally degenerate, they are doomed
to judgments, righteous and complete overthrow. “ Turning the cities of Sodom
and Gomorrha into ashes condemned them with an overthrow, making them an
ensample (not an exception to the regular laud of the Divine Government) unto
those that after should live ungodly,” (2 Pet. ii, 6.)

890


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; DEUTERONOMY. GHAP, XXXU.


Gop’s Supremacy In THE Worup.— Verses 34-43,


God is represented as killing and making alive (ver. 89) ; as judging men and
See gods ; a8 swearing to heaven and calling upon nations to rejoice in
ig supremacy.


I. Supremacy asserted in the Physical World. God is not quiescent but
active in the world, “doing marvellous things without number.” 1. Jn appointing
agents to maintain it. All creatures under His command, mightiest and
meanest ; gods and men; the “glittering sword” and “arrows drunk with
blood ;” life and death. He arranges and directs all agencies to work in the
circumstances, bodies and souls of men; inthe departments of creation and the
history of nations. 2. Jn fixing times to display it. Days of calamity and of
joy. In “the wheel of nature” (Jas. iii. 6), in the revolutions of time, “to
every thing there is a season.” The world not ruled by chance, fate, or accident.
Events most casual under control. Every work its part, and “a time to every
Nes under heaven.” “He changeth the times and the seasons,” ‘God

th determined the times appointed ” (Acts xvii. 26).


II. Supremacy vindicated in the Moral World. In the physical world laws
abstract principles set up in opposition: in the moral, reason, heathen gods,
“humanity,” and the heavenly bodies. ‘“ The heavens do rule”—1. In the
experience of men. Nebuchadnezzar’s royal testimony, Belshazzar’s judgment,
aud Napoleon’s downfall. Man is subject to law as well as creation. “In whose
hand is the soul (life) of every living thing, and the breath of all mankind
(flesh of man),” Job. x1i.10, 2. Jn the customs of society. Social and religious—
society is barbarous or civilised, progressive or stationary, degraded or elevated,
as it recognises and depends upon God. 3. Jn the history of nations. God
the Supreme Ruler and Proprietor. Nations increase as Rome, Israel, England,
and America ; or decay as Israel for its idolatry, Rome for its luxury, Spain for
its persecutions—according to His purpose. The rise, growth, and ruin of
nations with Him. “He increaseth the nations and destroyeth them: He
enlargeth the nations and straiteueth them again” (Job xii. 23).


III. Supremacy in its influence in the world. Two effects chiefly. 1. A source
of joy to God's people. “ Rejuice, O ye nations, with His people” (ver. 43),
His rule is not lawless authority, tyrannical and evil, but just and benevolent.
Hence “the Lord reigneth ; let the earth rejoice ; let the multitude of isles be
glad thereof.” 2. A source of terror to his enemies. ‘‘ Render vengeance to his
enemies” (ver. 43). When He “wounds” by loss (ver. 39); strikes according
to the manner in which He swears (ver. 40); and becomes the archer and the
arrow, who can resist? “Say to the righteous—it shall be well with him,


Woe unto the wicked, etc.” (Is, iii. 10, 11).
VENGEANCE In STORE.— Verses 84-38,


“ This” (ver. 34) not only includes the sins of the nation, but also the
judgment of God. ‘The apostacy of Israel, as well as the consequent punishment,
is laid up with God—sealed up in His treasuries ; therefore they have not yet
actually occurred—an evident proof that we have prophecy betore us, and not
the description of an apostacy that had already taken place, and of punishment


inflicted in consequence (Keil), i


OHAP. XXXUL. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY.





I. In store, as a natural consequence of a sinful course, Natural for sik
to produce results—results destroyed, checked, or treasured up. Sins stored up
in human conscience (Ps. li. 3) God’s providence, and at day of judgment,
(Rom. ii. 5), None lost or left unpunished—all repaid. “ Dost thou not watch —
over my sin (to visit it)? My transgression is sealed up in a bag (as evidence
preserved against me); aud thou sewest up mine iniquity (to keep it carefully
and punish it justly),” Job. xiv. 16. “The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up;
his sin is hid.” (Hos, xiii, 12),

II. In store, to be revealed in due time. Justice pledged to avenge broken
law upon disobedient. ‘Time and manner may be sealed up. Long sufferiag
must not be taken for forgetfulness. ‘“ Recompense in due time.” Retribution,
1, Verrible. ‘“ Kill,” and none can make alive. 2, Near. “ At hand.”
Instruments of judgment, like weapons of war, are “taken in hand.” 3. Swift.
“The things make haste.” Judgment lingereth not (2 Pet. ii. 3). 4. Certain,
“Shall come.” “TI will render vengeance.” As surely as I live for ever.


Ill. The reveiation of stored up vengeance will be just and wise. “True
and righteous are His judgments.” Restrained and educational ; yet sufficient.
1, To convince Giod’s people of their folly. In forsaking Him for idols which are
vain and impotent—in relying upon earthly props which are destroyed—in
showing Himself to be the arbiter of life and death. 2. 70 warn the wicked
of their sin. “ Reward them that hate me.” No power can avert or escape
His anger. They may think themselves to be immovably fixed, but “ their foot
shall slide.” They shall totter and fall. Refuge, strength, and hope shall fail
them. In God only can these be found. ‘The Eternal God is thy refuge,”
Flee to Him.


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 31, God a rock, A contrast but rather give place unto (the) wrath


between God and idols—in existence,
attributes, and conduct.


Ver. 35. Sliding feet. Risks of
carnal security. 1. Men fix themselves
firmly, feel secure, and think nothing
canshaketnem, 2. This is tremendous
risk. Contempt for misfortune of others
first sign of insecurity (Job xii. 5). Sin
overbalances, providence shakes the
feet, and the fall begins. 3. Results
most sad, Imagine a slip into the
abyss from alpine heights! ‘To slide
and fall is in a thousand places certain
destruction ; and no_ threatenings
against the workers of iniquity are
more terrible than that they shall be
set in slippery places. that their feet
shall slide in due time” (Dr. Thom.
Ld. and Bk.) 4. God alone can
prevent sliding. “‘ Hold thou me up,”
etc. (of Ps. xxviii, 17; xciv. 18).


Vers. 35-86.
elf revenge.
392


1, A warning against
“ Avenge not yourselves,


(let it spend itself and have free space ;
or give place, by stepping aside as
&® man attacked by a wild beast);
vengeance is mine (Rom. xii. 19),
2. God has power to punisa. “TI will
repay, saith the Lord.” Pxt off in-
dulgence, make room for the judgment
of God, who will execute in due time,
“ Anger is like
A full hot horse ; being allow’d his way,
Belf-mettle tires him.” —Shakspeare.


Ver. 86. The Lord shall judge.
Judicial acts of God. 1. As judge
for His people in mercy. 2. As judge
against or upon them to correct. 8.
As judge of all men in righteousness.


Vers. 34, 35. Iniquity reserved for
Suture punishment. 1, Treasured up.
Noticed, not forgotten, never forgiven
without repentance. 2 Treasured.
up to be punished. “Evil pursueth
sinners.” An order of sequence in


moral aa physical law. Punishment


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


_—


fixed, certain and near. “ Avenging
deities are shod with wool,” but never
pause nor mitigate their judgments.
8. Be wise and escape. Fatally unwise
to delay repentance and return to God !


Defer not till to-morrow to be wise,
To-morrow’s sun to thee may never rise.


Vers. 36-38. Learn—1. Afilictions
of God's people. Their power gone,
reduced to shame and helplessness,
Gods whom they worshipped and sup-
ported despised and unable to defend
them. 2. The pity of God for His
afflicted people. Judge, t.e., plead
their cause, protect and deliver them.
Repent of evils brought against them,
and deal in mercy, not in judgment,
with them. 3. Lessons to be learned
from this experience. The folly of
forsaking God, The impotence of idols.
The insecurity of any hiding place





OHAP. Xxxit.


against the justice of God. The desigr
of mercy to awaken a sense of ingrati-
tude and rebellion. ‘“ Experience is tie
best master.” ‘Experience teavles
fools; and he is a fool, indeed, that
does not profit by it.”


Ver. 89. lLearn—1. God’s self-
existence. “Iam He.” 2, God's sole
rule. “No God with me” 38. God
as arbiter of life and death. “I kill
and | make alive,’ etc. 4. God’s
absolute power. ‘‘ Neither is there
any that can deliver out of my hand.”


Vers, 40-42. A terrible God. 1.
Threatening vengeance. 2. Ratifying
sentence with an oath. 3. Preparing
to execute. 4. No resistance when
vengeance comes! “The Lord will
take vengeance on His adversaries,
and He reserveth wrath for His
enemies,


Taz Last Discourse.— Verses 44-47.


‘Ithese are the last words, the repetition of the law of Moses, the ultimatum


to the people.
I. The subject of the discourse.


warning, promise and command. The Jaw with
1. Its fulness.


Religion represented by law.


“All the words of this law.”


Words of
its claims and authority.
“ All the words” needed.


Nothing kept back. ‘Testimony clear and sufiicient, enough to satisfy intellect


and heart, to guide and bless, 2. Jts importance.


“ Not a vain thing,” an


empty, worthless profession ; a mere shadow of the good and true, but the


highest and only good.


The “one thing needful.” 3. Its necessity.


“ Your


life.” Not a philosophy, a mere system of morality, but a power of spiritual


life. “ The law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus.”


theory or a speculation, but a life; not a philosophy of life,
It is the highest life possible to men, an


living process.” —(Ooleridge).


“Christianity is not a
but a life and a


impartation of power by which eternal life may be finally attained.


II. The attention which the discourse requires.


Attention and interest


should be according to the importance of a thing. 1. A fixed purpose of mind.


“Set your hearts,”


thought and application, a firm and earnest resolve.
passing feelings and vacillating purpose, His |
Lord” (Ps. cxii. 7). 2 A due performance tn life.
Business men say life means energy and work.
Christ ~afckens, constrains and becomes the principle
When Christ lives within us, obedience is prompt and


and practice.
sloth are marks of death.
of action and obedience.


Meart and mind must be centered on it.


Constant
Through decision, not
“ His heart is fixed, trusting in the
“Observe to do.” Hear
Idleness and


loyal. ‘“ Keep My commandments and live.”
III. The blessings of thus heeding this discourse. If religion is the essence


of wisdom possession must be_
“Your life” iu its joy, happiness an
without God. Noble and zlorious the


advantageous.
d usefulness. Life—miserable existence


life of him who loves God and feels that


1. It gives enjoyment of life.


OHAP, XXXII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ;: DEUTERONOMY.





God loves him. 2. It prolongs life. “Prolong your daya” If this promise
does not really belong to us, yet religion tends to length of life, in preserving
from sins which shorten it, in promoting health, cheerfulness and activity.
“The fear of the Lord prolongeth days, but the years of the wicked shall be
shortened.” 3. Jt prepares for eternal life. Heaven not only eternal existence
but eternal enjoyment. ‘True religion an earnest and foretaste of it. - More
than dry formalism, cold assent, barren orthodoxy. I¢ is essentially “the
fountain of life,” “the kingdom of God within.”


THe Supreme Importance or OBEDIENCE TO Gop’s Commanps.— Verses 46-47.


I, Earnest purpose is essential to personal obedience to God’s law “Bet
your hearts,” etc. Without a purpose no strength in the will, no direction in
effort. Power and activity valueless without a clear aim. ‘To fix our hearts on
one great end, to make thought and duty define position and relation to this
centre principle are chief means of improvement, advance and obedience in
fy “My heart, O God, is fixed (prepared, set up) my heart is fixed”

8, lvii. 7).


II. Obedience to God’s law will secure happiness and prosperity. “It is
not a vain thing for you.” The life of individuals, the security and elevation of
the nation. Obedience better than gigantic schemes of trade, and colonization
than enlargement of frontier and increase of armies. “If thou wilt hearken
diligently unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe and to do all His
commandments, which I command thee this day, that the Lord thy God will
set thee on high above all the nations of the earth.”


III. It is our duty to render obedience ourselves and to teach our children.
“Ye shall command your children.” Instruct by precept and personal example.
Affection and divine law should urge to this. This wil secure their interests
here and welfare hereafter. Not mere talk, teaching to read, but practical
training required in present day. ‘Train up (instruct, dedicate) a child in
the way he should go” (Prov, xxii. 6).


Tae Last Days or Moses,


I, The last days of Moses were marked by sublime self-forgetfulness, and
deep solicitude for the well-being of the people. When informed that the time
of his departure was at hand, he exhibits no concern for himself, utters no regret
because of his great privation, or anxiety as to future destiny. Sublimely he
rises above personal and selfish considerations, and applies mind and heart in a
last effort to promote good of the people. Asks Jehovah to appoint a successor
in his great office (Num. xxvii. 15-22); solemnly recapitulates the law to
the people (Deut. xxxi. 7, 8, 23); pours forth this lofty and solemn song
(vers. 1-43) ; and blesses the several tribes (chap. xxxiii.).


II. The last days of Moses were shadowed and saddened by sin. Why die
at this time? Why not permitted to complete his work by leading the people
into the promised land? Not because physical strength exhausted or body
worn out or diseased (chap. xxxiv. 7). Because he sinned against God (ver. 81,
of. Num. xx. 2-13). Sin imparted mournful interest to last days of Moses,


III, The last days of Moses were relieved and cheered by the mercy of God.
God’s kindness exhibited in three things. 1. In the aspect in which He
Pasa oy his death to him. “Die . . . and be satire unto thy people,”

94


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY. OHAP, XXXIi.


{1.) Death is not the end of our life. “Gathered,” etc., not a poetical phrase
for death ; often used in addition to the record of death as a fact (of, Gen. xxv.
8, 17 ; xxxv. 29; xlix. 33; Num. xx. 26). Nor does the expression relate to
burial. In this sense not true of Moses, Aaron, or Abraham (cf. Gen. xv. 15;
1 Kings ii. 10; xi. 43). ‘‘ The only assignable sense” says Alford, “is that of
reference to a state of further personal existence beyond death.” (2.) To the
_ people of God death is the way to congenial social life. Moses about to pass
neither into isolation nor uncongenial society of strangers, but to His own

ople—persons of kindred sympathies, purposes, and interests. 2. In reminding

im of the death of Aaron. Moses witnessed the close of Aaron’s course on
Mount Hox. Recollection of that scene would tend to make hia own death less
formidable and more familiar. Aaron passed away peacefully ; why should
Moses dread the some journey? 8. In permitting him to see the promised land
(ver. 3} Surely this sight, ‘‘ one of the fairest and widest prospects in all the
eastern lands,” must have been a source of consolation and joy to the departing
spirit of the man of God. Conclusion. 1. See the beauty and nobility of over-
looking self in doing good to others ; and imitate it. 2. See how one sin may
cause grief and loss to a good man; and abstain from every form of evil.
8. See how in God’s dealings with men mercy is mingled with judgment, and
thankfully trust Him. 4. Our last days will come; by the grace of God let
us endeavour so to live, that they be like those of Moses—godly, useful, and
inspiring in their prospects.— William Jones.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND 8UGGESTIONA


Vers. 46,47. True Religion. 1. Not
empty profession, 2. A life conformed
to God’s will. 8. Real enjoyment.
“Religion is the dominion of the soul,
It is the hope of life, the anchor of
safety, the deliverance from evil”
(Napoleon I) Duty and its Lnforce-
ment. 1. What the duties? Personal
religion and instruction of posterity.
2. What are the arguments to enforee
it? a. Importance of the thing. * Your
life.” 0, Advantage of it, d&c.


The path of duty is the way to glory.
—Tennyson.


Vers. 49, 50. Moses on Mount Nebo,
or a Minister's death scene. This is
the record of a striking death scene,
It presents to us—I. The common
destiny of our race, “Gathered unto
thy people.” This phrase denotes the
twofold change which death effects in
our condition. 1. The corporal; 2.
The spiritual. II. The rigorousness of
moral rule. The reason why Moses
was required to die now, was because
be had committed a sin at Meribah,
(IL The agency of God in man’s dis-


solution. Moses died from the deter-
mination of the Divine mind. All
existence depends upon God's will.
IV. The termination of life in the
midst of labour. V. The promptitude
of Providence in supplying the place of
the dead. This fact is—1. Encouraging
to our faith; 2. Humbling to our
pride. VI. The tears of a congrega-
tion over the grave of their minister.
Well might they mourn (¢f chap. xxxiv
8, 9).—Adapted from Dr. Thomas.


Ver. 51. Trespassed. 1. In strange
unbelief. 2. In unrestrained passion.
8. In open rebellion, 4. In publicly
dishonouring God. Learn the jealousy
of God; the possibility of failure in

ualities in which we excel. Never
think you are secure; guard temper.
Though God pardons sin, yet will He
mark His hatred even in His servants.
A small sin may be followed by great
punishment.


Must I then forward only look for death §
Packward I turn mine eye and find him
there, — Young.


OHAP XXXIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY.





ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XXXII.


Ver. 2. Dew and rain. It is the
transformation of death unto life, and
the raising of that which lives into
higher and fairer form which is the end
in view. The morning sun and the
morning rain-cloud may seem wide
apart in their purpose, may appear at
times to obstruct each other, but they
have one great aim. ‘lhe sun and the
rain come to the dying seed, and both
together draw it from darkness to light
and build it up into the blade, the ear,
and the full corn in the ear, that God’s
world may live and praise His name.
Both are rich in times of refreshment ;
the sun after the dark night, the rain
after the parched day ; and after both,
the flower raises its head, and the birds
sing, and men are glad.J. Ker.


Ver. 7. Days of old.


“The past lives o’er again
In its effects, and to the guilty spirit
The ever-frowning present ia its image.”


&. T. Coleridge.
Ver. 10. Apple of his eye. Tender
guardianship. This organ more watched


than any other. “Does it not appear
to thee,” says Socrates to Xenophon,
“to be a work of providence that,
considering the weaknesss of the eye,
He has protected it with eyelids, as
with dvors which, whenever there is
occasiou to use it, are opened, and are
again closed on sleep? And that it
may not receive injury from the winds,
He has planted on it eyelashes like a
strainer ; and over the eyes has disposed
the eyebrows, like a penthouse, so that
the sweat from the head may do no
mischief.”


Ver. 15. Fat. The great bulk of
mankind resemble the swine, which in
harvest gather and fatten upon the
acorns beneath the oak, but show to
the tree which bore them no other
thanks than rubbing off its bark, and
tearing up the sod around it.—Scriver.


Vers. 23-26. Mischie/s. Every action
becomes more certainly an eternal
896


mother than it is an eternal daughter.
Richter. Vice ever carries with if
the germ of its own ruin, and a retri-
bution which is all the more inevitable
from being often slow, awaits every
violation of moral law.—/arrar.


Ver. 29. Wise. If you ask me which
is the real hereditary sin of human
nature, do you imagine I shall answer—
pride or luxury, or ambition, or egotism?
No ; I shall say—indolence. He who
conquers éndolence will conquer almost
every thing.— Lavater.


Vers. 34-35. In store. Anne of
Austria, Queen of France, once said
to Cardinal Richelieu, her implacable
enemy—‘“ My Lord Cardinal, there is
one fact which you seem entirely to
have forgotten; God is a sure pay-
master. He may not pay at the end
of every week, or month, or year; but
I charge you, remember that He pays
in the end.”


Ver. 89. I kill.
Make then, while yet ye may, your God
your friend.


Vers. 46,47. Your life, Faraday’s
“religion was a living root. His standard
of duty was supernatural. It was not
founded on any intuitive ideas of right
and wrong, nor was it fashioned upon
any outward expediences of time and
place ; but it was formed entirely on
what he held to be the revelation of
the will of God in the written word ;
and throughout all his life his faith led
him to act up to the very letter of it.”
—Memoir by Dr. Bruce Jones.


Ver. 46. Children. John Eliot, on
the day of his death, was found teaching
an Indian child the alphabet as he lay
on his bed; and when one tried to
persuade him to rest, he said— I
cannot poem now, but I have prayed
God to keep me useful, and He has left
me strength to teach a child,”


Ver. 50, Die. Life's evening, we may
rest assured, will take its character


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY.





from the day which has preceded it;
and if we would close our career in the
vomfort of religious hope, we must
prepare for it by early and continuous
religious habit.— Shuttleworth.


Ver. 52. Not go. The death of
Moses, though it was to him an entrance
into glory, was also a chastisement of
his infidelity. How many noble proofs
had he given of hiscourage and strength
of faith! How many gracious services
had he done for his Master? Yet,
for one act of disobedience, he must
be gathered to his fathers, All our
obedience cannot bear out one sin
against God. How vainly shall we
hope to make amends to God for
our former trespasses, by our better
behaviour, when Moses hath this one
sia laid in his dish, after so many and


OHAP. Xxxii





worthy testimonies of his fidelity!
When we have forgotten our sins, God
remembers them; and although not in
anger, yet Ho calls for our arrearages,
(Pe. Hall.) See the land. It is the

orizon that gives dignity to the fore-
ground ; a picture without sky has no
glory. This present, unless we see
gleaming beyond it the eternal calm
of the heavens above the tossing tree-
tops with withering leaves, and the
smoky chimnies, is a poor thing for
our eyes to gaze at, or our hearts to
love, or our hands to toil on. But
when we see that all paths lead to
heaven, and that our eternity is
affected by our acts in time, then it
is blessed to gaze ; it is possible to love
the earthly shadows of the uncreated
beauty—it is worth while to work.—
Maclaren.





CHAPTER XXXIIL


Ozrricat. Nores.—Moses now performs the last great act of life and blesses the tribes of
Israel “The blessing opens with a solemn conclusion of the covenant and giving of the law at
Sinai, by which the Lord became King of Israel, to indicate at the outset the source from which
sll blessings must flow to Israel (vers. 2-5). Then follow the separate blessings upon the
different tribes” (vers. 6-25).—(Ket). Compare these blessings with those ot Jacob
(Gen. xxvii. 40-49 ; i 27). Nothing special in the order.


1-5. Introduction. Man of God (ef. Josh. xiv. 6; 1 Sam. ix. 6; Ps, xc.—(Heading). Ver. 2
describes the vast area over which God’s glory shone in giving of law, from Sinai, Seir and
Paran— in thunder, fire and heavenly retinue. Saints, lit., from myriads of holiness, i¢., holy
angels (Zech. xiv. 5). People, lit., peoples, 1.¢., the Gentiles or the twelve tribes. Saints, God's
people just spoken of or holy ones (ver. 2). Thy hand, change from third to second person, and
vice versa, common in Hebrew poetry (¢f. Pa. xlix. 19). Hand, His power. He, (ver. 5) God, not
Moses (Jesh. of. xxxii. 15).


6. Reuben’s blessing. The rights of Reuben withheld in Jacob’s blessing (Gen. xlix. 8) ;
Moses prays for continuance and prosperity. Simeon is passed over, scattered abroad he lost
individuality as a tribe, yet lived in the midst of the tribe of Judah and shared its general
blessings. Few, iit., a number, easily counted, a negative implied from preceding clause, “let
not his men be few,” ¢e., let them be many. — (Gesentus).


7. Judah’s blessing. Royal tribe, from whom sceptre must not depart (Gen. xlix. 10). Judah
was to lead in zara eons back in safety and triumph. Sufficient to preserve independence.


8-11. Blessings of Levi. Addressed as petition. Thum. and Urim, ie, “thy Right and Thy
Light,” ¢f., Ex. xxviii, 30). Holy One. Levi as head of tribe. Prove, two events mentioned,
one at beginning, the other at end of forty years wandering, represent the series of trials to
prove the faith of this chosen tribe, Mas. (Ex. xvii. 1-7). Mar. (Num. xx. 1-13). Said o
reference to Hx. xxxii, 26-29; of. Mat. x. 37; Luke xiv. 26, Teach. Ver. 10, dignity of
priesthood conferred upon them, and to them belonged office of instructors. Hence favour
needed and strength to smite the loins, i.e. the seat of power and foil the enemy,


2. Benjamin’s blessing. A favourite with his father, was cared for by the Lord. Dwell in
i him. Cover, shelter. Shoulders, on his sides or borders, figure from
safety, resting upon er, 3 i 2 $y a
“fathers carrying their sons while young and tender.” —(Calvin). (of. i 81). “Upon the back,
equivalent to “between shoulders” (1 Sam. xvii. 6) aed


OMAP, XXXITL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY.





13-17. Blessing of Joseph (including Ephraim and Manasseh). A resemblance, yet not a
reproduction of that pronounced (Gen. xlix. 25, 26). In both fertility of districts allotted to
them is a leading feature. Deep (ver. 13) springs of water. Chief things (ver. 15), best gifts
Mountains, the sheltered sides of which were covered with vine, olive and fig, etc, Fulness,
all good that earth could produce, Good will. Covenant blessings added to natural, Bush, a
manifestation of God to Moses (Ex. iii.) Separated, consecrated, or distinguished (Gen. xlix, 26).
In the strength of this blessing Joseph would be powerful and tread down nations, Glory
(ver 17), Render, “The firstborn of his (te. Joseph’s) bullock is his glory.” Reference to
Ephraim raised by Jacob to honours of firstborn (Gen. xlviii. 8), and here likened to the firstling —
of Joseph’s oxen, %.¢., of Joseph’s offspring, the singular noun (shor) taken collectively. —
(Speak. Com.) Ox, an emblem of power generally (Gen. xlix. 6; Ps. xxii. 12; Jer. xlvi. 20;
Unicorn, Wild bull (cf, Num. xxiii, 22; xxiv. 8), Thousands (ef. Gen. xlviii. 19),
(1 Sam, xviii. 7, 8).


18, 19. Blessings of Zebulun and Issachar. Ohiefly a repetition of Gen. xlix. 13-15.
Going out in commercial enterprise. Zebulun dwelt on sea shore, Issachar possessed a fertile
inland district, dwelt at home and prospered in agricultural pursuits, Mountain, of the Lord’s
inheritance (Ex. xv. 17), upon which the Lord was about to plant His people and build His
sanctuary. They would offer thank offerings themselves and invite to sacrificial meals other
nations.—(Keil.) Righteousness not merely legal sacrifices conforming to ritual, but those
offered in right spirit, well-pleasing to God (Ps. iv. 6; li. 21.—(Keil), Suck. The treasures of
both sea (Mediterranean and sea of Galilee) and land shall be theirs ; purple dye from the shell
of the oyster and mirrors and glass vases from the sand.


20, 21. Blessing of God. Enlargeth by extending territory, or delivers from trouble, from
attacks by hostile and surrounding tribes. Lion rests securely and fearlessly though surrounded
by enemies. The verse indicative of warlike character. First part of conquest of Israel made >
by Gad and Reuben at request of Moses (cf. Num. xxxii.) Portion the leader's portion reserved,
te, there was reserved the fitting portion for God as leader in war.—(Speak. Com.) Heads,
te., joined other leaders to fulfil God’s commands respecting conquest of Canaan (Num. xxxii,
17, 21, 82; Josh. i. 143 iv. 12).


22. Dan’s blessing. Whelp, a cub; differing from a young lion weaned and beginning to
catch prey for itself, Shallleap after it has grown up. Springs suddenly upon its prey.
Bashan abounding with cares. Dan’s territory was insufficient; by a sudden and successful
irruption northwards he established a colony,


23. Naphtali’s blessing. Satisfled, his lot some of the most beautiful scenery and most
fertile soil in Palestine (ef. Porter’s Handbook of Syria). Fruits ripen earlier here than
anywhere else.


24, 25, Blessing of Asher. Acceptable, let him be the favoured one of his brethren, ée., the
favoured of God. The blessing an exposition of the name. Asher, the prosperous
(cf. Gen. xxx. 15).—(Keil), Dip. The process of extracting oil by foot-presses; or allusion
to fertile district adapted to culture of olive (Job xxix. 6; of. Gen, xlix. 20), Shoes. This
verse continues the figure of preceding, and represents strength and firmness of Asher, as is shod
with iron and brass (¢f. Rev. i, 15). Iron-soled shoes worn by warriors and suitable to rocky
country. Days. “Thy strength shalt be continued to thee as long as thou shalt live: thou
shalt never know feebleness and decay.”—(Speak. Com.)


26-29. Conclusion. ‘ God’s glory and power, and consequent safety and prosperity of God's
people, form the climax as they do the basis, of the blessing which the law-giver has to
pronounce,” None like unto God, O Jeshurun, Rideth with unlimited power in, ie, as
thy helper. This God a refuge (ver. 27), dwelling place for protection to homelese wanderers
(Ps. xc, 1; xci. 9; Hab. i. 12), Underneath, ée., God on earth below as well as in heaven
above. Fountain, a designation of Israel, who came from Jacob as waters from a fountain
(of. Is, xlviii. 1; Ps. lxviii. 26).- Ver. 29, unparalleled protection, deliverance and victory, hence
Israel congratulated. Happy! Saved, not mere deliverance from danger and distress, but
ealvation in general (like Zech. ix. 9; ¢f. Is, xlv. 17), coming from J shavahs


Tue Formation or tHE Kinapom.— Verses 1-5.


The glory of the covenant, the elevation of Israel as a nation, and the majesty
of the King and his law set forth.


I, The revelation of the king. God appears in forms awful and impressive.
1, In rte light. “He shined forth”—like the rising sun, filling
3


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. XXXIiL





around, and tipping the mountains with splendour. God is light, illumines
every valley, and covers all places with His presence and truth. 2. In burning
te “Went a fiery law.” “The Lord descended in fire.” “Is not My word

ke a fire?” (Jer. xxix. 22), 8, In terrible thunder. “There were thunders
and lightnings.” God robes Himself in clouds of smoke or flames of fire to
Impress the senses and speak to the heart ‘‘ Whose voice then shook the earth?”
4. In splendid retinue. ‘He came with ten thousands of saints.” “The
chariots of God are twenty thousand, even many thousands of angels. The
Lord is among them, as in Sinai, in the holy place” (Ps. lxviii, 17). Thus did
God reveal Himself to Israel. ‘ Who is a God like unto Thee?” If mountains
trembled, and Moses feared and quaked, how reverent and deeply touched
should we be?


II. The number of his subjects. Jehovah is the universal King. His sway
is over the meanest and mightiest. All agencies and all creatures are at His
service. 1. Myriads in heaven above. “ Angels, and authorities, and powers”
are subject to Him (1 Pet. iii. 22). ‘Thousand thousands ministered unto Him,
_ and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before Him” (Dan. vii. 9, 10) as
executors of justice or ministers of mercy. 2. The inhabitants of the earth
beneath (ver. 3). Israel, the Gentiles, and all nations of the earth. “Saints,”
holy ones especially, stand in His presence, constitute His train, and enter His
spiritual kingdom. Submission to Him essential to happiness and heaven,


III. The assumption of Royalty. These splendours of royal state illustrate
the majesty of the king, and the method of establishing his kingdom. 1. By
enactment of law. law needful, and the medium of blessing in every kingdom.
Order and supremacy only secured by good government. “Sovereign law sits
empress, crowning good, repressing ill.” ‘The law came by Moses,” “was given
by the disposition (ministration) of angels” (Acts vii. 53). 2. By appointment
of representatives. ‘‘ Moses commanded us a law,” was God’s viceregent, and a
subordinate king. Moses was “the man of God,” and the minister of God.
Consecration to God’s service gives real worth and dignity. True kings and

riests those who trust and obey. No supremacy, no reigning without love to

od and service to men, This should be our ambition. “I would rather be
king over the French than king over France,” said Louis XIV. 3. By consent
of the people. Israel stood in attitude of reverence and attention. At His “ feet,”
willing to hear and ready to obey. “All that the Lord shall say we will do.”
Our wills must be subdued and consent before we become subjects, disciples of
Jesus. In vain do we profess or teach, if disobedient. “ He that is of God
heareth God’s words.”


Tus Maszsty or Gop’s Law.


The giving of the law was the design of this manifestation. “ Moses personates
the listening nation, and not only speaks of himself in the third person, but
does so by identifying his own person with the nation, because he wished the

ople to repeat his words from thorough conviction, and because the law which

e gave in the name of the Lord was given to himself as well, ‘and Was as
binding upon him as upon every other member of the congregation ” (Keil).


I. In the source from which it was revealed. “From his right hand,” &e.
The law from God; a revelation of his mind and authority. Hence not mere
counsel or advice, but given from a source which he cannot question ; imposin”
obligations which are strongest, and enforced by sanctions which none can


resist, aso


OHAP. XXX10L HOMILETIO COMMBNTARY ; DEUTERONOMY.





If. In the splendour in which it was revealed. This event, unparalleled in
the history of man, no nation, whatever its legends or traditions, ever conceived
of the God of heaven proclaiming law to them “out of the midst of fire ”—
light unapproachable hiding his person from the gaze of man. ‘These outward
signs of majesty, power and authority will not be witnessed again until the
great day “when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, with the angels
of His power in flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God and
obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.”


III. In the design for which it was revealed. Law designed to reveal the
claims and preserve the knowledge of God among men; to convince of sin,
offences against the order of society and the authority of the Creator; to
enforce moral principles and educate to moral duty. Hence—1. To enrich
God's people. “The inheritance of the congregation” (ver, 4). Good laws

eculiar to Israel, and distinguished them from other nations (Ps. xiv. 7, 20;
Rose. iii, 2), are the best wealth and treasure; the Scriptures and the means
of grace a goodly heritage to any people. 2. To bless all nations. “'This is
the blessing ” (ver. 1)—(a) In revealing God’s love. ‘He loved the people”
(ver. 3). (6) In transmitting God’s will. Be thankful for this inheritance of
law. Remember, obligation to keep it is hereditary, passing from parents to
children, Receive it as a legacy of love and truth. “ ‘hy testimonies have I
taken as a heritage for ever” (Ps, cxix. 111).


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. The man of God. 1. A


lace of security. 8. The place of
special friend of God. “Speaking


Instruction, sitting like scholars to


face to face, enjoying direct intercourse
with God.” 2. A distinguished servant,
holding high position and engaged in
glorious work. 3. A famous legislator,
giving’ divine laws and _ requiring
implicit obedience. 4, A medium of
blessing to his people in life, example,
and teaching.


Ver. 2. A fiery law. 1. In its
bright origin. 2. In its searching
nature. 3. In its purifying effects,
4, In its awful sanctions, He shined
forth, God resting and journeying
with his people as light, shield, and
defence, Sinai, Seir, and Patan,
Special providences in special places,
Manifestation of God’s presence, the
gift of flesh, appointment of 70 elders
and bestowment of Holy Spirit,


Ver. 8. 1. God’s love to his people.
2. God’s rule over his people. 3. God
adored by his people. Jn thy hand.
1. To be formed into a people, 2. To
be preserved as a people (John x. 2, 8).
3. To be ruled as a people. At thy
feet. 1. The place of humility, 3. The
400


receive instruction and ready to obey.
“Every one shall receive of thy
words.” Yea, he loved the people. No
doubt of this with regard to Israel.
Often reminded of it, and told why
he set his love upon them. Not for
greatness, they were the fewest of all;
not for goodness, for they were stiff-
necked ; but because the Lord had a
favour towards them. He chose, re-
deemed them, provided for them, and
distinguished them by miracles and
privileges. His love is of three kinds
—A love of benevolence, which consists
in wishing and designing them good.
A love of beneficence, consisting in
doing them good. This appears in a
thousand instances, chiefly remember-
ing them in their low estate, and
sending his Son that they might live.
A love of complacency. The love of
benevolenceand of beneficenceregarded
them as unworthy and miserable; the
love of complacency regards them as
mere creatures. He cannot take
pleasure in those destitute of his image
and enemies by wicked works. But
he prepares them for delighting in


HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY ; DEUTERONOJIY.


OUAP. NNT LIK.





them and holding intercourse with
them. What can I wish more? Do
men reproach? I have been precious
in his sight, honourable, and he has
loved me. Let them curse, he will


than life, and will more than balance
a universe of frowns. Let my portion
and the portion of mine be—‘ ‘The
goodwill of Him that dwelt in the
bush.” —Jay.


bless. One smile of God’s is better
REUBEN, OR THE Buessiye or Existenor.— Verse 6.


This is a prayer for the continued existence of Reuben and suggests things
that imperilled this existence.


I. Existence prolonged in danger. Reuben was endangered by surroundin
nations—their leaders were far in advance of them, and little ones left behing
Eee xxxii, 27; Jos. iv. 12). Individual and family life dependent upon

od, exposed to risks, Need to pray for each as Abraham, “O that Ishmael
might live before thee.”


II. Existence prolonged in sin. Reuben had a threefold honour (Gen. xlix. 3),
as first-born, might of Jacob’s strength and naturally pre-eminent. He forfeited.
these blessings and fell into dishonour. He grievously transgressed (Gen. xlix. 3, 4)
and rebelled with Korah (Num, xvi. 1). Sin brings disgrace, shortens life and
exposes to judgment. “Preserve thou those that are appointed to die.”


III. Existence prolonged with prosperity. ‘Let not his men be few.”
Judging from the first census after deliverance from Egypt and that on
plains of Moab nearly forty years after, this tribe was reduced in number. The
prayer includes continued existence, increase of number and perpetual remem-
brance. “The Lord shall increase you more aud more.” ‘I will increase
them with men like a flock.” Lessons from Reuben’s history. Learn: 1. Not
to insult the fallen and disgraced. 2. Not to perpetuate marks of wickedness,
“To speak no slander, no, nor listen to it.” 3. To take warning. Occupied
with herds and flocks they lost early energy ; could not be roused against Jabin
(Judges v. 15, 16); dissipated strength in distant expeditions (¢f 1 Chron. v.
10-18), and did not care to complete their conquests (¢f Num xxxii,)—
(cf. Speak, Com.) 4. Pray for personal life, family increase and church
prosperity, that all may be given to God.


Jupan: Tus Buzssina or Supremacy.— Verse 7.


This reference is rich, peculiar, and suggestive. Judah, the royal tribe; the
prayer for its settlement, security, and supremacy.


I. Supremacy through conflict. Judah, prominent in battle, in order of
marching and encampment, hence danger, conflict, and suffering. All
knowledge and virtue gained through difficulty and contest. he earth is
subdued and sovereignty over men acquired by warfare. Supremacy ever
through conflict.


II, Supremacy by God’s help in conflict. “Be thou an help to him.”
‘God strengthened his hands, gave warriors sufficient to support the tribe and
vindicate its rights. Without him no strength, no triumph. “ Happy is he
that hath the God of Jacob for his help.”


III. This help in conflict secured by prayer. “ Hear, Lord, the voice of
Judah.” Conscious of weakness, he orted to God. Prayer never oa . place,
30


CHAP, XXXII. HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


Anreeretin aed





Greatest soldiers often devoutest men—Cromwell, Havelock, and Hedley Vicars,
A prayerful posterity and people ever eminent and supreme. But prayer and
work, self-help and reliance upon God must go together (¢f 2 Chron. xiii, xiv.,
xv.). Labour and pray, then in husbandry, art, and war we prevail. ‘Judah
prevailed above his brethren, and of him came the chief ruler” (1 Chron. v. 9).


Lavi: tHE Rewarps or Service.— Verses 8-11.


I. Service in defence of Right. After the defection at Sinai the sons of Levi,
not in mere heat of pious zeal, but at the command of Moses and under divine
direction, obeyed readily, attacked courageously, and slew idolators. They
defended God’s honour, supported God’s cause, and punished God’s enemies,
“Moses stood in the gate of the camp and said who is on the Lord’s side?
And all the sons of Levi gathered themselves together unto him, &.,” Ex.
£XXil, 26-28,


II, Service rendered in a noble spirit. The value of service estimated by
the difficulties and the spirit in which it is given—lovingly or reluctantly. 1. Ine

rit of faithfulness, hey alone were true; all the rest broke the covenant,

oly amidst idolators; upright when multitudes bowed like reeds before the
wind, “Among the faithless, faithful only he.” 2. Ina spirit of impartiality.
Best friends and nearest relatives were not spared. Zeal for God prevailed over
love for father and mother. This is the spirit of the Master. (Mt. xii. 48.) 3. In
a spirit of self-denial. Levites often absent from home, engaged in constant
attendance at the altar, and could not defend their families as other Israelites.
They preferred fulfilment of duty to indulgence in grief at the loss of kindred,
(Lev. xxi., 11, 12.), and obedience to God to natural affection.


III. Service severely tested in its performance. Their history had been
critical and sad, 1. Zested by the people. “‘ Moses and Aaron, in whom the
whole tribe was proved, had grievously failed. ‘“Massah” and “Meribah”
represent the feelings of the people, and the purpose of God to try their leaders,
The whole journey was a probation and a test. 2. Tested by the enemy. ‘They
met with hatred and opposition, “them that rise against him, and of them that
hate bim.” Those who teach and reprove others, who uphold and preserve
religion, meet with enemies. Korah and his company were envious, (Num xvi. 1);
Saul rose up against the priests (1 Sam. xxii. 18) and were overcome.


IV. fervice abundantly rewarded in its results. Levi was the holy one, the
consecrated to God. He was rewarded. 1. With oficial honour, “Let thy
Thummim and thy Urim be with thy holy one.” They were to retain the
priesthood and be endued with knowledge and uprightness to discharge its
duties, ‘These were lost in the captivity and not restored to the second temple,
but are perpetuated for ever in Him of whom Aaron was a type. 2. With
personal acceptance, “ Accept the work of his hands, ver. 11. Holy adminis-
trations done by hands and body hence fitly described. God accepted them
with favour, Acceptance with God the greatest blessing to minister or people,
and worthy of aim. “That we may be accepted of him,” 2 Cor. v. 9. 3, With
continual prosperity. “Bless Lord his substance,” special allotments and
ample provision came easily. Increased fertility of land brought increased
substance, hus the blessing of God was upon their work, and the providence
of God was their inheritance. Those who depend most upon God’s blessing
work most faithfully in God’s service, shall never be disappointed, “A sacrifice
acceptable and well-pleasing to God.”

402


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. XXXII.





Tae Hoty Priesraoop.— Verses 8, 10


Levi represents the head of the tribe whose crowning glory was the priesthood
and possession of ''hummim and Urim.


I. Its divine allotment. Every man a calling in which to abide, a vocation
from heaven. ‘The Christian ministry the highest and noblest, not the gift of
Bishops, Presbytery or Council, but an appointment of God. ‘None but He who
made the world can make a minister of the Gospel” says Newton, “The sons
of Levi receive the office of the priesthood” (Heb. vii. 5.)


IT. Its necessary qualifications, “Thy holy one” Holy, pure in life and
character, consecrated in work, incorrupt in doctrine and consistent in all things.
Intelligent “able to teach others,” judgment to Jacob and law to Israel (ver. 10).
Truthful, “The law of truth must be in his mouth.” The true minister wi
resolve like the missionary Eliot to leave something of God, heaven and religion
in all that he does,


IIT. Its sacred duties set forth in three functions. 1. To teach. “ They shall
teach Jacob, &c.” Knowledge must be sought, possessed and communicated.
“They shall teach my people the difference between the holy and profane, and
cause them to discern between the unclean and the clean” (Exek. xliv. 23.)
‘The law shall not perish for the priest, nor counsel for the wise, nor the word
from the prophet” (Jer. xviii. 18.) 2. Zo offer incense. “They shall put incense
hefore thee.” ‘To offer prayers for the people, present gifts, gratitude, and praise.
“ He shall burn incense upon it (the golden altar) a perpetual incense before the
Lord throughout your generations ” (Exek. xxx.7, 8.) 3. To present sacrifices.
* Whole burnt sacrifices upon thine altar.” God Me eket by sacrifice, for
men have sinned and need mercy—Christians generally ‘‘ a royal priesthood ” to
offer up spiritual sacrifices (i. Peter ii. 5-9.)


IV. Its distinguished success (ver. 2.) Those who rightly serve God and
instruct men will reap reward. 1. Their work is accepted. “ Accept the work of
his hands.” 2. Their character ts vindicated. Men may ridicule enthusiasm,
suspect motives, and assail character. But God defends them, vindicates their
conduct and society, and smites their enemies so “ that they rise not again.”


BensaMis—BeLovep anv SxcurED.— Verse 12.


Benjamin beloved by Jacob his father (Gen. xlix. 27). In this parental love
Moses sees a reflection of God’s love so free and tender.


I. By an endeared relationship. “The beloved of the Lord.” This name
not an empty title, nor a description of human merit, but an expression of
God’s regard for holy character, genuine service and devout attachment to his
cause. If wecannot be rich, we may be useful. If we do not receive honours
from men, we may be dignified with the title “Sons of God.”


II. By distinguished privileges. God’s presence would overshadow, protect,
and exalt them by position and influence in central government and religous
worship. 1. By special advantages. His inheritance included Moriah, the mount
on which the temple of God was built. Future generations dwelt near the
oracle of God and had easy accsss to the ordinances of public worship. In
Israel’s eventful history this tribe shone with conspicuous honour. It gave birth
to the first King and was the pride of the greatest apostle (¢/ Rom. ii, 1 ; Phil,
iii. 5). 2. By divine protection, “Shall dwell in safety by ie If the


OMAP. XXX, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





words apply to the temple, then even Benjamin “ was covered all the day long *
under the security of the sanctury (Ps. cxxv. 2) often described as a place of


refuge (Ps. xxvii. 4,5; Neh. vi. 10).


safeguards ever towards those he loves.
In weakness and danger “they dwell between his


the care of his heart.
shoulders,”


God’s singular comforts and constant


The welfare of his children is always


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS, .


Ver. 6. Live. Learn—1. Sin en-
dangers life and its blessings. Reuben’s
impoverished life and diminished num-
bers through ancestral sins (ef Gen.
xxxv. 22; xlix.4). 2. God in answer
to prayer preserves forfeited blessings.
“Not die.” Though deprived of the
honour and privileges of firstborn,
yet he retained rank, became more
numerous than many other tribes
(Num. i, 21; ii. 11), yet gradually
sank into a nomadic tribe which had
enough merely to “live and not die.”


Ver. 7. Voice. Putting thy promises
(Gen. viii. 9-11) into suit by his
prayers, and pressing thee for a per-
formance (Trapp). Three things were
expressed—1. That the tribe of Judah,
conscious of weakness, shall depend
upon the Most High, and make sup-
plication to him. 2. That God will
hear such prayer. 38. That his hands
shall be increased, and that he shall
prevail over his enemies. This blessing
has striking affinity with that which
this tribe received from Jacob (Gen.
xlix. 9), and both may refer to our
blessed Lord, who sprang from it, who
conquered our deadly foes by his death,
and whose praying posterity ever
revail through his might (4. Clarke).
n the verse we have a prayer—1. For
unity. Bring him unto his people;
let them be united and permanent.
2. For strength. “Let his hands be
sufficient.” No work of any kind
without strong hands. ‘The arms of
his hands were made strong by the


hands of the mighty God of Jacob.
3. Kor success. “Be thou a help te
him from his enemies.” Pray and
obey, for “ good success have they that
do his commandments ” (Ps. exi. 10).


Vers. 8, 10. The blessing of the
Christian ministry, 1, As a medium
of God’s will, 2. As teachers of God’s
law. 8. As intercessors for God’s
people.


Ver. 12. Beloved. God’s special
love. 1. Tender—like a father carry-
ing his child between his shoulders,
2. Sufficient—“ cover him,” 3. Last-
ing—‘‘all the day long.” The safety
of the beloved of the Lord. Of Ben-
jamin three things are here said which
will beautifully apply to all God’s
people—I. He was the special object
of the Divine affection, “beloved of
the Lord.” God espesial’y loves his
spiritual children with a love of—
1. Approbation, 2. Manifestation ;
“ He gives them love tokens and pays
them love visits. 38. Distinction. II.
He was to dwell near to the Lord, “ by
Him.” All God’s people are rear to
Him—1. By grace. 2. In providence.
8. In reference to His ordinances. 4.
With regard to the prevailing impres-
sions of the mind. III. He was to
abide in perfect security. God’s
chosen dwell in safety from (1) the
curses of the Divine law; (2) the
pence of darkness ; (3) the perils of
ife; 4, the terrors of death and the
judgment day.—Dr. Burns,


JoserH ; on PLentry and Power.— Verses 13-17,


Moses waxes eloquent and poetical at the mention of Joseph. Out of the


fulness of his heart his mouth speaks,


possible abundance of earthly blessing a


conflict with the nations.” —(Keid).
404


“He desires for this tribe the greatest.
nd a vigourous manifestation of power in


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. XXXIIt.








I. Exuberant fertility bestowed. No scarcity in any department. A fertile
country, a prolific seed and a balmy clime. 1. Precious fruite of earth. “The
precious things of the earth” (ver. 16). Its trees and pasturage, and the cattle
that feed upon it ; for all of which Joseph’s land was famous, 2 The genial
snjluences of heaven. ‘The precious things of heaven.” Its dew, sunshine and
showers. “God give thee of the dew of heaven and the fatness of the earth and
plenty of corn and wine” (Gen. xxvii. 28). 3. Fruits in due season. Fruits
matured by light and warmth, from sun and moon. Once in a year by the sun,
annual productions as corn, barley and grapes. Monthly productions, as grass
and herbs, figs and olives, of which many crops in a year by the moons.
4. Varied productions of land. “The ancient mountains,” yielded their
“chief things,” and “ the lasting hills” their useful ores. ‘The deep couched
beneath” in perennial fountains and flowing streams, “ Blessings of heaven
above, blessings of the deep that lieth under, etc.” (Gen, xlix. 25).


Ii. Regal authority established. “His horns are like the horns of unicorns,”
emblems of strength and royal authority. 1, Lstablished by aggressive power.
“With them he shall push the people together.” Drive out Canaanites and
overcome ali opposition “ to the ends of the earth.” ‘lhe most distant nations.
2. Lstablished in great security. The stately bullock an emblem of quiet,
patient strength. Its horns natural weapons of defence and security.
3. Lstablished in prolific numbers, “The ten thousands of Ephraim,” but
“the thousands of Manasseh.” ‘‘'Truly his younger brother shall be greater
than he, aud his seed shall become a multitude of nations” (Gen. xlix. 19;
gf. Num. i. 33-35). 4. /stablished in signal honour. Joseph “ was illustrious
among his brethren,” separated in the sense of consecrated or distinguished.
A dignity received for his affectionate conduct to his father. We may gain
this honour and emulate Joseph in temper, taste and purpose.


III. Spiritual blessings added. “The good will of him that dwelt in the
bush.” ‘I'o the blessings of heaven and earth spiritual mercies are desired.
What is life, wealth, and earthly blessings without divine favour? God's
presence better than large estates, splendid revenues, military glory, and

ushing energy. “ ‘I'he good will” is more desirable than natural productions.
od is more than His gifts. ‘ With thee is the fountain of life,”


But oh, Thou bounteous giver of all good,

Thou art of all thy gifts Thyself the crown t

Give what thou canst—without Thee we are poor,

And with Thee rich, take what Thou wilt away.
—Cowper.


ZEBULUN ; oR, Busnxess Pursuits and Retiaiovs Worsuip.— Verses 18, 19.


Commercial pursuits and sacrificial offerings are here connected. “ Life is
described in its two aspects of work and production, rest and recreation. f
* Going out” (enterprise and labour) is attributed to Zebulun, and “ remaining
in tents” (the comfortable enjoyment of life) to Issachar. In accordance with
the delineation of their respective characters in the blessing of Jacob, this is to
- be attributed to the poetical parallism of the clauses, and the whole is to be
understood as applying to both in the sense suggested. by Graf, “ Rejoice,
Zebulun and Issachar, in your labour and your rest” (Keil). Learn—


I. The providence of God in the spheres of men. As the tribes of Israel
were located in Canaan, so now men’s “ fortunes” are at God's disposal, “ What
is chance to man is the appointment of God,” says one. ‘The lot “in the lap’
at the bottom of an urn determined important matters. Work was i i.


OHAP. XXXIII. HOMILELTIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.





dwellings fixed, and officers chosen. ‘The lot cast” at, peradventure, carrying
a show of casualty (Bp. //all) is under a certain disposal ; “ the whole disposing
thereof is of the Lord” (Prov xvi. 33). 1. Jn trade, with its special tastes,
skill, and success. 2. In residence, with its surroundings and comforts. Each
man’s sphere of life, and each nation’s place on earth, are adapted to character
under the originating cause and controlling power of God, “who hath determined
the times before appointed, and the bouzids of their habitation” (Acts xvii. 26).


II, The joy springing from a right discharge of duty in these spheres.
“Rejoice, Zebulun, in thy going out, ete.” If we do our duty in that station
of life in which it hath pleased God to call us, we may be happy. God’s blessing
can rest on commerce and agriculture. Prosperity without this may be a misery,
and not a joy. Secular pursuits should develop a spirit of gladness. Profits in
trade, comforts of home, and the callings of life are means of pleasure and the
gifts of God. “ Every man also, to whom God hath given riches and wealth,
and hath given him power to eat thereof, and to take his portion, and to rejoice
in his labour, this is the gift of God” (Ece, v. 19).


III. The expression of this joy in religious worship. “ They shall offer
sacrifices of righteousness.” Ties of affinity bound these two tribes together,
The same feeling, purpose, and zea! ruled in both, and displayed in the worship
of God. God was acknowledged in business pursuits, and success prompted to
consecration, and afforded gifts of corn, fruit, and oil to God. “ Honour the
Lord with thy substance, and with the first-fruits of all thine increase; so shall
thy barns be filled with plenty, ete.” (Prov. iii. 9,10). 1. 7 hey worshipped God
themselves, Business no excuse for neglect and staying at home. ‘l'o others
they set an example in liberality, praise, and energy. Their sacrifices were well-
pleasing to God. “‘ Offer the sacrifices of righteousness, and put your trust in
the Lord.” 2. They invited others to join them. “ They shall call the people
unto the mountain.” Alive themselves, they stirred up others (Zech. viii. 21).
Their zeal was contagious, Their neighbours at home (“in thy tents”) were
not forgotten ; their merchants abroad (“ going out”) were missionaries of God.
A spirit of earnestness and personal resolve will incite others, and meet with a
ready response. “ The inhabitants of one city shall go to another, saying, Let us

o speedily (go, going, implying earnestness and constancy) to pray before
Catat the face of) the Lord, and to seek the Lord of Hosts: I will go also”
(Zech. viii. 21).


ZEBULUN AND IssacHaR.


I. The dependence of one class of society upon another. In warfare some
pray upon the mount, while others fight in the valley ; in commerce some “ go
out” and others stay at home. Society in its various parts, pursuits, and
interests is a school of mutual pep: Persons most prominent and obscu
most easy and most enterprising, trades most attractive or most humble, denen’
upon each other. “The carpenter encourages the goldsmith, and he that
smootheth with the hammer him that smites the anvil” (Is. xli. a)


II. The blessings of unity in benevolent enterprises. Numbers accomplish
what individuals cannot. Men combine to increase resources and surmount
obstacles. In the development of trade and in the propagation of truth “ unity
is strength.” 1. /¢ guarantees success. “hey shall suck of the abundance
of the seas.” ‘Treasures of sea and land shall be theirs. The soldier falters
alone, but with comrades he advances with confidence to victory. ‘“'T'wo are
better than one because they have @ good reward for their labour” (Ece. iv. 9;

406


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. XXXII.
Sy ps ees se heen


8. It creates joy. “ Rejoice” not only in success but in co-operation to secure
it. Richer is the enjoyment of the common good when mutual efforts promote it,
“That both he that soweth and he that reapeth may rejoice.”


III, The honour gained by those who rightly co-operate in benevolent
enterprises. ‘'Mhey shall call the people unto the mountain.” God will fix
his seat on the mount in their midst; they shall invite others to worship, be
honoured as missionaries to neighbours and distant nations. God will hold
fellowship with them, and many shall participate in their joy and sacrificial
meals ; honoured in privileges, calling, and social intercourse. “hem tha}
honour me I will honour.”


Ovureorva anpd Home-xzErina: A Szrmon For SumMen.— Verses 18, 19.


Issachar the fifth, and Zebulun the sixth son of Jacob and Leah. When born
their mother selected their names, and gave thanks to God. In one case
“God hath given me my hire; and she called hisname Issachar. In the other,
“God hath endued me with a good dowry; and she called his name Zebulun.”
These words describe the different spheres and the common duties of Zebulun and
Issachar, and suggest ideas respecting ourselves suited to the season of summer.

Zebulun. An itinerating tribe. ‘Their distinct habit and relative position
was going out. Their territory to Mediterranean, with its ports as “a haven
for ships.” They are commemorated as first who adventured skiffs on ocean,
and who acquired skill in fishing. They engaged in foreign commerce and
defensive war, became mariners and merchants, deriving wealth from productions
of other countries and from beings “ which suck the abundance of the seas”
and enriched “ with treasures hid in the sand,” perhaps gems, corals, and pearls
from bottom of sea by diving. Jssachar. A district entirely imland, and

urely agricultural. Its soil so rich that most indolent invited to cultivate it.
its valleys covered with corn, hills rejoiced on every side, and vast plains
ornamented and enriched with trees. A home-keeping tribe; like Jacob a plain
man dwelling in tents, occupied with breeding cattle. Their toil rewarded them
with sufficient supply for personal wants and public revenue. Loth to leave
they “acquitted themselves better in the subsidy than in the muster-roll.”
Others went out to battle; they ‘abode among the sheepfolds, to hear the
bleatings of the flocks,”

These different spheres and occupations find parallel in modern England,
with its diversities and divisions, its population of various orders and classes,
Many go out; business calls them abroad. ‘They traverse the kingdom for

urposes of commerce, and circumnavigate the globe in the interests of science,
Bhips incessantly sail in all seas, Exports and imports enormous. Others go
out in quest of health ; jaded workers needing relaxation, students in search of
knowledge, adventurous men, or teeming thousands in cheap excursions. Still
there are stayers at home—devotees of the dwelling—domestic hermits—so
tenacious of tent that they never go anywhere. More fond of retirement than
roaming, who believe that “as the bird that wandereth from her nest, so is a
man that wandereth from his place.” In choice of these different conditions
and varied pursuits he sees traces of human will and Divine appoi.tment.
Inclination for each kind of life may be God’s work. He predisposes some for
the quietude of the hamlet and monotonous labour of the homestead ; fits others
for the city full of stir, for the port crowded with strangers, and for travel with
its everchanging events.

Zebulun and Issachar, who occupied different spheres, were directed to
perform common duties. Both to rejoice, call people to the mountain, and to


offer sacrifices of righteousness. bulun to be contented and seen! in


CHAP, XXXIIL HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY.


nee eERR Eves hole Ned ster eeY Colly  P sel e
going out, not to repine at exposure to danger and fatigue ; but bravely
sncounter perils of sea, and patiently endure the bustle of port. Not permitted
to envy brethren passing their lives in safety and inland position. The other
tribe equal reason to rejoice and be cheerful, for their tents fixed in most fertile
parts of fruitful land. Every country has its attractions to those within its
boundaries, Denizens may find delight where travellers see no beauty. There
is mercy in every place, and if we have an eye to see it and a heart to rejoice
in it, no place will be underrated or dispraised. If not good enough, strive to
make it better. Poor it may be, and we shall prove our unworthiness by leaving
*t worse than we found it.

Wherever we live, in town or country, near lively coasts or far inland, we
should be mindful of our religious duties and acts, These duties prescribed
to Zebulun and Issachar, “call the people to the mountain,” the centre of
general assembly and seat of religious worship. The duty of convoking people
the official act of Levites, but a mutual service among people themselves,
Those in retired regions must call each other out of tents, those who travelled
and traded must commend worship of God to those whom they met and with
whom they did business. In our day the mountain is near us. Sanctuaries
open to all classes. Those who go out find them in places of sojonrn ; those
who stay in see them within reach from their dwellings. With mountain
always accessible at home and abroad, our duty to call each other to it. We
shall thus diversify homekeeping, sanctify outgoing by public exercise of religion
—what these exercises are, learned from the text, “the sacrifices of righteousness.”
Sacrifices of many kinds varying from the great propitiatory offering of Jesus
once for all, to humblest presentation of joy and praise by the people he has
redeemed. We are “a holy priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices, &c.”
Our prayers and songs, preaching and teaching, gifts for God’s treasury, good
deeds in general and communications for special need may all become sacrifices
of righteousness well pleasing to God. The work of the Lord should always
be done and worship maintained. He must have an altar in our tents and an
offering in our tour. Before every outgoing His presence should be asked and
in return to the delights of home we should repair to the sanctuary of God.
This prophecy of Moses may have suggested by same Holy Spirit the double
duty enjoined by David. “Offer the gacrifices of righteousness, and put your
trust in the Lord.”— Rev. W. Underwood, D.D.


Gap ; Leapzrsurp, anp Vatour.— Verses 20-21.


“In the blessing of Noah (Gen. ix. 26), the God of Shem is praised, so Moses
praises the Lord who enlarged Gad, ¢.¢., who not only gave him broad territory
in the conquered kingdom of Sihon, but furnished generally unlimited space
for his development (¢f. Gen. xxvi. 22), that he might unfold his lion-like na‘ure
in conflict with foes” (Keil).


I, Wonderful enlargement of Territory. “Enlargeth Gad.” Extends the
borders of his territories by Jephtha (Judg. xi. 83) and by the victories over the
Hagarenes (1 Chron, v, 18-21), or delivers out of distress, which is called
enlarging. Spiritually God enlarges individuals, “Thou hast enlarged (re-
lieved me) in my distress ” (Ps. iv., of, Ps. xxi. 8). He enlarges the Christian
ehurch, “The Lord hath made room (44t. broad space) for us, and we shall be
fruitful in the land ” (Gen. xxvi. 22).


II. Strength in self defence. When territories were gained they could be
kept and defended. “He dwelt asa lion,” couched and rested, fearless and
secure ; was annoyed by surrounding tribes (Jud. xi.), but overcame them, No
force could prevail against them ; they shattered “the arm,” the instrument of
i sisted 7) ee destroyed “ the head,” the policy, and rule of every foe,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. XXXIil,
2 ee eee ee

III. Valour in Leadership. When they had chosen their own lot, they helped
to secure that of others. They were distinguished not for ease and selfishness,
but for valour, promptitude, and energy. 1. hey fought in obedience to God’s
commands. ‘‘ He executed the justice of the Lord.” Executed the decree to
extirpate inhabitants of Canaan (cf, Num. xxxii.) 2. They fought in the front
ranks. “Came with the heads of the people,” the chiefs of other tribes, were
leaders in the war. Many skulk behind in fear and reluctance, Be prominent
and courageous in the good fight of faith. 3. They fought bravely. They ful-
filled their promise to Moses. ‘“ We ourselves will go ready armed before the
children of Israel until we have brought them unto their place” (Num, xxxii.
16-17). Be helpful to others and valiant through God for right. Courage is
required in every war. This crowned the efforts of Joshua with success (1, 5, 8)
and raised Hezekiah to unequalled eminence among the kings of Judah
(2 Kings xviii. 5-7). “ Be strong and of good courage.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 16. Separated. 1. By the treat-
ment he received from them. 2. By
the providence of God which exalted
and distinguished him. Joseph, a type
of Christ, separated in personal char-
acter, in evil treatment and divine
exaltation. Good will of him that
dwelt in the bush. 1. The Dweller in the
Bush. Not an angel, but God himself
(Ex. iii. 2). Hence God’s favour desired
better than man’s favour, fickle, un-
certain, and worthless. 2. The good
will of the dweller in the bush. Israel’s
condition sad, helpless and hopeless.
God appears. 1. To confirm his pro-
mise. 2. T'o accomplish deliverance.
8. To pledge his presence. Or, 1.
A pleasing retrospect. Moses never
forgot the bush, deeply impressed and
marvellously strengthened by itsappear-
ance. Past experience should teach
and help. 2. A wonderful revelation.
“Good will.” Love, condescension. and
power to redeem. A revelation of God
suited to Moses and to Israel. “A
great sight.” 3, A solemn pledge. God
had not forsaken his people nor for-
gotten his promise. “He heard their

oaning, remembered his covenant,
ooked upon Israel (with watchfulness
and sympathetic feeling), and had re-
spect unto them” (Ex. ii. 24-25.)
“The burning bush, the persecuted
church, was not consumed, because the

ood will of God, of which David speaks
(Ps. evi. 4), was in the bush. So it is
still with His in the fiery trial, in any
affliction ” (Is. xliti, 1)—7Zrapp.

Ver. 17. Glory. A bullock was
the most excellent of animals among


the Jews, not only because of its ac-
ceptableness to God in sacrifice, but
because of its great usefulness in
agriculture. There is something pecu-
liarly noble and dignified about the
ox, and his greatest ornament are his
fine horns. ‘These the inspired penman
has in view, as the following clause
proves, and it is well known that in
scripture language, horns are the em-
blems of strength, glory, and sovereignty
Ps. Ixxv., 5, 11, lxxxix., 18,25, cxii, 9;

an. viii 3; Luke i. 69; Rev. xvii.
3.— Clarke.

Push. Pushing in life. In God’s
strength and by God’s opening. No
push without strength, and no opening
without God. “Through Thee will we
push down our enemies” (Ps. 44, 5.)


Ver. 18. In thy tents, Issachar, a
powerful, sagacious tribe capable of
great exertion and warlike achivements,
in dangerof luxuriant repose and sub-
jection to more heroic men, because
given to quiet pursuits and fat mea-
dows, We must conquer and _ serve.
“Be a hero in the strife.” “Put on
the dauntless spirit of resolution.”


Ver. 21. With the Heads. 1. God’s
cause in its nature. Holy and more
sacred than the rescue of Jerusalem
from infidel Turks by Crusaders. 2,
God’s cause in tts requirements, (1.)
Courageous leaders. (2.) United ranks.
3. God’s cause tn its rewards. (1.) It
secures the “first portion,” a choice
purchased by bravery. (2.) It gains the
commendation and prayers of good
men. “Blessed be he, &c.” pe

4


OHAP, XXXII, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: DEV TERONOMY,


G 4e ll Ln he


Day ; activity 1x ConFiict.—Verse 29,


Jacob had compared him to a serpent for subtlety, that suddenly darts at the
horses’ heels and throws the rider, Moses gives prominence to strength and
activity. Wehave:1. The agility of youth. “He shall leap.” Springing and
leaping, signs of agility. “ Spring like a lion on his prey and spread consterna-
tion around him.” 2. Strength in attack. “Dan is a lion’s whelp.” The
tribe remarkable for strength and prowess, courage and resolution—Samson fron
this tribe. Strength rightly used a blessing. ‘I'he more we attack sin and act
for God, the more we are enabled to do, ‘The way of the Lord is strength to
the upright.” 3, Sewiftness in action. “He shall leap.” Promptitude in
decision, boldness in action most needful. Leaders in war are nimble and
adventurous, Joshua exercised stratagem and courage, was prompt in action
and obedient to God. “O God be thou strong in our weakness that we may be
ever steady in thy strength.” Bp. Hall.


Napuratt ; Sarisraction ux Divine Buxssive.—Verse 23,


1. Satisfied in acquisition of suitable territory. “The possession of the sea
and the south, ¢.¢, an inheritance which should combine the advantages of the
sea—a healthy sea breeze—with the grateful warmth of the south.” Keil,
Possess thou the west and the south, 2. Satisfied in possession of God’s favour,
If the favour of men; this in return for courteous and vbliging conduct; as the
graceful hind, zealous for liberty and kind words (Gen. xlix. 21). “Kind words
never die,” As a man sows will he reap. If God's favour, this the sublimest
of all possessions. It is sufficient, “ full with the blessing.” It gives content=
ment. ‘Satisfied with favour.” With this we have enough, and desire no
more, This satisfies heart, conscience and intellect. God’s blessing satisfies all
human instincts, All misery and delusion without him. Delighting in him,
all things minister to our comfort, “He that cometh to me shall never
hunger ; and he that believeth on me shall never thirst.”


“ My soul which flies to thee, her trust, her treasure,
As misers to their gold, while others rest,— Young,


AsHER : Futnuss or BiEssinas.— Verses 24, 25,


“ Asker, the prosperous (¢f. Gen. xxx, 15), was justly to bear the nama He
was to be a child of prosperity, blessed with earthly good ; he was to enjoy rest
all his life long in strong fortresses. It is evident enough that this blessing is
simply an exposition of the name Asher, and that Moses here promises the
tribe a veritication of the omen contained in its name.” —( Keil),


I, Numerous offspring. “Blessed with children,” blessed among, cr more
than the rest of the sons. He shall have humerous, strong and health
Sqiiseae “Lo, children are an heritage of the Lord, and the fruit of the ate
is his reward.”


II, Social prominence, “ Acceptable to his brethren.” Not merely beloved
among his brethren, but the one specially favoured and elevated by the Lord,
Asher above tribal suspicion and animosity. His influence supreme and
respected.


III. Abundant prosperity. “Let him dip his foot in oil.” Oil for the face
and oil for the feet ; abundant and most famous. Like Job, he “washed his
steps with butter (cream or thick milk), and the rock poured out rivers of oil
(alongside of me wherever | went, like the refreshing stream which followed

410


HOMILEIIC COMMENTARY ; DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. XXXIIL





Israel in the desert) (Job xxix. 6). God provided necessities and dainties.
This rich tribe had plenty in its borders and exported to other places. ‘Out
of Asher his bread shall be fat and he shall yield royal dainties” (Gen. xlix. 20).


IV. Security in the enjoyment of this prosperity. “Thy shoes iron and
brass.” The reference not to the feet, nor to mining, but a poetic figure for
impregnable strength and defence. ‘heir strength shall be ar iron and their
fortresses as brass ; closed and well defended. “ The mountains (barriers) were
mountains of brass” (Zech. vi. 1),


V. Strength in proportion to need. ‘As thy days” last so shall thy
strength continue. ‘Thou shalt never diminish in number, nor decay in vigour,
Thy youth shall be renewed and flourish in old age. As a tribe they should
not meet with disaster, but grow stronger and stronger. It may be applied to
rest. Constantly exposed to irruptions and pillage, God would give confidence
and security. As “thy days,” circumstances, vicissitudes and efforts, ‘so
shall thy rest be.” When faithful to God no evil can touch, no enemy over-
come us. “God is my defence, I shall not be greatly moved.”


SrrenetH Equa to THE Day.— Verse 25,


Many great temporal blessings promised to Asher, none like this which is
superior to all others. Strength for the day.


I. Natural strength as duration of the days. Some laid by in life through
infirmities and accidents, but others vigorous and strong to the last. “ The back
is made to meet the burden.” The eye of Moses was not dim, nor his naturat
force abated (chap. xxxiv. 7). Caleb at four-score and five was as strong and
ready for war as in the day Moses sent him to view the land (Josh. xiv. 10, 11).
“ Fat and flourishing in old age to show that the Lord is upright,”


II. Varied strength as the character of the days. Days vary in complexion.
Days of light and darkness, of duty and warfare. Present days, the age in
which we live, with its philantrophies, enterprises and missionary ardour.
Future days, whatever they may be or bring. “He hath said, I will never
leave thee nor forsake thee,”


III. Spiritual strength as long as days and duties last. The strength of the
sufferer to bear “ the ills of life” in patience and submission to God ; of the
speaker to restrain and to put forth his energy ; of the soldier for aggressive and
courageous warfare, for complete and constant victory. We need strength to
sit still in this restless and feverish day ; strength to obey when commanded to
act. Strength as the condition of rest and the success of work, “All your
need according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus.’

Let me but hear my Saviour say,
Strength shall be equal to thy day ;
Then I rejoice in deep distress,
Leaning on all sufficient grace.


Srrenetu AccorDING To THE Days.— Verse 28.


L. It is not the design of these words to suppress forelooking and foreplannin
in secular things. JI. Nor are they designed to teach men that God wi
maintain a providence of miracles on their behalf. III. They teach us that
we cannot know beforehand what help will spring up from our circumstances.
IV. They also teach us that anxiety for the future is labour lost. Apely the


—_—


OHAP. XXXII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; DEUTERONOMY.





subject to those who— (1) Follew conscience against their interests. o Wish
to reform from evil habits, but fear they will not be able to hold out. (3) Look
wistfully on a Christian life, but doubt if they would be able to maintain it.
(4) Are exceedingly troubled in regard ta expected events. (5) Are troubled
about relative afflictions, (6) Are troubled about their own death.—H. W.
Beecher.


THE Magsxsty or Israzy’s Gop.— Verses 26-29,


Conclusior. of blessings corresponds with introduction. The kingdom was
founded in Jehovah the salvation of his people. So in conclusion Jehovah is
their eternal refuge, and they are blessed in Him. These probably the last
words Moses wrote. The next chapter added by another writer. God’s
majesty and power set forth in splendid imagery.


I. Inimitable in his perfections. Not like the vanities of nations ; if real,
they cannot be compared with the Almighty. 1. Lternal in existence. “The
eternal God ”—not of yesterday ; before time, before all worlds ; ever was, is,
and will be the same unchangeable, wise and holy being, “ the everlasting God.”
2. Unequalled in majesty. “None like unto the God of Jeshurun.” “ Every
nation boasted of its God, but none had such a God to boast of as Israel had.”
“Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the gods? Who is like thee, glorious
in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders ?”


II. Powerful in His protection. “Thy refuge.” 1. Arms to sustain.
“Underneath are the everlasting arms ”—arms which never relax their embrace,
never get weary and strong as omnipotence, bearing up, carrying and keeping
from falling the weakest child that trusts them. 2, Strength to overcome. “He
shall thrust out the enemy.” God drove out the heathen to plant them
(Ps. xe. 1). He will dislodge our enemies, open up the way, conquer
principalities and powers, and put us in possession of heaven. 3. Confidence in
security. “Israel then shall dwell in safety.” When planted by God, he is a
strong tower and protection, without earthly bulwarks, alliances, and resources ;
even in opposition and danger God gives confidence and security, “He shall
dwell on high; his place of defence. shall be the munitions of rocks ”
(Is, xxxiii. 16),


III. Constant in oversight. God never forgets, nor forsakes, No people
so well provided for as Israel. 1. Abundant provision. “The fountain of
Jacob” overflows in streams of mercies and never dries. 2. Useful provision.
Corn, wine, and oil to sustain and refresh ; the products of earth, “wheat and
barley, vines and fig-trees,” and the blessings of heaven, everything needful
and substantial, “God give thee of the dew of heaven and the fatness of the
earth.” 3. Constant provision. “The heavens shall drop down dew.” The
early and latter rain and fruits in season ; no stint, no scarcity. ‘Bread shall
be given him, his waters shall be sure” (Ia. xxxiii, 16).


IV. Merciful in deliverance. “A people saved by the Lord.” Rescued
from Egypt, preserved in the desert, and ever kept from harm. This not by
Israel’s sword nor Israel’s skill, but their salvation bought and defended by
Jehovah. If we take the glory of national deliverances, admire and applaud
the courage that gained them and the wisdom that planned them, our right
hand will become palsied, and victory may be followed by shameful defeat.


“O Israel, trust thou in the Lord, he is their help and their shield.”
413


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. XXXII1.





Y. Victorious in contest. When God undertakes, no one can contend with
him; this adds madness to folly. ‘“ Woe unto him that striveth with his
Maker!” 1. Victory ts easy. ‘‘Thine enemies found liars” who predicted
failure. 2. Victory 1s complete. “Thou shalt tread upon,” subdue all opposi-
tion ; assail “‘ their high places” and level them to the dust. Satan to be trod
upon shortly, death and the powers of hellsubdued. Free, compte, everlasting
victory. “Salvation is of the Lord.”


Tue Happiness or [srarL In Gop.— Verse 29.


God is “blessed for ever” and the source of blessing to his people. He
li happiness from them but imparts it to them. “ Happy art thou,
srae ;


I, Happy in the presence of God. Who is their home, refuge and dwelling
ae Man wants rest and blessedness, a centre of unity, a perfect home.

ese only found in God. Earthly home, a mere shadow, a type of eternal
home. In seeking this home, God is with his people. ‘My presence shall go
with thee and I will give thee rest.”


II. Happy in the salvation of God. “QO people saved by the Lord.” Israel’s
deliverance a type of salvation in Christ—Christians like ancient Israel, a
people separated, saved and exalted. ‘Save us, O Lord our God, and gather
us from among the heathen, to give thanks unto thy holy name and to triumph
in thy praise.”


III. Happy in the protection of God. “The eternal God is thy refuge.”
He was the shield of their help—Israel “ dwelt safely alone” among enemies.
Without treaties and alliances with other nations. God protects—(1) Jn
defensive War, “their shield,” which nothing can pierce or turn aside. “With
favour wilt thou compass (crown) him as with a shield” (Ps. v. 12.) (2) In offensive
War, “their sword.” ‘To slay their foes, ensure their progress and gain them
eminence. ‘The sword of thy excellency.”


IV. Happy in the triumph of God. God’s wonders were terrible in reality
and report. 1. Fear put the enemy to flight. “The terror of God was upon
the cities that were round about them, and they did not pursue after
the sons of Jacob” (Gen. xxxv. 5; of. Ex. xxiii, 27; Deut. ii. 25; xi. 25).
2. Fortifications were no defence. God, higher than the loftiest bulwark,
“rideth upon the heaven” in splendour, power, and supremacy. Is this God
your God? Then His heavenly favour, protection, and triumph, are yours.
“Happy is that people that is in such a case ; yea, happy is that people whose
God is the Lord.”


AND 8UGGESTIONS.


never hunger, and he that believeth on
me shall never thirst.”


HOMILETIO HINTS


Ver. 23. Satisfied. 1. Men thirst,
are not happy, dissatisfied. 2. God’s
favour alone can satisfy, things seen


and heard give no permanent enjoy- Ver. 26. Rideth to help. 1. The
ment, Ecc. i, 8. “Our own will, al- source of help, “Heaven,” 2. The
though it should obtain its largest swiftness of help. Riding as one


wish, would always keep us in un-
easiness” (Pascal). “Satisfied with
favour.” He that cometh to me shall


one on horse, coming with irresistible

might. 3. The majesty of help. Rides

in state and splendour, in Supe acenoe
&


OHAP, XXXII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; DEUTERONOMY,





of clouds and awful grandeur. 4 The
variety of help. Heaven and earth
united, thunder and lightning, hail-
stones and artillery, ‘“excellency on
the sky.” “Having the celestial
creatures for his cavalry, and the ter-
restrial for his infantry ; how then can
his want help” Af eee): 5. The
sufficiency of help. ‘ None like him”
in power and disposition.


Ver. 27. The eternal God, Heb.,
the God of antiquity, that “ancient
of days,” that “Rock of Ages,”
“who is before all things, and by
whom all things consist” (Col. i, 17),
“who is the first and the last, and
besides whom there is no God” (Ia.
xliv. 6) Trapp. Thy Refuge, God the
home of the soul. 1. Man a homeless
creature. A wanderer in the wilder-
ness, seeking habitation and rest. 2.
God a home, for sheiter, provision, and
rest. “Our dwelling place in all
generations.” Hverlasting arms, 1.
Long enough to embrace eternity.
2. Strong enough never to get weary.
3. Ready enough to embrace any that
come. 4, Yet “stretched out” in pa-
tience, perseverance and love, to “dis-
obedient,” rebellious “ children,” “all
day long,” Rom. x. 21. What a ten-
der, compassionate attitude of God
towards sinners! ‘he glory of God’s
forbearance a bitter ingredient of
misery at last. The words a descrip-
tion of God’s power also. Power to’
lift up the lowest and most degraded,
to protect and shelter the weakest and
most timid. “As the arm is the
emblem of power, and of power in a
state of exertion, the words here state


ILLUSTRATIONS TO


Ver. 2. Shined. Contemplate the
exalted attributes of Deity ; the dis-
plays of His glory; the splendours of
His throne; the amplitudes of His
dominions ; the angelic orders of His
kingdom ; the richness of His gifts,
and the untouched ocean of happiness
yet in reserve for His people (J. Wilson).
Saints. The interest felt by the angels
in all oe concerns the Gospel and the

4


that an unlimited and unconquerably
power shall be eternally exerted in the
defence of God’s church, and in the
behalf of all those who trust in him,”
A. Clarke.


Destroy them. 1. The duty. “ Destroy
them,” spare no sin, no enemy. Not
merely maim, utterly irradicate them
and leave nothing undone. 2. The
strength to perform tt. “He shall
thrust out, &.” God goes before in
providence, accompanies in person
and equips for success.


Ver. 29. Happy. 1. God’s people -
happy in this ia Trusting in God
they have contentment, hope and
security. All things work together
for their good, a real, solid, happiness,
not momentary joy or feverish excite-
ment. “Happy art thou, O Israel.”
2. Happy in death. Guilt and fear —
taken away, death and hell conquered.
“The end is peace.” “The battle is
fought,” said Dr. Rayson, “and the
victory is won for ever, I am going to
bathe in an ocean of purity, and bene-
volence, and happiness to all eternity.”
3. Happy in the world to come. Heaven
a place of peace and felicity. No dis
cord nor disorder there. A realization
of Howc’s conception. “ the blessedness
of the righteous,” and Baxter’s “Saints’
Everlasting Rest.” .


Man’s sickly soul, though turned and toss’d —
for ever
From side to side, can rest on nought but thee g
Here, in full trust; hereafter, in full joy.
On thee, the promised, sure eternal down j
Of spirits, toil'd in travel through this vale. —
Young.


CHAPTER XXXIII.


eternal interests of men put on their
probation, form a very humbling con-
trast to our cold indifference.—Adams,


Ver. 4. Law. A law is valuable,
not because it is law, but because there
is right in it; and because of this
rightness it is like a vessel carrying
perfume ; like the alabaster enclosure
of a lamp.— Beecher.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: DEUTERONOMY.


OHAP, XXXIV.





Ver. 6. Live. Every man’s life lies
within the present, for the past is
spent and done with, and the future
is uncertain.— Antonius.


Vers. 9-11. Observed Thy word—


How fond it were to wish for such a King,

And no obedience to His sceptre bring,

Whose yoke is easy, and His burthen light 3

His service freedom, and His judgments right.
U,


— Waller.

Ver. 12. Beloved of the Lord. Two
gentlemen were once riding together,
and as they were about to separate,
one said to the other, “Do you ever
read your Bible?” “Yes; but I get
no benefit from it, because, to tell the
truth, I do not feel that I love God.”
“Neither did I,” replied the other,
“but God loved me.” This answer
produced such an effect upon his friend
that he said, “It was as if one had
lifted him off the saddle into the skies.”
It opened up to his soul at once the

eat truth, that it is not how much I
ove God, but how much God loves


me.

Vers. 18, 19. Going out. Trades
exemplify dependence and mutual
help. Precisely because no man can
reach perfection in all the arts, and be
a proficient in every profession, the
progress of civilization requires the
division of labour ; not division in the
sense of hostility, but a division of
works with a common will—many de-
partments with one interest, “ diversi-
ties of operation with the same spirit.”
Not more completely does the wheel
of the engine depend upon the boiler,
or the rod upon the valve, than one
individual upon another in the more
intricate and wondrous mechanism of
society.

Heaven forming each on other to depend,

A master, or a servant, or a friend,

Bids each on other for assistance call,

Till one man’s weakness grows the strength

of all, —F. D. Huntington, D.D.


Ver. 20. Lion. Wonderful is the
case of boldness in civil business.
What first? Boldness. What second
and third? Boldness.— Bacon.


Ver. 23. Satisfied with favour.
‘My soul hath found inexpressibly,”
said John Brown, of Haddington,
“more sweetness and satisfaction in
two words such as these—thy God and
my God—than all the pleasures found
in the things since the creation could
equal.”


Give what thou canst, without thee we are poor,
And with thee rich, take what thou wilt away.
Cowper.


Ver. 25. Strength. Dr. Doddridge
was one day talking, much depressed,
his very heart desolate within him;
but, says he, passing a cottage door
open, I happened at the moment to
hear a child reading, “ As thy days, so
shall thy strength be.” The effect on
my mind was indescribable. It was
like life from the dead.—Jay.


Ver. 27. Thrust out.


Rouse to some work of high and holy love,
And thou an angel’s happiness shall know.


Ver. 28. Shield. If heaven and
earth shake God hath ordained and
secured that his children shall be
protected as they need and when they
need. When the enemy is most
strongly assaulting, at the last ex-
tremity, when every other refuge shall
have been swept away.— Bridges.
Creature extremity can never reach
beyond the help of Omnipotence.


‘Ver. 29. Happy art thou, O Israel.


O Israel, blest beyond compare ;
Unrivalled all thy glories are,
Jehovah deigns to fill thy throne,
And calls thine interest His own,





CHAPTER XXXIV.
Crrrroat, Nores.—This chapter, written after death of Moses, once formed an introduetion


to book of Joshua,


1-4. Moses ascends Nebo. Pisgah height, of which Nebo a peak ; from which extensive pros
poet of land east of Jordan to Dan. Not Laish-Dan (Judges xviii. 27) which was not in G


415


OHAP. XXXIV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; DEUTERONOMY.





Probably a town in north of Perza. Utmost sea, Mediterranean, beyond which no land. Zoar,
southern extremity of Dead sea (ef. Gen., xix. 22). See, really with the naked eyes miraculously
strengthened.

5-6. Death and Burial of Moses. Word, lit. at the mouth of the Lord. “The sense clear
from Gen. xlv, 21, Vulg. correctly “jubente Domino.” It denotes that Moses died, not because
his vital powers were exhausted, but at the sentence of God, and as a punishment for his sin,
of. xxxii. 51.—(Speak. Com.) Buried. God buried him, an honour perhaps designed to sustain
the authority of Moses, which might have been impaired through punishment. Sepulchre. N ot
merely lest he should become an object of superstitious honour, for Jews not prone to thir
particular form of error. But, bearing in mind the appearance at Transfiguration (Mat. xvii. 1-10
and what is said by Luke v. 9, we may conjecture that Moses after death passed into same state
with Enoch and Elijah ; and that his sepulchre could not be found, because shortly translated
from it (Speak. Com.)

10-12, The character of Moses. Joshua filled with the spirit (ver. 9) of practical wisdom in
manifold action (Is. xi. 2) ; but not like Moses, gifted with power to work signs and miracles,
to found a kingdom and create a nation, None equalled him (except Jesus) in official dignity,
holy character and imtimate friendship with God. Knew God freely and familiarly conversed
with him. This made him eminent above all prophets (¢f. Num. xii. 8).


UNREALISED Vistons.— Verses 1-8.


The great parable of the wanderings of Israel in the wilderness has one of ita
profoundest applications in the death of the two great leaders, Moses and
Aaron. Men above all others entitled to enter the land of promixe ; neither
falling in battle nor dying a natural death, both doomed to die by the sentence
of Jehovah whom they served, and under whom they were leading the people.
This startles into a recognition of the tragedy of life and the impress of reality.
Aaron, the high priest of God, though infirm, a noble and saintly man ; in
character and service second only to his brother, led by Moses and his son out
of the midst of the wondering, weeping people to die in priestly robes, on the
lonely summit of the Mount in Edom. Moses must die on N ebo, but die alone;
neither son nor brother to close his dying eyes or receive his last words. Yet
in its romantic incidents and tragic crisis, his death a fitting close of his great
heroic life. The command to climb Nebo and die after such a vision, seems
a penal infliction wantonly aggravated. Imagination can scarcely enhance the
mystery and the awe, terrible in deliberateness and conditions, Only sublimest
faith could implicitly obey such a mandate. It is a twofold parable. First, of
the unrealised hope of human life. 1. The unrealised hopes of human life ;
the frequent disappointments, the unfulfilled purposes which so often characterise
it; and which, to the affections and the philosophy of life, are so mysterious
and painful. Every life a pilgrimage seeking its goal in some Canaan of rest,
We picture it, struggle for it and sometimes on verge of realizing it. We “see
it with our eyes ;” but in mysterious providence of life, forbidden ‘to go over.”
“ Our purposes are broken off,” we are disappointed, and resent if faith prevent
not. Mark conditions under which Moses died. (1) While as yet his physical
strength was undiminished, “His eye not dim,” ete. (2) While as yet there
seemed a great work for him to do, Jordan to cross, Jericho to conquer,
Canaanites to drive out, ete. (3) He died Just when bright prospects filled his
eye, when all the hope of his life was about to be fulfilled. hat explains this
mystery or justifies the ways of God to man? Cannot always judge, but learn:

Success is not the chief nobility of life, 2. The chief blessedness of life
is capability of service. 3. It is a blessed thing to die when the work has been
80 far done that it justifies the worker, demonstrates his character, vindicates
his nobleness ; so that he is not ashamed to leave it for completion ; so that
his friends are proud of its unfinished fragments. This not always given, but
the faithful servants accepts the conditions. 4. The formal denial of our hopes
may e oe means of perfecting our character. 5, If in our service we have


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. XxXxN.





sinned against right methods and tempers of service, sinned against Him whom
we serve, it is well that his disapproval of our sin should be manifest. 6. The

rohibition comes with gracious mitigations. The sting of death extracted.
0) What greater grace wrought in a man than acquiescence in such a mandate.
2) Moses is permitted to prepare for departure. (3) He is permitted to see his
successor. 7. God honours his faithful servant by Himself preparing his
sepulchre. 8. God fulfilled His promises and the hopes of his servant in a
deeper and higher way than he anticipated.

Second, of the visions which may inspire human life, its unrealised hopes
notwithstanding. To men who live greatly God gives visions through this very
idealism of life, which are glorious inspiration and strength ; visions of a great
faith and a bright hope ; of rest through the toil, of triumph while they fight,
of heavenly perfection and blessedness. Many glorious visions had been given
to Moses. Who knows but to the lofty soul of this man of God, Canaan would
have been a disenchantment. Many of our realised hopes are. In the better
country no shortcoming, no disappointment. Canaan may suffice for a sugges-
tive prophecy ; only God’s heaven can be a satisfactory fulfilment. A great
thing for faith to climb and stand on heights to survey the heritage of God.
And the nearer Jordan, the more glorious the prospect. The goodly land is
revealed. All earthly lights pale before the great glory, all things here seem
little and unimportant in that great blessedness. ‘The sufferings of the present
time are not worthy to be compared, etc.” Thus Moses disappears from sight
and God buries him. One more glimpse of him vouchsafed on “ the Holy
Mount.” The prayer, “show me thy glory,” was finally answered. “ When
Christ, who is our life, shall appear, we also shall appear with Him in glory.”
“Such honour have all the saints.”"—Dr, Allon’s Vision of God.


Tue Buriat or Moses—tts Lessons AND SUGGESTIONS.


Strange and singular that the greatest of all Old Testament prophets should
find a resting place in the earth and no man able to point it out. Sepulchres
of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob among the groves of Hebron, Joseph’s bones rest
in Shechem, sepulchre of David by Jerusalem, the home of his heart. Neglect
of the people did not leave the spot unmarked. Not what a Jew wished or
what popular history would have framed, this death and burial, fitted to be a
source of fruitful reflection.


I. God will have no one, living or dead, to stand between His creatures and
Himself, II. God wishes men to see something more left of His servants than
the outward shrine. III. God takes the honour of His servants into His own
keeping. IV. God would teach men that He has a relation to His servants
which extends beyond their death. V. God wouid teach men from the very
first that His regard is not confined to any chosen soil. VI. There is one
concluding lesson which has been reserved for us in its fulness, and which could
be seen only partially by the Jews—that the seeming failure in a true life may
have at least a complete compensation. Under the gospel this view clear. As
God forgave the sin we see that long since he made up the loss. This a comfort
to many who feel immeasurably distant from Moses, as if our nature were all
broken by failure and flaw. A true purpose in life shall reach a perfect close
one day, its shortcomings completed, its errors rectified, its visions realised.
One greater than Moses ended life in what appeared utter failure, with His
followers scattered, His mission rejected and He Himself betrayed to a death of
agony and shame. But He cried, “It is finished,” achieved success and secured
it for all who take up the cross and follow Him. There is full compensation for
failure in every true life, and the highest where struggle and loss reg been

2D


OHAP. XXXIV. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY.


re


deepest. Most comforting of all these is reversal of consequences of sin in
contrition and faith. The shadow on earth’s dial-plate is turned back when
eternal life is gained and the sun no more goes down. Like Moses we shall rise
to have heart’s desire, to look on the land and on Him who is the glory of it.
Rev. John Ker.


Tur DzatH or Moss


I. The greatest of men are but instruments in God’s hands, and He can afford
to lay them aside when He chooses. Moses seemed indispensable. None of
similar ability and character to carry on work, yet God determined to move him.
Paul, Luther, Wesley, and great reformers removed, yet truth survives, progresses
and triumphs. 1. Let this dispel fears for future of the Church of God.
2. Abate personal pride, and—3. Calm our fears for loved ones. “ God, the
husband of the widow,” etc. II. The time and the manner of each man’s
removal from earth are fixed by God. III. When God removes His servants
from earth, it is that He may take them to Heaven. IV. Until God calls us
away, let us be diligent in doing good. V. God frequently gives intimation
that He is about to call them to Himself. VI. God will remove all difficulties
away in our heavenward journey. Adapted from Vol. Il. Preachers’ Monthly.


“In His bleas’d life,
I see the path, and, in His death, the price,
And in His great ascent, the proof supreme
Of immortality.”— Young,


Tus Cuarmina Prospror.— Verses 1~4.


“The plains of Moab,” the last station before entrance to Canaan
(Num. xxxiii. 48). he prospect from Pisgah, charming in beauty and
extent. About 160 miles in length and 50 or 60 in breadth. We borrow many


of the following hints from an American Sunday School Journal.


I. The method of discerning it. He glanced before, not below him. In


clear atmosphere, he saw verdure, sunshine and “the glory of all lands.” How?
1. With the naked eye. “ His eye not dim.” Beauty everywhere if only an
eye to see. An artist’s eye ; a poet’s eye. Culture and communion with God
help to discern and appreciate landscapes. 2. With the help of God. “The
Lord showed him.” Indicated direction, gave supernatural strength to follow
it, The eye and the object from God. ‘To him are we indebted for a spirit of
wisdom and revelation. Natural and spiritual vision, “the hearing ear and tha
seeing eye the Lord hath made.”


II, The summit from which it was viewed. Moses went up from the plaing
to the mount, Clouds and conflict below. We must rise higher and higher for
rest, intercourse with God and heaven, ‘The celestial city viewed from the
delectable mountains. On the Mount of Transfiguration we see the glory of
eee From Pisgah we discern Canaan. “In the mount of the Lord it shall

seen,


III. The hopes which were realised by it. Moses had written of places
which he had never seen. Memory would sweeten this prospect. 1. The land
was secured to the people. Promised and were about to possess it. 2. “ He
was reaping the recompense of reward.” Not overwhelmed with grief, because
Set ii earthly inheritance. ‘He desired a better country, that is a


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY. OHAP. XXXIV,








heavenly.” He saw the type, but taken up to the reality. “In the death of a
good man eternity is seen looking through time.”’—Goethe. When we see the
salvation of God we may pray, “Lord now let thy servant depart in peace.”


Tur Sieepina Samnt.— Verses 5-7.


“ Moses, the servant of the Lord, died,” and rests from his labours,


I. Moses died by command of God. But his change more like sleep than
death. Lazarus slept. Believers “fall asleep in Christ.” God put him to
rest as you gently lay a child to sleep. ‘The Jewish doctors so expound this
text, as though God did indeed take away his soul with a kiss (the loving
mother is seen to kiss the child and then lay it down to sleep) ; and so of their
903 kinds of death, this they say is the easiest. God bade Moses go lie down
and sleep (Deut. xxxi. 16), and he accordingly went to bed when his Father
bade ”—Trapp. “Thou shalt sleep with thy fathers.”


II, Moses was buried by the hand of God. (God himself, or Michael at
command of God “ buried him.” “Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death
of His saints.” He cares for soul and body. “No man knoweth of Hia
sepulchre unto this day.” We shall not speculate or discuss about it. ‘‘ Tha
grave is not deep; it is the shining tread of an angel that seeks us.” — Lichter.


O, lonely tomh in Moab’s land !
O dark Bethpeor’s hill!

Speak to these anxious hearts of ours
And teach them to be still.

God hath his mysteries of grace,
Ways that we cannot tell ;

He hides them deep like the sacred sleep
Of him he loved so well.


—D. M. Moin


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. Moses went up. Climbing
mountains. An address for children.
1. It is itself a picture: the old, clear-
visioned, vigorous man, climbing the
rugged and lofty mountains east of
Canaan. His life a series of historical
pictures the most impressive and in-
structive. The lesson is a picture of
Canaan the most beautiful. 2. Climb-
ing mountains! What boy or girl will
not be interested in that? 3. The
thoughts that may have entered
Moses’ mind as he looked out on hills,
plains, valleys, and river below, and
the sea beyond !


Moses a Man af Mountains.
1. Mountain of conflict (Ex. xvii. 10).
2. Of the law (Ex. xix. 20). 3. Of
communion with God (Ex.xxiv. 15-18).
4. Of bereavement (Num. xx. 23-29).
6 Of vision and of death (Deut.


xxxiv. 6). 6. Of transfiguration (Matt.
xvii. 7). Mount Zion (Heb, xii. 22-24).
—S. 8. Journal.


Went up. 1. A good man’s life an
ascent. At God’s command, and by
God’s help, in knowledge, strength,
and meetness for heaven. 2. A good
man’s death an ascent. May be in the
valley, but guided through and lifted
up. ‘God ordered that Aaron and
Bice should go up to the tops of
mountains to die,” says J. Edwards,
“to signify that the death of a godly
man is but an entrance into a heavenly
state.” ‘Death is to the good an
ascension.”


Ver. 4. The Lord showed him. God
gave Moses that day (1) a lesson in
eye-teaching. 2. A lesson in geography.
8. A lesson in prophecy—tribes not yet

419


CHAP, XXXIV.





located. God showed him where He
would locate them. 4. A lesson in
history. “TI sware unto Abraham,” ete,
v. 4.—S. S, Journal.


Vers. 5,6. “ Moses died according

to the word of the Lord.” What oc-
curred in this case, occurs in that of
every Christian, All three—time,
place, and manner—are fixed in the
word of the Lord. Here a higher
power interposes and disposes of man’s
existence upon earth. The death of
Moses was solemn, sudden, and though


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY.





a chastisement—a public visitation for
sin in the eye of all the hosts of Israel
—yet in some respect an honourable
one.—Dr. Cumming.


Thoughts on the death of Moses.
I. The best must die: “the servant
of the Lord.” II, The best may die
in the szenith of their greatness.
III. The best may die when apparently
indispensible. IV. The best may die
where they little expect. V. But all
die when and where God decrees.—
R. A. Griffin.


A Weeprine Prorizt.— Verse 8.


Seven days the usual time of mourning, for persons of rank and eminence,
thirty (Gen. L 8, 10; Num. xx. 29). Moses ansent when he died, was not
carried in public procession, hence bitter mourning (see Josephus Ant. Bk. iv,
chap. viii, sect. 48). I. Bereaved by a mysterious event. Families robbed of


heads, Christian churches of best workers, nations of leaders.


counsels, influence and prayers,
thereof.”
odly man


mourners.


We lose their


“the chariots of Israel and the horsemen
We cry at the departure of every leader,
ceaseth, for the faithful fa
I. Punished for strange ingratitude.
against Moses, did not treat him kindly.
“Tt is infamy to die and not be missed,” —({ Welcoa). III. Taught


“ Help, ‘Lord, for the


il from among the children of men.”


Israel often complained and rebelled
Now missed, and murmurers are


by a wise providence. The justice, truth and firmness of God must be known


(Deut. xxxii. 49-52),


They must be taught that God depends not upon any of


his creatures, and that the best, most holy and most useful must die. “‘The
fathers where are they? and the prophets, do they live for ever!”
en some men die, a nation feels ;
When others fall, the world is moved.


A Worrtny Svuocessorn.— Verse 9.


Anxiety of parents to be succeeded in business and profession by children, of


aoblemen by heirs, of monarchs by princes,


I, He was introduced by Moses.


Joshua a worthy successor,


“Moses had laid his hands upon him,”


and thus designated the person and conferred the power (Num. xxvii. 18, 23).
No breaks, no vacancies in God’s service. One goes, another comes; one finishes


what another leaves incomplete. A leader succeeds a lawgiver.


“The law,”


says Bp. Wordsworth, “led men to see the promises afar off, and to embrace
them (rather to see and greet the promises from afar, Heb, xi. 13), and it brought


them to the borders of Canaan,


II, He was qualified by special endowments,


wisdom.”


but could not bring them into it; that was
reserved for Joshua, the type of Jesus,”


“Full of the spirit of


Intimacy with Moses and training under his care not enough. He


had faith (Num. xiv. 6-9), and experience (Ex. xvii. 8-13) ; but required Divine


gifts and graces to fit him to govern.


not equipped until the spirit given.

office, were shreds of honour,

counsel, and might (Is, ii. 2).
420


The disciples had been with Jesus, but


Friendship and education, patronage and
“The Spirit needed” as a spirit of wisdom,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : DEUTERONOMY.
SS


III. He was successful in his work. “The children of Israel hearkened
unto him,” etc. Gifted men admired. The presence and authority of God with
His servants will secure the affection and obedience of the people. Joshua
owned as leader and prosperous in undertaking. By strength of character, and
superlative wisdom, men rise to honour and success; wield an influence after
death, and become saviours and kings in society. “On that day the Lord
magnified Joshua in the sight of all Israel ; and they feared him, as they feared
Moses, all the days of his life” (Jos. iv. 14; iii 7; i. 5).


OHAP. XXXIV,


Tae INFLUENCE oF a Hoty Lire.— Verses 10-12.


_ Moses here commended for character official position and privilege. Unique
in greatness and honour. “There arose not a prophet,” ete.


I. The source from which the influence came. Fellowship with God,“ whom
the Lord knew,” conversed with “face to face” (Num. xii. 8). Intercourse
with God gives power with man. None great and successful without this
(Jacob, Joshua, Daniel and Luther). Retirement most requisite, most season-
able in our pressing and incessant duties. Moses in Midian (Ex. ii. 15; iii. 1);
John the Baptist in the desert (Luke i. 30) ; Jesus in Nazareth (Matt. ii. 23).
“Learn to live alone,” said Dr. Paley, when recommending to the younger
clergy, communion with God. “Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place.”


II. The method by which the influence was acquired, ‘The Lord sent” him
and he went “in the land of Egypt” to deliver the people. Obedient to God
he was endowed with the power of God. Entire consecration of time and
talents brings its reward. In the words of the apostle, we have the influence
of devout life upon ministerial success. ‘“ We will give ourselves continually
to prayer and to the ministry of the word” (Acts vi. 4). “The hand of the
{uord was with them ; and a great number believed and turned unto the Lord.”


III. The ages through which the influence lasted. None like Moses in the
days of Israel, and after intervening centuries he was still considered “ Mighty
in words and deeds” (Acts vii. 22. The power of such a life not destroyed by
one failure. Memory survives death, and deeds never pass into ovlivion and
the tomb. Myriads crowd the lower walks of life, removed and no more missed
than atoms from the base of a lofty pyramid. But men conspicuous for virtues
and holy deeds will live in name and influence and act upon the race till the
end of time. “The righteous had in everlasting remembrance.”

“To hew his name out upon time


As on a rock 3 there in immortalness
To stand on time as on a pedestal.”


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 10-12. Not a prophet like
Moses. Unequalled. 1. In rank.
2. In faithfulness to duty (Num. xii. 7 ;


Ver. 9. Joshua chosen. All spiritual
endowments from the Holy Ghost. The


spirit of wisdom, courage and the fear
of God specially needed for well-
qualified teaders of men. Admire the
goodness of God in raising up such
men. If one burning and_ shining
light is extinguished “the Father of
lights” can kindle another.


Heb. iii. 1-6). 3. In legislative wisdom
and 4, In divine authority, displayed
(.) in signs to the enemy (4) in terror
to Israel. Moses was warrior, states-
man, poet, philosoper, hero and saint.
No man has rivalled him, a rebbed


CHAP. XXXIV.





him of his honour. “A prophet who
stood by himself in his greatness in
relation to men and to God. To be the
leader of a nation in such peculiar
circumstances for 40 years was in itself
@ position without a parallel; but to
have led them out of Egypt against
the will of their enslavers, to have


ILLUSTRATIONS TO


Vers. 1-4, Showed. ‘“ My work is
done; I have nothing to do but to go
to my Father ;” said the Countess of
Huntingdon. “I am on the bright
side of seventy—bright side, because
nearer to the everlasting glory.” Top
of Pisgah, 'The loneliness of death.
Ordinarily when men die, there are
friends to gather round their bed, with
terder ministries of love and prayer.
Sometimes in the case of men like
Moses, a nation will hush its footsteps
and wait the issue with agonising
suspense. Shut us up to die alone,
with no hand that our weakness may
clasp, no tear that may soothe our
love, no prayer that may wing our
hope, and how appalling death becomes.
What pathos there is in the shrinking
wail of Pascal—“I shall die alone!”
—Dr. Allon.

Went up. What a contrast to a
former Divine summons, to ascend
Sinai to commune with Jehovah, to
receive from Him comfort and strength
and a renewed commission of. service t
Yet he evinces none of the trembling


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : DEUTERONONY.





been at their head during a whole
generation of which every day wit-
nessed a stupendous miracle, to have
been the founder of their laws and
their religion, was a work such as far
outshone the deeds of any one man
from the beginning of history, and such
as still remains unique,”—Blunt,


CHAPTER XXXIV.


awe with which he ascended Sinai.
Without remonstrance, without hesi-
tancy save for a moment, he calmly
obeys the stern injunction. “A good
man knows how to die” (Dr. Allon),
“Death cannot come to him untimely
who is fit to die” (AZilman).

Climb the ascent of being

And approach for ever nearer to the life divine,


Ver. 5. The servant of the Lord
died. A man of God has fallen
to-day.


Ver. 8. Weeping. When Augustus
died the Romans wished that either
re nee never been born or had never

ied.


Ver. 10. Not a prophet since.
Moses was one that exceeded all men
that ever were in understanding, and
made the best use of what that under-
standing suggested to him.—Josephus,


Lives of great men all remind us
We can make our lives sublime, ete,


Tur Exn


INDEX.





I GENERAL SUBJECTS,


“Aaxzon’s death, 179

Activity, 179

Adultery, 129

Address, a farewell, 865

Accursed of God, 281; a tree, 281

Affection, power of seductive, 211

Affliction a furnace, 94, 104 ; blessings of,
96; chastisement, 160, 393

Agency, lay, 67

Altar, stone, 321, 322

Alternative, solemn, 196

Abominations, heathen, avoided, 257

Ambition, 29

Amen, meaning of, 324

Amanuensis, the faithful, 878

Amorites dispossessed, 102

Amalek, doom of, 310, 811

Animals, clean and unclean, 218, 224

Anger, divine, 385, 387

Armies, defective, 672

Apostasy punished, 96

Apparel interchanged, 284

Arrows of God, 387

Assembly, a solemn, 237

Assher, 'ulness of blessing, 410

Asthetics, religious, 287, 289

Authority, parental, 280


BATTLEMENTS, making, 286
Benevolence, God’ 8, 294
gs, small, 316

Beneath and above, 336

Benjamin, the beloved, 408

Bible, preserved, 8, 91; conflicts of, 57;
honoured, 76; a family book, 135, 161,
869; rule of life, 194; religion of, 140;
in national history, gi, 369; method of
spreading, 369 ; publicly read, 870

Blessings, great, 21 7; divine, 332; wonder-
ful, 332, and cursings, 323

Blood, sacred, 204 ; oronibited, 205; spilt,
233

Birds, eh ipette for, 285; nesta of, 285; ways


2$
Bitniieed judicial, 338 ; spiritual, 849
Boaster, impious, 852
Bread, unleavened, 237
Bush, dweller in, 409


CaTTLE, stray, 284


Camp, sanctity of, 295

Canaan, conquered, 152; a good land, 160,
165; introduced, 164, 170; distinguished,
193; land of promise, 196

Choice, important, 195; alternative, 361

Children, blessings, 23; cared for, 71; an-
cestors of, 76; good, 115; questions of,
142; trained, 198; duty of, 329

Church, the Christian, reputation of, 214;
duty to poor, 229

Charity and prayer, 317

Chastisement, 198

Cleanliness, 295, 296, 298

Circumstances, Divinely thought of, 222

Congregation, exclusion from, 293

Conflicts, life’s, 366

Conquest, of kings, 83;
foreign, 341

Commandments, 106, 129, 142; kept, 188;
perfect, 207

Commerce, Christian, 809

Courage, 11, 270

Controversies, decided, 248

Consecration renewed, 350

Covetousness, 121

Covenant, in Horeb, 106; merciful, 155;
renewed, 349, 319

Crimes, abominable, 829; faoony 276

Conspirators overthrown, 189

Curse, turned into blessing, 294; threefold.
836; upon conduct, 197, 214

Customs, wordly, 216


DATHAN and Abiram, 189, 198

Dan, activity and conflict, 410

Day, memorable, 166, 318

Danger, recognised, 12

Decision, 195

Deception, cautioned, 193

Devotion and daily life, 817

Desire, unlawful, 119

Death, near, 63; a sleep, 872

Destiny reached, 9

Delay and discipline, 72

Deeds and words, 124

Dew, 378, 396

Discipline, Divine, 158; in life, 188; need>
ful, 279; national, 818

Divine law and conduct, 387

Diet, laws of, 205, 207


territories, 84;


i INDEX,





Divorce, law of, 800, 801

Disobedience, penalty of, 334

Dishonour, filial, 325

Disappointment, parental, 339

Distress, elements of, 338

Dulness, spiritual, 348

Duty, urgent, 14; performed, 38, 159, 414;
enforced, 65,395; simple, 359; delayed,
67, 351; conscientious, 224 ; moral and
positive, 289

Drunkenness and gluttony, 282, 856

Edomite and Egyptian, 294

Enemy, routed, 334

Encouragement, 52, 69; divine, 81; of duty,
150


Egypt remembered, 112, and Canaan, 190
Evil, steps of, 34; inducements of, 212;
great, 344; known to God, 873


FAILURE, 41

Faith, power of, 52, 58

Fear of God, end of commandment, 131;
foundation of religion, 143

Fears anticipated, 152; forbidden, 271; an-
tidote to, 367

Feasts, Jewish, 24, 245; three great, 24)

Favour, divine, 167

Feet, sliding, 392

First fruits, feast of, 240

Firstborn, dedication of, 231, 232

Folly, human, reproved, 388, 389

Food, animal, 204

Forgetfulness, cautioned, 162, 164

Flock, the, 237

Flight, without safety, 262

Freedom, 232, 233

Friendship, 212, 215

Fringes, 289

Fruitfulness, 43


GAD, leadership and valour, 408

Garment, mixed, 288

Gain, worldly, 13 ; unholy, 298

Gatherings, three annual, 241

Gifts, attained, 78; God's, 815, use of
common, 316

Gleaming, divine ordinance, 305

God, word of, 16; benignity, 21; walking
with, 28; forgotten, 136, 143, 212; a
refuge, 46, 59; helper, 15, 58 ; known,
48, 377; tempted, 188; provoked, 169;
no respecter of persons, 183 ; in history,
834; omniscient, 60; seeking, 97;
attributes, 876; government of, 109;


unity of, 183; a rock, 879; our
Father, 379
Goodness, God’s, 57; amidst evil, 60;


human obligation to divine, 180
Godliness, marks of, 211
Government, moral, 183 ; just, 248
Goods lost, restored, 284, 286
Grace, preserving, 258 ; in redemption, 882
Guilt, detected and punished, 246, 806


HasiTations, divinely fixed, 218; dedi-
cated, 271
Hanging, 282


Heart, turned from God, 352; and hand
229 ; circumcised, 358

Happiness of Israel, 413

Heroism, 572

Help, divine in life, 314

History, personal, 95 ; wonderful, 14}

Home, charity, 222; partiality, 280

Horeb, 168; son of, 170, 176

Horses, 251, 269

Holy life, influence of, 421

Humanity, principles of, 326

Human life, under divine inspection, 887


Ipo3s destroyed, 178, 208

Idolatry, dangerous, 93, 247; warnings
against, 95, 873; snares of, 154, 324;
forbidden, 145, 244, 326

Ingratitude, 48; of God’s people, 879;
Israel’s, 384

Iniquity, future punished, 892

Injustice, men of, 325
eritance, gained, 148, 313; Levi's, 179;
prepared, 179 ; future, 203

Intercession, a great, 171; prolonged, 174

Inscriptions, 329

Insult, shameful, 311

Instruction, important, 876 '

Israel’s, prosperity, 21; charge to Esau and
Moab, 73 ; to Ammonites, 76; help, 77,
78; God's inheritances, 94; chosen,
people, 149, 149; ministers of destruo-
tion, 148 ; exalted, 146 ; rejected, 338


JOSHUA, nominated, 84, 86 ; leader, 366, 368,
$74, 421; with Moses, 870


Jews, misery of, 839; a proverb, 340

Jordan crossed, 85

Joy, social and sacrificial, 224

Journey, a happy, 333

Joseph, plenty and power, 404; a type of
Christ, 409

Judges, duties of, 31, 833; character, 32, 853
chosen, 66

Justice, administration of, 248, 244

Judah, or supremacy, 401

Judgment day, 184


Kines, choice and duty of, 250; earthly
under the Heavenly, 251

Kingdom formed, 398

Knowledge, scriptural, 855


Law, spiritual, 77; obeyed, 89; magnified,
91; forgotten, 92; majesty of God's,

121, 899; terrible, 125; fiery, 400;
broken, 327; penalty, 330: demands of,
827, 361, 872; method of preserving,
134; reasonable, 183; special, 296;

social, 303 ; harvest, 804; mosaic, 807

Labour, rights of, 307

Landmarks, 326; removed, 264

Leader chosen, 866

Legislation, Mosaic, 280, 284, 289, 803

Levites, 206 ; service, 401

Lending and borrowing, 229

Leprosy, plague of, 803


Heaven, 103 ; upon earth, 19% ; typified, 241; | Liberality, 228


God's sturelouse, 334


Light craved, 259; God’s, 400


INDEX, iil


a


Life, individual valued, 278 ; human sacred,
801, 116, 247, 263; God’s care of, 74;
end of natural, 74 ; retrospect, 157, 159;
Christian, 58; pure, 290; social, dark-
ened, 291 ; blemished, 233 ; pilgrim, 240;
devotion and daily, 817; in suspense,
845; course of, 197; a weary, 346;
Godless, gives no repose, 345 ; pathways
of, 362 ; chosen, 363

Love, force of, 186, 263 ; God's, 400

Lost restored, 284

Lusts, fleshly, 44


MAGISTB«TES, duties of, 214
Majes*y of God's, 412
Ma eee sanctity, 116, 800; law of Levirate,


Meeting, a solemn, 370

Methods of human training, 849

Be ro teotion of past, 380, and wrath,

Memory, good, 152; helpful, 158, 244; want
of, 304


4

Men, wise, 29; good, 88; godless, 50; in
Christ, 563; warlike, 76; selfwilled, 77,
78; gigantic, 170; valued, 229; de-
moralised, 390

Meditation, 102

Ministers, called, 255; service of, 255, 256;

Moral character and material prosperity, 191

Morality, trade in, 308

Mountains, climbing, 419

Moses, words of, 10; first address, 15;
character, 20; work, 25, 28 charge to
judges, 34; power of, 47; prayer, 85;
mediator, 109, 123; honoured, 128;
eminent, 400; prophet like unto, 258;
last discourse, 393; sins, 395; last days,
894; on Nebo, 395; death, 418, 420;
burial, 417; man of mountains, 419;
none like, 421

Murder, forbidden, 115; nature of, 129,827;
unknown, 276; expiation of, 277

Murmuring, 48

Monuments, 321, 822


Name, glorious and fearful, 841; divine,
344; dishonoured, 886

Nations, vicissitudes of, 75, 80; preeminent,
90; dispossessed, 102; divided, 383;
honoured, 185; cut off, 207

Nature, under God’s control, 339; worship
of, 94; a source of instruction, 123;
subservient to God’s purposes, 190

Naphtali, satisfaction of, 410

Night and its teachings, 59

Numbers, seductive power of, 218


OBEDIENCE, inducements to, 99, 161; bene-
fits of, 102, 149, 194, perfect, 128;
aspects of, 185; ready, 318; importance
of, 394 ; loyal way to national prosperity,
194


Obligation, parental, 134

Offences, capital, 265

Offerings, 242

Og, conquered, 82. 87; bedstead of, 83
Organization, 22


Oracles, heathen, 859

Ordinance, the appointed, 237

Prorelony restraints of, 227; classes liable
0:


Patus, forbidden, 187

Patriotism, 87, 384

hey glorious, 305; memory of, 25; dis-

onoured, 55; revised, 65, 80, 157; days

of, 98; lessons, 147 ; remembered, 802

Passover, 235

Parents, despised, 826; honoured 826

Peace, 275

Pentecost, day of, 239

Perfection, Christian, 258, 260

People, miserable, 153; stiffnecked, 172;
enslaved, 175; holy, 223; God’s, 256;
@ disheartened, 367

Pity, without, 264 ; and justice, 267

Pillars, memorial, 321

Philantrophy, national, 242

Place, the chosen, 202, 207

Plagues, the seven, 336

Poor, considered, 228 ; claims upon rich, 229

Poverty, 232

Power abused, 35, 307 ; of God in affliction,
337 ; of suffering, 338

Prayer, achievements in, 177 ; of Ed. VI. 260 ;
patriotism and, 317; reverence, 318

Presumption, 71

Priests, office, 179; duties, 254; mainten-
ance, 254; inheritance, 256; holy, 403

Primogeniture, rights of, 279, 280

Progress, 71; faithful obedience, way to, 195

Providence, 70; retributive, 78; mysterious,
82, 94; twofold, 108; law of, 153;
watchful, 222

Proposal, heavenly, 67

Prospect, a dark, 371; a charming, 418

Principles, important, 333

Prophets, false, 209, 259; mission of, 260

Prosperity, spiritual, 67; danger of teme
poral, 161, 130, 386

Purpose, 40; unrealised, 70, 268

Purity, bodily, 121; moral, 295

Punishment, witnessed, 248; national, 837


RAIN, 198, 198, 379

Redemption of God’s people, 236

Recollection, important, 303

Rebellion, consequences of, 47, 71; grievous,
173; and ruin, 342

Refuge, cities of, 100, 102, 261

Religion, pleasures, 10, 42; nature, 5) ; re-
quirements, 56; home, 113; practical
1659; true, 125,816; of inquiry, 140; of
temper, 114; and material prosperity,
152

Reputation, 346

Release, year of, 226

Requirements, divine, 132

Responses and curses, 323

Retribution, and national defection, 858, 44


267
Rest, way to, 70; a future inheritance, 208
Retaliation, law of, 266
Repentance, 358 ; true, 359
Return to God, 357, 364
Reuben, or blessings of existence, 401


iv INDEX.


rere


Revenge, self, 8392
Rights, civil, 297; varied 298
Righteousness, rewards of, 61


SACRIFIOES, vicarious, 62 ; blemished, 246

Sabbath keeping, 111

Saint, a sleeping, 419

Scene, unlawful, 324 ; wonderful, 824

Service, rewarded, 68 ; fai 91; God’s,
137, 374; principles of, 188; dis-


tinguished, 178; joyful, 841; Levites, .


179 : commanded, 197 ; perpetual, 230

blab of rete oe

ecrets, divine, 354; things, 85

Security, carnal, 852

Seed, mixed, 288 ; divers, 289, 287

Sihon, 12; destroyed, 77

Sins, 71; remembered, 168: greivous, 170;
Aaron’s, 172; dreadful, 193 ; pre-
sumptuous, 250; seoret, 824 ; dangerous,
403 ; and suffering, 885

Similitude, royal, 381

Snares, warned against, 206

Slaves, liberated, 229, 232

Slander, 292

Society, welfare of, 249

Soldiers, bearing, 296

Son, a rebellious, 280

Song; for a people, 372, 874

Solicitude, divine, 126

Sorrows, worldly, 217 ; triple, 848

Spote, of God’s children, 379

Spies, conduct of, 49

Spirit, Holy, first fruit of, 240

Storm, the pitiless, 336

Strongholds, confidence in, 841

Stranger, love to, 184, 185: object of pity,
828


Strength, equal to day, 411

Success, law of, 41; delayed, 59; seoret of,
79 ; philosophy of, 163 ; worthy, 420

Summer, sermon for, 407

Supremacy, God’s over affection, 106;
worship, 107 ; and lips, 110

Supplies, divine, 164


TABERNAOLES, Feast of, 240
Tables, broken, 172; @od’s provision for
man’s, 218, 220
Teachers, true, 128
Thing, the cursed, 158
Time, claimed by God, 108
Tithe, law of, 223, 320
Tongue, governed, 118
rade, customs of, 811


Training, Divine, 883


Trials, 26

Trees, fruit, preserved, 278
th, important, 149; God’s kept, 193;
searched, 247


UnBELIZ£f, its nature, 55, 68; consequences,
57, 69


’
Unclean, touching, 218
Uncleanliness, sins of, 826
Unfortunate protected, 302
Union, national, 289 ; blessings of, 606
Usury, 297, 298


Vengeance stored up, 391

Victory, of Jahaz, 78; a famous, 83; condi-
tions, 296

Visitations, Divine, 108

Visions, unrealised, 416

Vocation, high, 258; of God's people, 256

Volume, the inherited, 868

Vows, 298, 299


Walking, careful, 127; true, 128; after God,
211


Warfare, Christian, 55, 269
War, a first, 77; righteous, 268; exemptions,
270: method, 272; exterminating, 275;
" Old Testament, 275
arnings to posterity, 853
Ways of life, 139
Wealth, 165
Weeks, feast of, 238


| Witnesses, 70; false, 118, 226; heaven and


earth, 363, 377

Wisdom, marks of, 388

Wilderness, journey, 36, 87

Women, captive, 279 ; rights of, 301

World, nonconformity to, 187 ; God’s rule
over, 391; homage to moral worth, 832,
334


Wonder, 846

Word, h 133 ; authority, 249; an dew,
378; written, 252; a little, 824

Works, good, 51; reward, 19; ability for,
20; systematic, 221

somerood and sin, 352

orship, spiritual, 108; i 110; lawa

fal ; blessings of public, 202+ joy-


YEAR, Sabbatio, 281; three times in a, 242
Young, life and death set before, 8638
Yoke, unequal, 288


SEBULON, or business and worshi 405 ; and
Tesacar, 406, 407 *


. a
et ee ee eae


FROM AUTHORS.





Apaw, 108

Abbott, 87

Addison, 14, 41, 43, 80
Atterbury, 10, 260
Allon, Dr., 367


Augustine, St., 199, 219, 830, 848


Bacon, 88, 75, 108, 180, 150, 152, 176, 186,
215, 262, 266, 288, 292, 846, 856, 364

Barnes, A, 275

Baxter, Richard, 118, 124

Barrow, 108, 234

Beaumont and Fletcher, 176

Beecher, 148, 149, 348, 356, 414

Beveridge, Bishop, 357

Bernard, 139


Brewer, 155

Bridge, Charles, 79, 160, 199, 261
Bunsen, 235

Bunyan, 197

Burritt, E., 24

Buchanan, J., Dr., 128

Buffon, 142

Burke, 233, 243, 889, 252, 298
Byron, 13, 238, 819


CAMPBELL, T., 871


Carlyle, 10, 14, 295, 881

Cecil, 85, 152, 154, 298

Clarke, Rev. Dr.,

Deteridge, ee 133, 198, 874, 8938, 896
Collins, 3

Cicero, 18h. 244

Chalmers, Dr, 195

Chrysostom, 89, 49, 108

Cook, Eliza, 14

Colton, 199, on

Cowley, A., 28

eee: nase 30, 75, 94, 118, 220, 268, 812, 829,


peaiiig Dr., 80, 91, 185, 206, 220, 840, 851
Dallington, Sir Richd., 29


Davies, Dr., 282, 347
Dickens, O., 24


Dryden, 10, 136, 227, 263, 289, 802, 847
Dyer, 94, 165, 319


Edwards, J., 95, 419
Emerson, 21

Euripides, 282

Evans, J. H., 175, 245, 847


Feltham, 291

Fenelon, 68

Feuerbach, 161

Fielding, 234

Flavel, 92, 253

Foe, De, 309

Fontaine, 209

Foster, John, 15, 282
French, 347

Fuller, Thomas, 51, 268, 88@


Garfield, President, 330
Gibbon, 320

Gilfillan, 260

Goldsmith, 233
Goulburn, Dean, 93
Goethe, 194, 199, 252, 419
Gregory, St., 260
Grindon, L., 116, 165, 204
Graves on, Pent, 155, 160
Gurney, J. J., 223
Guruall, 180, 224, 317
Guthrie, Dr., 148


Hale, 133

Hall, Bishop, 88, 102, 180, 170, 185, 190, 221
229, 305

Hall, Robert, 57, 71, 196, 233, 836

Hallam, 165

Hamilton, W., Sir, 302

Harvey, Dr., 19, 204

Hare, 214, 346, 355

Havergal, Rev. W., 378

Heber, 39

Herbert, G., 65, 202, 228, 298

Henry, P., 93

ae loa 341

Helps,

Hill, and 255

Hnoper, Bishop, 165, 248

Horn, Bishop, 20


Iqmieson, Dr., 129, 142, 154
Jerome, St., 202

Jones, Sir W., 252
Johnson, Dr., 38, 41, 208


Jortin, 71





wi, INDEX,
Keble, J., 855 ekae ah Pein 109, 155, 165, 218, 288,
King, 48 339,
Knox, J., 145 Richter, 10, tn 396, 419


Lacordaire, 846

Landon, 165, 362

Lavater, 396

Leighton, Archbishop, 155, 228, 266
Locke, 34 6

Lowel, 357, 374

Longfellow, 41, 243

Luther, 179, 188, 198, 203, 283


Maclaren, 397

Maimonides, 9

Manning, Archbishop, 198, 256
Mant, Bishop, 198, 208
Mason, 173

Mede, 92

Melville, Hy., 144, 198
Milton, 28, 211, 115, 268, 854
Mirabeau, ’330

Mill, J. 8, 851
Montgomery, J., 194

More, Sir T., 253


NAPOLEON, 12, at 267, 314, 846
Nicol, Robert, 2

N ewton, Sir ie 104

Newton, John, 403

Newman, 374


PALEY, 61, 101, 421
Parker, Dr. J., 129, 130
Parnell, 378

Pascal, te

Patrick, 13, 83, 75, 187
Paxton, 36 36

Pilkington, Bishop, 184
Plato, 20, 131, 258
Pollock, 369

Pope, 78, 96, 136, 161, 242, 298, 808, 856
Porter, 82, 87
Powerscourt, Lady, 178


QUARLES, 12
Questree, 255, 868


RAWLINSON, 9
Raleigh, Sir W., 41, 48
Reynolds, Sir Z., 19, 4l


Robertson, ¥. W,, 216
Rogers, 319
Ruskin, 245, 256, 846


SANDEERSON, Bishop, 229

Salter, 224

Savage, Mrs., 98

Secker, a 214, 245, 257, 886

Selden, 10;

Seneca, o, 129, 159, 284, 848

Scott, Sir W,, 28

Schiller, 133

Sibbs, 190

Sidney, Sir P., 282

Smith, Sid., 1i, 168

Shakspeare, 11, 19, 84, 98, 104, 121, 180, 1
159, 176, 185, 205, "291, 829, 845, 856, 8

Bocrates, 119

South, 170, 199, 292, 852

Southey, 24, 25, 245

Stael, Madame De, 25

Stowel, Dr. W. H., 111, 116, 120

Spencer, 330

Spurgeon, 60, 158, 164, 178, 175, 198


TAcITUs, 233

Taylor, J., 812, 329

Tennyson, 104, 130, 199, 208, 295, 874, 898
Tillotson, 10, 49, 197, 260, 829

Tholuck, 147

Thomson, 130

Trench, Archbishop, 130

Trapp, 97, 109, 112, 185, 154, 204, 884, 850


VENN, 299
Vinet, 290, 874


WATSON, T., 110, 119, 129, 151, 829
Warburton, 16 165

Webster, J., 208, 282

Wesley, Ie 229, '296, 865
Wellington, 270, 330

Whewell, 41

W ilberforce, 129

Wilson, Bp., 198

Wordsworth, Bp., 208, 219, 298


ore ee 10, a a 148, 196, 260, 848, 856
»&


ae a


ge ea me


Ii ANECDOTES AND ILLUSTRATIVE
INCIDENTS.


AtrzeD the Great, 96


Alexander the Great and Homer, 251, and


enemy, 275
Achilles, 330
African Prince, 103
Antigonus and troops, 271
Archius, plot against, 864
Aristotle’s philosophy, 189
Augustine, 358
Augustus, death of, 422


Bantin, M. LL. and Book, 194
Basil, St. and Emperor, 54
Bell on Rock, 208
Bishop's advice, a, 805
eed saying of, 281
rown of Haddington, happiness, 418
Buckingham, Duke of, 44
Burns, death of, 843
Byron, Lord, bitter life 343


Oarrentesr, A, 40

Catherine, St., Monastery, 50
Cesar, 30, 153, 345

Charles II., 366

Charles V., 256

Chatham, 374

Chesterfield, Lord, 258, 845
Children, 24

Cicero, 184

Clarke, Dr. S. and God’s name, 186
Coleridge and Sabbath, 120
Commander, Roman, 216
Cowper, 285, 325

Cork, Earl of, 94

Cressy, battle of, 77

Cromwell’s Ironsides, 158
Crown, Roman civic, 64
Crusaders before Jerusalem, 158


DaMoo.Es, sword of, 845
Decades of France, 111
Diocletian, 294


Ep. ITI. and his captives, 339
Ed. VI, 253, 260

Eliot, G. & children, 896, 408
Emperor and lawyers, 82
English, Farmer, 198
Epicurus, 189

Euripides, 155

Erskine, Eben, Rev., 228


Fairs, ancient, 241


Famine, in Italy, 847
Faraday’s religion, 896
Fines, 278

Yoster, John, 15


Gazrison, W. L., 109
General, an ancient, 151
Gentlemen, two, 415
Goblet, tale of, 61
Goethe, 182


Haprgian VL, 39
Hale, Justice, 112, 124, 268
Hall, Bp., 165

» Robert, 196, 856
Hamilton, Dr., 847
Hannibal, 275
Helps, A., 217
Hercules, 62
Hilarion’s death, 176
Hippocrates, 119
Hooker's prayer, 118
Howard, J., 233, 281
Huntingdon, Countess, death of, 423
Henry, Philip, 178


InvipEL Father, 144

James II., deathbed, 2843 forsaken, 884
Jay, 125, 346

Johnson, Dr., 41, 144

King, ungrateful, 57

Kuill, Rd., 129

Knox, J., 66, 145, 174


LaDy, 4 pious, 186, and Indian servant, 229
Lacedemonium, 299

Lantern and blind man, 192

Latimer’s prayer, 174

Lawyer, distinguished, 121

Livingstone, Dr., 42

Louis XIV. and French, 399

Luther, 155, 18 167, 218


Lycurgus, 88


Maockensiz and wreck, 64
Man, a dying, 148; young, 168
Mahommed, 274, 87

Massillon, 122

Mecca, pilgrimages to, 241
Milton, 113

Milesius and Dolphin, 48
Mother, a pious, 144
Mirabeau, 330

Morris, Rd., Bap. Minister, 180


vif,


INDEX.


a REALS SESE ERE 3 SRA RP RR PS PY SR a ECE TORTS


Napotnon, 65, 75, 212, 856
Nelson, 862

Nero, 845

Newton, Sir L, 135, 186


Oswa.p, King, and poor, 225
Ovid, 80 :


Patry, 161

Palissy and Henry ITI., 11 resolves, 262
Pascal’s death, 422

Pathagoras, 355

Payson, 324; death, 414

Pelopidas and war, 27

Philosopher, a Persian, 142 ; and king, &8
Philo, the Jew, 51

Philip, son of Chas, V., 118

Plato, 181, 304

Prometheus, 73

Publius Scipio, example, 283


QUEEN Viorokri4, 103
Revo.vrion, French, 887


Robespierre and God, 91
Raleigh, Sir W., 267


Richelieu, Cardinal, 896
Roman Emperor, 390
Rutherford, 159


Srrmon, A, 261

Selucus and

Simonides, 186

Slaves, Roman, 231

Socrates, 396

Solon’s oak, 31 ; happiness, 78 5 max, 848
Stoner, David, 203

Storks, 130


TAMEBLANE, 275
Travellers, a company, 267


VESPASIAN and senator, 82
Voltaire’s death, 45 ; saying, 89


WELLINGTON, 270, 830, 864
Wickcliffe’s prayer, 167
Wolsey, Card., 129
Wright, Dr. S., 225


XeERxzEs, 270





IV. ILLUSTRATED TEXTS


Gen, v, 24, 211
LJ vi. & 6, 3738
» xxvi. 22, 408


Ex. xii. 1, 235
» 3% 16, 95
w« xix. 5, 95
w xxiii, 1, 118, 266
w xxiii, 9,184
» xxxiii, 14, 89
Lev. xix. 4, 244


Num. xiv. 22, 188
wn xiv. 34, 72


Joshua i. 8, 367
Jud viii, 16, 159
Ruth f. 14, 91
1 Sam, fv, 9, 81
Neh. ix. 25, 186
Job v. 14, 338

n viii. 8, 98


x. 17, 342
xi. 10, 337, 889


Gower


Job xii. 10, 891, 837
n = XxXvii. 8, 345
wo XXX, 16, 843 :


Psalm xx. 1, 342

xxi. 8, 222

xxix, 9, 128

xxxi, 6, 149
xxxiv, 12, 140
xxxvi. 11, 334
Xxxvii. 23, 74
xxxix. 3, 102

lvi. 8, 74

lxvi. 12, 94

Ixviii. 9, 379
Ixxiv. 20, 257
Ixxviii. 18, 140, 188
xevi. 5, 100

ovi. 7, 186

oxx. 3, 4, 202, 268
exxvii, 1, $32


Prev. iv. 28, $9

« xi. 1, 308

w xiv. 34, 146
xxii. 6, 192, 809
wm xxiii. 10, 11, 264
w xxv, 18, 266
" xxix. 1, 78


INDEX. in.
renee nee EEnEiaSS


Hoo, ii, 11, 119 2 Cor. vi. 17, 210
« vii. 13, 188, 160, 814
" viii. 11, 100 Gal. iii. 1, 257, 282
a“ xii. 18, 100 # iv. 8, 141
e vi. 17, 288
Tea. viii. 19, 257
« xiii, 1, 98, 146, 387 Ephes, iii 12, 124
a Ixv. 16, 187 w = fv. 18, 142, 119
Jer. ii, 11, 353 Phil. ii. 15, 877
n xiv. 18, 14, 310 w iv. 11-18, 120
» xiix. 35, 83
Col. fi. 28, 201
Lam. i 9, 889 w iii, 12, 228
Hos. iv. 7, 871 8 Thess. ii. 9, 210
n xiii, 5, 388 ” v. 21, 1
John i, 18, 258 1 Tim. iii. 1, 256
« ik Q7; 255 Cy) iv. 2, 853
e xiv. 6, 107
» xv. 16, 70 2 Tim. i. 10, 217
Acts vii. 58. 122 Titus ii. 10, 170
nw xvii, 26, 70 « iii, 4, 297
nu xvii. 29, 325
"= xvii. 30, 325, $11 Heb. ii. 1, 106
w ix, 22, 204
Bom. i. 18, 96, 98, 890 w xi. 18, 420
nn ii. 6, 167 ® xii. 5, 6, 150
n iii. 2, 103, 183 o xii, 15, 362
n vii. 7, 119
n viii. 28, 838 Tas. ii, 10, 328, OF
n x, 21, 181 » iv. 6, 161
® xi. 13, 254 a v.16, 172
wn xii. 1, 282, 216
oe. 80? 3 Pet. ii. 9, 146, 986
1 One ii 6 115, my. 10, 518
wo & 17, 25
a 2. 11, 389, 188 8 Pot i 7, 216
Res T.


444716


THEOLOGY LIBRARY
CLAREMO N ih 6 CAL {F









, a
t 7]
e
Me A > f ie ?
_ Mi? 6", am , eho of DA he a *
Roth A oy re oes
| gee a Cer
Bit, Vee, oe SURIY Rp aeses
» Mia Ava
i Ww 7) @é 4 ae as h- Oe,
x ¥ e A i OO
\ Ald 8y ai tecegi ita
fe itr Zz o af - : iy eae Rt
ft 2) ha eee
te og 4d Se on eae
‘ 2-4 ‘ er
2 iti S aes
: ' oer x? Ha
, rT ‘ tae jipes, SE, Sy
» td's - oF weer} : ye?
In ‘ a 4
ee | my
o WA) Pe Ase t © “'e4
t uy > g ee J
; Miwa,’ 2% LAA ae _
= = «6a ‘ A ne .
: / 7 ie £
~e 2
: 7 ; wren. ‘hy es
’ - . “ Poo te = ¢ ‘
-? PV AL th om
d in & ra guy tga! sa & “~<a
ie ere Te ai wi
ee ; el
: \), , hee ts , L- # Pie
my ee ee ee if dO
ae , “v « ' ‘ mae
ea - “oe
eS ee ee ee
- i | i + 4















mesa be

Mes os ee eS

Siee. a)
raeg









ps


al — eae’ ee he oe Se” a Aes goa | |e a vit ty ad Bs . ee
yeep Any vr) ere od yee Nae 7 a 5 ee :

“ae 1 - ’ S

\=





« 7















eee


Le


vee fo


-
nd


ie Se et le















BS491 .P65/ vol 4 7. en ayn nal


The Preacher s complete homiletical com














V4 THEOLOGY LIBRARY
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY
AT CLAREMONT
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA


OEMCO





\


a a


vyu oon bene
wer yee tev 9 6
oe ae


Nye ve ew
ee ve pew te


¥
VWrerwrery
eee reny


vevre
vey


“vow
Sey Oey ey

Vetruyyerveuey Eye y

A Re


av vev ee
tee rEy eee
Vriewnee
y eee US VET YE EUEUY YY YEE EEY CED YY
Vevey ervey Te we yew ey ever eeveeyy
wEUVPerevere yey ts eye w
eveeeery ie w
vee rt
ate eve Ee ev vy
TYE Eee SY ae
Rew y eee ey


ewe


Vee EAN VEY TOE
teueeey


 Veverny ey
yyy ev ty we
wey .
‘ vueeueyeey vad Yew wy
Veeyeryy DO ek eed
vey ye eee eye Seny bern eey yt Vee ee ee ww
EEE EEEE, CEETYT SE TET EV YY OCUNT SV t YS Ir YH wy lunes
VE VE MCE TEST EYE SY TTY UT r
Cee ever ere yee _
VUES EVEN CEN veweveyveae
CVV ESTE EV VY Ee YT} CS oN


VEEEeEEELESUMUES
“ey
=


eins.
Sey

rev eee eee Et

Te EE MeO Mt att Me

SOE ET EEL EOE TE UE EET eo
a ERE CMCC I ee
vivewruceuy eeu py tm
See ee eee IN Ion a


Weeyy yer ee


Veity veer y
ERE See ye we sie
A Urresvery yy Wsvovecuevenebyy
teeee oe ery eM war
VES eee


a A

eee CeNEEPEREOE 5 s
eeryelerey Tey

ee eee Ore f ¥ Satetere aeons

ee ‘. ot 4

Sa are oe oy MANNE wo we te

Lalu ee OOM UM Ee eee ee

as boule aes wna fe vr

Syn y cay en ee ‘eee come Mein oe emote

Veupeueuny yer


ennyne
kee pepevry
eure ene ee
eee RUN Ie
LENT CS CS See eye han ey
EMRE eee Pvteures yer mS
WV etahels,


<=
Pert
eesse ieee
é


S
<s
esvy eee


458


Rea

Sra
ehetatatae
se Sahat eh she:


rey ty

eee es wey

CO AIA RIO ARS Perth th Phe ad
veh Ce AN ANS


5
x ‘ Ce pas
+444 cree
Srfey ence eye et
Sie eu eevee Lenses
Meant


ey eee
ae Seve aire
tse sie eae ret
San oan a


ia
aeata,


eg eSaSe


Stele erates
ORT ENT T
Sree
MARES a lnerceie gst
Mie atatem niente i
SIHO OER MS
poh Pa a iets sae
Pies dey aaa phates
attain Mana" :
“%


CARA a ad
PORDAS ATC RR A A RO


eee


vow
Seer a Oe Ne.
wv ‘eee


Ce
ite Oe


ye wat
LP ELSA te


te ee ee
ee EY ECM MN OS DY


Ve to
ae ee od


es
=


$
<


Se
se


Perea}
set eet


a te ioe ve


Pe Nae a Noe ee OF em


ene ee ee
re ee
.


a
POPS SM
CR AA tata dd

Fane No ete


Ce ee

Pe ee as pe eet IME
ie eee ete ae
Ce SME ES


s2esa.
wot bey
SSabese:
Pepi eeD
aBshace
a3<5

34


4

sSaes

*

edaates

a hejese

hnisses

aoe

peer

qadated:
s.8,

PS


%
#
oF
et


+Pas
ats
4
Pl
ce
ask
“4%.


6
ate.
sie
386
a3
0
eee)
4
BS
ats,
as
as
S36.


aie
435,
4.
<
«
a4.
<
5
3


2
s
baltin’
of
s
)
P
<<
iS
ae


*,
$3
<

Me
be

»
-,


4

a3
<
3
tee)


a
3"
ry


«


B


444,
4


s:


38
<
<4)


Peas


eer
ve


2

234.

moe nts
ea)


Poe me


VOLS TRY A Se
Se RA ded


”


x

”

at
i.


+
:
3


2
ee


PD Kah Pp Fhe


“e


Z


ve


(heed


Cos
¥


ot,


were
ee aed


rye





tpg enn t 4


IAS
pears
hes


reve


istety
ay
