yeh
Fe ah


Wu


624


te
=
So
=
w
Pa
cs
a
o
~
cs


gy
AN
1001 1320


Il


|


“Til








THE


PREACHER’S HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY.





Dale wlaUekKaks


eo


INTRODUCTION.


The writer of the Gospel.—_The author to whom the primitive Church
ascribes the composition of the third Gospel was called Luke—a name which
is an abbreviation of Lucanus or Lucilius, but has no connection with Lucius
(Acts xiii. 1; Rom. xvi. 21). In the well-known Muratorian fragment (c. A.D.
170) the fact that he was the author is distinctly asserted ; and even Renan
admits that there is no grave reason to question the truth of the statement.
Though he is not mentioned either in the Gospel or in the Acts, his name occurs
in three other passages of the New Testament (Col. iv. 14; Philem. 24; 2 Tim.
iv. 11). In the first of these he is described as ‘the beloved physician,” and
appears as a friend and companion of the apostle Paul. Further, in the same
passage he is distinguished from “ those of the circumcision,” as one of Gentile
extraction. It is interesting to notice that, as far as known to us, he is the
only Gentile who took part in the composition of any of the books of Holy
Scripture. Eusebius (c. a.pD, 315) says that he was a native of Antioch, the
capital of Syria. As physicians then were very frequently slaves or freedmen,
it is not at all improbable that Luke belonged to that class. It may be that
he was a member of the household of the Theophilus to whom he dedicates his
Gospel, that he had received his freedom, and practised independently as a
physician. It has been pointed out by Mr. Smith, of Jordanhill, in his work
on the voyage of St. Paul, that the historian’s allusions to nautical matters are
very accurate, and yet are unprofessional in tone. He suggests that Luke may
have sometimes practised as a physician on board one of the merchantmen,
which sailed from port to port on the Mediterranean Sea. These vessels were
sometimes of great size, and carried a large number of passengers—as many as
two hundred and seventy-six were in the ship which was wrecked at Melita
B 1


inTtRoDUcTION. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





(Acts xxvii. 37); and as voyages in those days were of uncertain length, it is
not unreasonable to suppose that in some cases at any rate it was usual to have
a medical attendant on board. From his intimate acquaintance with Jewish
customs, it would seem that Luke had been a Jewish proselyte before he was
converted to Christianity. If so, he was one who accepted the moral law and
the Messianic hopes of Judaism without conforming to the ceremonial law
or undergoing the rite of circumcision. In chap. i. 2 he distinguishes himself
from those who “from the beginning were eyewitnesses” of the life of
Christ; but this does not necessarily preclude his having seen and heard
tL» Saviour. There is no ground, however, for the conjectures that he was
one of the seventy, or one of those Greeks who visited Jesus shortly before
His crucifixion (John xii. 20), or one of the two disciples of Emmaus. The fact
that he was a Gentile is fatal to the first of these conjectures, while the
Aramaic colouring of the narrative of the journey to Emmaus shows that the
author is drawing his information from some foreign source rather than from
his own reminiscences. It is interesting to trace Luke’s connection with the
labours and journeyings of the apostle Paul. He appears first in connection
with that apostle at Troas (Acts xvi. 10), for the most natural interpretation
of the sudden use of the first person plural is that the author of the Acts is
there beginning to take part in the history which he records. He journeys
with the apostle as far as Philippi, and on the departure of St. Paul from that
city he was apparently left behind. He takes no further part in the second
missionary journey of that apostle, for in xvii. 1 the third person is resumed.
But he again joins St. Paul on the occasion of his second visit to Philippi, and
journeys with him through Miletus, Tyre, and Cxsarea to Jerusalem (xx. 5—
xxi. 18). Seven years had elapsed between these two visits (A.D. 51—a.p. 58),
and during this time Luke probably preached the gospel in Philippi and its
neighbourhood. An incidental notice of his activity during that period is
probably given in 2 Cor. viii. 18, in the allusion to “the brother whose praise
is in the gospel throughout all the Churches.” During St. Paul’s three months’
stay at Philippi he sent Titus and this “ brother” on a mission to Corinth; and
many critics hold that the unnamed emissary on this occasion was the Evangelist,
as indicated in the subscription appended to 2 Corinthians. If so, the fame he
had acquired was due to his activity as a preacher, and not, as Jerome supposed,
in consequence of his having then already published his Gospel. As already said,
he accompanied St. Paul on his last journey to Jerusalem (Acts xxi. 17), and there
would have many opportunities of personal intercourse with the first witnesses
of the life and death and resurrection of Christ. During the apostle’s two years’
imprisonment in Cesarea Luke probably remained in Palestine. He afterwards
accompanied St. Paul to Rome, undergoing the perils of shipwreck and sharing
his imprisonment. According to 2 Tim. iv. 11, he remained faithful when others
forsook the apostle; and no doubt this fidelity remained unshaken to the last.
After the death of St. Paul, the life of his beloved companion is wrapped in
hopeless obscurity. Epiphanius (c. a.p. 367) says that he preached the gospel
in Dalmatia, Gallia, Italy, and Macedonia, Gregory Nazianzen (a.p. 361) is
2 Zi


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. INTRODUCTION.


—eeeeeeeeSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSsFsFeeseFFeFSsSSSssSSSssssesese
the first to rank him among the martyrs, Nicephorus (c. A.D. 1100) relates
that whilst ministering in Greece he was condemned to death by the unbelievers
without even the form of a trial, and was hanged upon an olive tree, in the
eightieth or bighty-fourth year of his age. These traditions are, however, of
but slight value. The last-named author states that Luke was also a painter of
no mean skill, and painted portraits of our Lord, of the Virgin, and of the chief
apostles; but probably he confused the Evangelist with some later Christian
painter of the same name to whom works of the kind were ascribed.


Time and place of writing.— According to Acts i. 1, the Gospel was written
before the Acts of the Apostles; so that if the date of the latter can be fixed, a
reasonable conjecture as to that of the former may be hazarded. The latest
time mentioned in the Acts is the end of the second year of the apostle’s
imprisonment (xxviii. 30, 31), i.e. about a.p. 63. The most probable explana-
tion of the abrupt conclusion of the Acts is that the historian had no more to
tell at the time when he published his work; in other words, that the date to
which the history is brought down is that of the publication of the book. How
much earlier “‘ the former treatise” was written is of course uncertain ; but there
is strong probability that it dates from the period of St. Paul’s imprisonment
at Czsarea, a.D. 58-60, when the Evangelist was, as we can almost with
certainty conclude, in Palestine. This date would allow abundant time for the
growth of that voluminous literature to which the Evangelist alludes in chap. i. 1.
There are other suppositions as to the place where the Gospel was written.
Jerome says that it was written in Achaia and the region of Beotia; the Syriac
Version of the Gospel contains a note to the effect that it was written in
Alexandria. In later times Rome, Achaia, Macedonia, and Asia Minor have
been named as the place of composition. But there are no definite grounds
for coming to a decision on this point.


The object with which the Gospel was written.—The Evangelist himself in
the preface to the Gospel (i. 3) states the aim he had in view in writing it—viz.
that his friend (or patron) Theophilus, and it is to be presumed others who were
like him converts to Christianity, might know the certainty of those things in
which they had received oral instruction as catechumens. “ He tells us that
many had already attempted a written history of the life of Jesus. They had
endeavoured to take for their guidance the statements made by the first witnesses
for Jesus, the apostles, from whom Luke distinguishes both himself and them.
It seems very improbable that he is here alluding to the Gospels of Matthew
and Mark. He seems rather to have in view certain literary efforts of Christian
antiquity, of which some might be better than others, but among which not
one was, in his opinion, quite satisfactory. He at least considers them
inadequate for the ‘certainty’ of the faith of Theophilus; and having weighed
and examined the various documents to which he had access, he felt himself
powerfully impelled to undertake such a work also, and, as far as in him lay,


to improve upon the accounts of his predecessors” (Van Oosterzee).
3


INTRODUCTION. -HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,





—


The style and character of the third Gospel.—The style of the third
Evangelist is marked by a striking peculiarity. The prologue of the Gospel is
written in pure classical Greek, but is succeeded by a long section, extending
down to the close of the second chapter, in which there is a large number of
Aramaic idioms. This plainly indicates that the author in the one case writes
in his own person, and in the other translates somewhat literally from Aramaic
documents before him. The same phenomenon is noticeable in other parts of
the Gospel, though nowhere else in it is the contrast so marked. At times the
Evangelist writes freely in the elegant Greek of which he was a master, and.
at other times he translates or paraphrases the material, either written or oral,
' which had come to him in an Aramaic form.

He is careful to give chronological notices which connect the Gospel facts with
ancient history in general; but he does not adhere strictly to the order of time
in the events he records. Z.g. the visit of Jesus to Nazareth related in chap. iv.
is made to follow immediately upon the temptation in the wilderness, while
ver. 23 of the same chapter clearly states that it had been preceded by a
ministry in Capernaum, in the course of which several miracles had been
wrought. The great section also (ix. 51—xviii. 14) contains a large number
of separate incidents which the Evangelist himself does not profess to give in
anything like a direct chronological order. The connecting words in many
parts of it seem to disclaim any attempt at such order (see ix. 57, x. 1,
25, 38, etc.).

In the matter of completeness St. Luke surpasses the other synoptical writers :
his Gospel contains three-fourths of all the recorded events in the life of Christ,
and fully one-fourth of the whole is peculiar to him. Thus we may divide all
the matter contained in the first three Gospels into one hundred and sixty-nine
sections. Of these, fifty-eight are common to the three, twenty are peculiar to
St. Matthew, five to St. Mark, and forty-five to St. Luke. Of the rest, twenty
are common to St. Luke and St. Matthew, six to St. Luke and St. Mark, and
fifteen to St. Matthew and St. Mark.

The miracles peculiar to St. Luke are: (1) The miraculous draught of fishes,
v. 4-11; (2) the raising of the widows son at Nain, vii. 11-18; (3) the
woman with the spirit of infirmity, xiii, 11-17; (4) the man with the dropsy,
xiv. 1-6; (5) the ten lepers, xvii. 11-19; (6) the healing of Malchus,
xxii. 50, 51.

The parables peculiar to St. Luke are: (1) The two debtors, vii. 41-43 ;
(2) the good Samaritan, x. 30-37 ; (3) the importunate friend, xi. 5-8; (4) the
rich fool, xii. 16-21; (5) the barren fig tree, xiii. 6-9; (6) the lost piece of
silver, xv. 8-10; (7) the prodigal son, xv. 11-32; (8) the unjust steward,
xvi. 1-9; (9) Dives and Lazarus, xvi. 19-31; (10) the unjust judge, xviii. 1-8;
(11) the Pharisee and the publican, xviii. 10-14.

Other remarkable incidents which are only recorded by him are: John the
Baptist’s answers to the people (iii. 10-14); the story of the penitent woman in
the house of Simon (vii. 36-50) ; the conversation with Moses and Elijah on the
Mount of Transfiguration (ix. 31); the visit to the house of Martha and Mary

4


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. tnrRopvucttion.





(x. 38-42); the weeping over Jerusalem (xix. 41-44) ; the bloody sweat (xxii. 44);
the sending of Jesus to Herod (xxiii. 6-12); the address to the daughters
of Jerusalem (ibid. 27-31); the prayer, ‘“ Father, forgive them” (ibid. 34) ; the
penitent thief (ibid. 40-43); the journey to Emmaus (xxiv. 13-35); and the
particulars connected with the Ascension (ibid. 50-53). He seems to have
special pleasure in relating instances of our Lord’s tender mercy and compassion ;
and his Gospel brings into full prominence the great fact that Christ offers
salvation to all men as a free gift. The tradition was early current that
St. Luke’s Gospel contained the substance of the teaching of the apostle Paul ;
but perhaps too great stress has been laid upon the analogies between the
third Gospel and the Pauline Epistles, which seem to prove this. The note of
universality, which is undoubtedly to be found in them both, is not wanting in
the Gospels of St. Matthew and St. John.


Analysis of the Gospel.

I. THE PROLOGUE (i. 1-4).

II. NarRaTIves OF THE INFANCY (i. 5—ii. 52): (1) The annunciation of the
birth of the forerunner, i. 5-25; (2) the annunciation of the birth of Jesus,
i. 26-38; (3) the visit of Mary to Elisabeth, i. 39-56; (4) the birth of John the
Baptist, i. 57-80; (5) the birth of Jesus, ii. 1-20; (6) the circumcision of Jesus
and the presentation in the Temple, ii. 21-40; (7) the first journey of Jesus to
Jerusalem, ii. 41-52.

III. Tue apvent oF THE Messtau (iii. 1—iv. 13): (1) The ministry of John
the Baptist, iii. 1-20; (2) the baptism of Jesus, li. 21, 22; (3) His genealogy,
iii, 23-38 ; (4) the temptation in the wilderness, iv. 1-13.

IV. THE MINISTRY OF JESUS IN GALILEE (iv. 14-—ix. 50): (1) The visit to
Nazareth, iv. 14-30; (2) a short sojourn at Capernaum, iv. 31-44; (3) the
calling of the four disciples, v. 1-11; (4) the healing of the leper and of the
paralytic, v. 12-26; (5) the calling of Levi, with attendant circumstances,
v 27-39; (6) two controversies relative to Sabbath-keeping, vi. 1-11; (7) the
choice of the twelve apostles, vi. 12-16; (8) the Sermon on the Mount,
vi. 17-49; (9) the healing of the centurion’s servant, vii. 1-10; (10) the widow’s
,son raised from the dead, vii. 11-17; (11) the message from the Baptist,
vii. 18-23 ; (12) the testimony of Jesus to the Baptist, vii. 24-35 ; (13) the peni-
tent woman in the house of Simon, vii. 36-50; (14) the women who ministered to
Jesus, viii. 1-3; (15) the parable of the sower, viii. 4-18; (16) the visit of His
mother and brethren, viii. 19-21; (17) the stilling of the tempest, viii. 22-25 ;
(18) the healing of the demoniac, viii. 26-39; (19) the raising of Jairus’
daughter, and the healing of the woman with an issue of blood, viii. 40-56 ;
(20) the mission of the twelve, ix. 1-6; (21) the alarm of Herod, ix. 7-9;
(22) the feeding of the five thousand, ix. 10-17 ; (23) the first announcement of

the Passion, ix. 18-27; (24) the Transfiguration, ix. 28-36; (25) the healing
of the epileptic boy, ix. 37-43a; (26) the second announcement of the Passion,
ix. 430-45; (27) the close of the Galilwan ministry—counsels to the apostles,
ix. 46-50.

5


intRoDUcTION. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


V. THE JOURNEY FROM GALILEE To JERUSALEM (ix. 51—xix, 28): (1) The
inhospitality of the Samaritans, ix. 51-56; (2) the three disciples, ix. 57-62;
(3) the mission of the seventy, x. 1-24; (4) the parable of the good Samaritan,
x. 25-37; (5) Martha and Mary, x. 38-42; (6) lessons concerning prayer,
xi. 1-13; (7) the blasphemous charges of the Pharisees, xi. 14-36; (8) open
rupture with the Pharisees, xi. 37—xii. 1-12; (9) teaching concerning the
relations between the believer and the world, xii. 13-59 ; (10) words of warning,
parable of the barren fig tree, xii. 1-9; (11) the healing of the impotent
woman, xiii. 10-17; (12) the parables of the mustard seed and leaven,
xiii, 18-21; (13) the answer to the question, ‘‘ Are there few that be saved?”
xiii. 22-30; (14) the message to Herod Antipas, xiii. 31-35; (15) Jesus in the
Pharisee’s house, healing of the man with the dropsy, conversation with guests
and host, parable of the great supper, xiv. 1-24; (16) warnings against unwise
enthusiasm, xiv. 25-35 ; (17) parables of the lost sheep, the lost piece of silver,
and the prodigal son, xv. ; (18) two parables on the use to be made of earthly goods,
the unjust steward, Dives and Lazarus, xvi. ; (19) teaching concerning offences,
forgiveness, faith and service, xvii. 1-10; (20) the healing of the ten lepers,
xvii. 11-19; (21) teaching concerning the coming of the kingdom of God,
xvii. 20-37; (22) parable of the unjust judge, xviii. 1-8; (23) parable of
the Pharisee and the publican, xviii. 9-14; (24) children brought to Jesus,
xviii. 15-17; (25) the interview with the young ruler, xviii. 18-30; (26) the
third announcement of the Passion, xviii. 31-34; (27) the healing of Bartimeus,
xviii. 35-43; (28) Jesus in the house of Zaccheus, xix. 1-10; (29) the parable
of the pounds, xix. 11-28.

VI. Tue sosourn In JERUSALEM (xix. 29—xxi. 38): (1) The triumphal entry
into Jerusalem, xix. 29-44; (2) the cleansing of the Temple, xix. 45-48; (3) the
question of authority, xx. 1-8; (4) the parable of the vineyard, xx. 9-19;
(5) the question about tribute-money, xx. 20-26; (6) the question of the
Sadducees, xx. 27-40; (7) the question of Jesus, xx. 41. 44; (8) Jesus denounces
the scribes, xx. 45- 47 ; (9) the widow’s mite, xxi. 1-4; (10) the great discourse
concerning the destruction of the Temple and the gone of the end, xxi. 5-38.

VII. Tue Passion or JESUS (xxii., xxiii.) : (1) The treachery of Judas, xxii. 1-6 ;
(2) the last supper, xxii. 7-38; (3) the agony in the garden, xxii. 39-46; -
(4) the betrayal, xxii. 47, 48; (5) the arrest, xxii. 49-53 ; (6) the trial before the
Sanhedrim, the denials of Peter, xxii. 54-71; (7) the trial before Pilate, Jesus
sent to Herod, fruitless expedients of Pilate to secure the release of Jesus, the
sentence of death, xxiii. 1-25; (8) the journey to Calvary, xxii. 26-32; (9) the’
crucifixion, xxiii. 33-38 ; (10) the penitent thief, xxiii. 39-43 ; (11) the Saviour’s
death, xxiii. 44-49 ; (12) the burial, xxiii. 50-56.

VIII. Tue Resurrection AND ASCENSION (xxiv.): (1) The visit of the women
and of Peter to the tomb, xxiv. 1-12; (2) the appearance of Jesus to the
disciples at Emmaus, xxiv. 13-35; (3) the appearance to the assembled apostles,
xxiv, 36-43; (4) the last instructions of the risen Saviour, xxiv. 44-49; (5) the
ascension, xxiv. 50-53.


6


CHAPTER I.
CRITICAL NOTES.


Ver. 1. Many.—St. Luke cannot here refer exclusively to the works of the other evangelists.
He alludes to narratives drawn up by writers who derived their information from the
testimony of “eye-witnesses and ministers of the word.” The first and fourth Gospels,
written by “eye-witnesses and ministers of the word,” are necessarily excluded from this
category. This would only leave one Gospel, St. Mark’s, as a representative of the “many”
incomplete narratives. Neither can St. Luke refer to apocryphal gospels, which are of
a very much later date and of no historical value. ‘He had in view rather the very earliest
literary attempts, made by persons more or less authorised, at the beginning of the
apostolic age; and it may be reasonably concluded from this preface, that, during the
composition of his Gospel, he had before him many written documents and records, which,
when they seemed worthy of acceptation, he incorporated in its pages. The relative
coincidence between this and the two former Gospels is certainly most simply accounted
for by supposing them to have been freely drawn from common sources” (Lange). Taken
in hand.—J/.e. attempted; as ver. 3 implies, the attempts had not been very successful.
The narratives were fragmentary and ill-arranged, but not necessarily erroneous. Which
are most surely believed among us. R.V. “which have been fulfilled among us.’ A
rendering favoured by many critics, and which seems to yield a better sense, is, “which
have been full accredited,” or “established by sure evidence.”

Ver. 2. Even as they.—J.c. the apostles and original disciples. The English rendering
is at first a little misleading. From the beginning.—J.e. from the time Jesus began His
public ministry. To have associated with the Saviour from the time of the baptism of
John was a necessary qualification for apostleship (Acts i. 21, 22).

Ver. 3. It seemed good to me also.—‘ St. Luke by this classes himself with these zo)ol,
and shows that he intended no disparagement nor blame to them, and was going to construct
his own history from similar sources. The words that follow imply, however, a conscious
superiority of his own qualification for the work” (Alford). Having had perfect under-
standing, etc.—Rather, “having traced the course of all things accurately” (R.V.). From
the very first._Reference is made here to the contents of the first two chapters of the
Gospel. The fragmentary narratives in question dealt solely or chiefly with the official life
of the Lord. In order.—JZ.e. “to narrate the events consecutively in a connected series, and
methodical, but not necessarily chronological, order” (Wordsworth). Most excellent.—A
title formally applied to officials of high rank (Acts xxiii. 26, xxiv. 3, xxvi. 25). Theophilus.
—Probably like St. Luke himself, a Gentile convert, Nothing whatever is known of the
person here addressed. The name was a very common one. The idea that it is not a
proper name, but is to be taken as a designation of a believer—‘“ one who loves God,” or
“is loved by God”—is far-fetched and highly improbable. The official title—“ most
excellent ”—is a conclusive argument against it.

Ver. 4. Instructed.—Lit. “ catechised ”; reference being made to the oral teaching imparted
to candidates for baptism (catechumens). The section from i. 5 to ii. 52 is Hebraistic in style,
and hence many have supposed that the Evangelist here makes use of Aramaic documents.

Ver. 5. Herod, the king of Judea.—He also ruled over Galilee, Samaria, and the greater
part of Perea. He was the son of Antipater, an Edomite, and had been imposed upon the
Jewish nation by the Romans. The sovereignty of Herod and the enrolment under Czesar
Augustus (ii. 1) are indications of the fact that the sceptre had departed from Judah (Gen.
xlix. 10), and that the appearance of the Messiah might now be looked for. A certain priest.
—Not the high priest. Of the course of Abia.—The priests descended from Hleazar and
Ithamar, the sons of Aaron, were divided by David into twenty-four courses, each of which
ministered in the Temple for one week (1 Chron. xxiv. 1-19). Only four of the twenty-four
returned from exile in Babylon; these were again divided into twenty-four classes, and
the original names were assigned to them. This is alluded to in Neh. xiii, 30, Course,—
*Ednuepta is properly a daily service, but came to denote the class which served in the Temple


for a week.
7


CHAP, I. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





Ver. 6. Commandments and ordinances.—It seems arbitrary to distinguish between these.
as some do, and to understand them to denote moral and ceremonial precepts respectively,

Ver. 7.—Childlessness was regarded among the Jews as a great misfortune. It is several
times spoken of in the Old Testament as a punishment for sin (see ver. 25).

Ver. 9. His lot,—The various offices were distributed among the priests by lot: the most
honourable was this of burning incense, the act being a symbol of acceptable prayer rising to
God, no priest was allowed to perform it more than once. This day, therefore, would have
been a most memorable one in the life of Zacharias, even apart from the vision. The temple.
—I.e, the sanctuary, in which was the altar of incense, as distinguished from the outer
court, in which the people were praying.

Ver. 10. The time of incense.— Probably at the time of the morning sacrifice.

Ver. 11. An angel.—St. Luke both in this Gospel and in the Acts dwells frequently on
the ministry of angels. The right side.—A circumstance which seems to have no more
significance than as marking the definiteness of the vision.

Ver. 13. Thy prayer.—For a son; a prayer formerly offered, but to which he had now
ceased to expect an answer. John.—Jehochanan—“ the favour of Jehovah.”

Ver. 15. Shall drink neither wine nor strong drink.—He shall be a Nazarite (Num. vi. 3),
separate from the world to God like Samson and Samuel. Cf. Eph. v. 18 for a similar
contrast between the false excitement of drunkenness and spiritual fervour.

Ver. 17. Before Him.—J.e. before the Lord their God, manifest in the flesh. A very clear
testimony to the divinity of Christ. ‘The angel making no express mention of Christ in
this passage, but declaring John to be the usher or standard-bearer of the eternal God,
we learn from it the eternal divinity of Christ” (Calvin), Spirit.—Disposition. Power.—Zeal
and energy, or mighty endowments. There is one point of difference between Elijah and
John Baptist—John did no miracle.

Ver. 18.—‘‘Grotius here remarks on the difference in the cases of Abraham (Gen. xv. 8)
and Zacharias, as to the same action. The former did not ask for a sign from distrust in
the promise of God, but for confirmation of his faith; whereas the latter had no true faith
at all, and did not as the former turn from natural causes to the great First Cause. Hence,
though a sign was given to him, it was a judicial infliction likewise, for not believing;
though wisely ordained to be such as should fix the attention of the Jews on the promised
child” (Bloomfield).

Ver. 19. Gabriel—_ Name means “man of God”; appeared to Daniel (Dan. viii. 16,
ix. 21), and to the blessed Virgin (ver. 26). Only two angels are mentioned by name in
Scripture: Gabriel and Michael (Dan, ix. 21; Jude 9)—the one announces God's purposes,
the other executes God’s decrees. Stand in the presence of God.—J.e. in attendance, or
ministering to: a figure derived from the customs of Oriental courts. He says this to
accredit himself as a Divine messenger, and to assure Zacharias that the promise would
be performed. To shew glad tidings.—Or, ‘‘to preach the gospel.” St. Luke uses the
word more than twenty times in his Gospel and in the Acts, and it is common in the
hen writings; but it is only found elsewhere in the New Testament in 1 Pet. i. 12;

att. xi. 5.

Ver. 21. He tarried so long.—It was customary for the priest at the time of prayer not
to remain long in the holy place, for fear the people who were without might imagine that
any vengeance had been inflicted on him for some informality, as he was considered the
representative of the people.

Ver. 22. He beckoned unto them.—R.V. “he continued making signs unto them.”

Ver. 26. The sixth month.—J.e. not of the year: the reference is to the time indicated in
ver. 24. Nazareth.—St. Luke alone informs us that this village was the place of Mary’s
residence before the birth of Jesus; from St. Matthew’s narrative we might have inferred
that it was Bethlehem. The two Gospels are thus shown to be independent of each other,
though there is no contradiction between them. Nazareth was an obscure village; it is not
mentioned in the Old Testament, the Talmud, or the writings of Josephus, “This is
important in its bearing on the originality of our Lord’s teaching. In Nazareth the only
instruction He would receive would be in His own family and in the synagogue; there He
would not be under the influence of Grecian culture, nor that of Rabbinical teachers, with
whose whole spirit and system His own was most strongly contrasted” (Speaker's
Commentary).

Ver, 27, Espoused.—Rather, “betrothed,” “contracted”: a ceremony which among many
nations has always preceded marriage, and to which great importance has been attached.
House of David.— Mary’s own descent from David is nowhere asserted, though it seems to
be taken for granted in vers. 32, 69. The two genealogies are those of Joseph ; it is most
probable that Joseph and Mary were first cousins, so that her genealogy would be involved
in his. Mary,—The same name as Miriam.

Ver, 28. Highly favoured.—_One on whom grace or favour has been conferred. The Lord
is with thee.—Perhaps should be, “ The Lord be with thee”: a frequent form of salutation


8


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. car. t





in the Old Testament. Blessed art thou among women.—Omitted in the best critical
editions ; probably taken from ver. 42.

Ver. 31. Jesus.—This is the Greek form of the name Joshua, which means “the salvation
of Jehovah,” or ** Jehovah the Saviour.” In two passages of the New Testament the name
Jesus occurs when the reference is to Joshua: Acts vii. 45; Heb. iv. 8.

Ver. 32. Shall be called.—Shall be publicly recognised as what He really is, the Son of
God (2 Sam. vii. 14; Ps. ii, 7, Ixxxix. 27). The throne of His father David.—A clear
revelation of His Messiahship. The prophecy of the physical descent of the Messiah from
David is found in Ps. cxxxii. 11. ;

Ver. 33. There shall be no end.—A universal and supernatural kingdom. Cf. Isa. ix. 7 ;
Dan. vii. 14.

Ver, 34. How.—“ The question of Mary expresses, not unbelief, or even doubt, but innocent
surprise” (Speaker’s Commentary).

Ver. 36. Thy cousin Elisabeth.—Rather, “‘ kinswoman”; the exact nature of the relation-
ship is unknown. It does not follow from this that Mary was also of the tribe of Levi; as
intermarriage between members of different tribes was allowed, except in the case of
heiresses. Reference is made to the pregnancy of Elisabeth as an example of the power of
God’s creative word.

Ver. 37. Nothing.—Rather, “no word.” R.V. “no word of God shall be devoid of
power.”

’ Ver. 38. Be it unto me,—The words reveal not only obedient submission, but patient,
longing expectation.

Ver. 39. City of Judah.—The city is not named. Probably it was not Hebron, as a place
so well known would most likely have been named. The conjecture that Judah is a corrup-
tion of Juttah, a priestly city (Josh. xxi. 16), is unsupported by MS. authority. Probably
the place referred to was to the south of Jerusalem and to the west of the Dead Sea.

Ver. 41. The salutation of Mary.—J.e. her salutation as she entered, and not the salutation
addressed to her by the angel Gabriel, and now repeated to Elisabeth. The babe leaped in
her womb.—This movement of the unborn child was evidently regarded by the Evangelist
and by Elisabeth as something extraordinary ; she took it asa recognition of the unborn
Messiah on the part of His kinsman and forerunner.

Ver, 42. Spake out, ete.—R.V. “she lifted up her voice with a loud cry.” Blessed art thou
among women.—This might mean (1) Blessed [or highly privileged] art thou beyond all
other women, or (2) Thou art blessed [praised] by other women (cf. xi. 27). The former
rendering is the better of the two. The phrase used is indeed the Hebrew form of the
superlative, as in Jer. xlix. 15; Cant. i. 8.

Ver. 43. The mother of my Lord.—This appellation “my Lord” as applied to the unborn
babe is an acknowledgment of the Divine nature of Jesus, The title “mother of God”
which came into use in the fifth century, is open to obvious objections.

Ver. 45.—This may be rendered either, Blessed is she that believed, for, etc., or, ‘“ Blessed
is she that believed that there shall be,” etc. The former is preferable. Elisabeth no doubt
contrasts the faith of Mary with the unbelief of Zacharias.

Ver. 46.—It is interesting to observe the close resemblance between the Magnificat and the
song of Hannah in similar circumstances (1 Sam. ii. 1-10), Soul.—The natural life witb
all its affections and emotions, ;

Ver. 47. Spirit.—“ The diviner and loftier region of our being” (1 Thess. v. 22) (Fasrar).
My Saviour.—Not merely as the Deliverer from a state of degradation, but the Author of
the salvation, for which His people were looking.

Ver. 48. Low estate.—Lowly condition, not humility; there is a contrast between the
present humiliation and the former glories of the house of David.

Ver. 51.—The sense of the passage is, “He scatters their imaginations, frustrates their
schemes, and brings their counsels to nought ” (Bloomfield).

Ver. 54. He hath holpen.—TZe. helped: the word properly means to lay hold of anything
by the hand in order to support it when it is likely to fall.

Ver. 55. As He spake unto our fathers.—These words are parenthetical ; the sentence runs,
“Jn remembrance of His mercy to Abraham, and to his seed for ever” (cf. Mic. vii. 20;
Gal. iii. 16).

Ver. 56. "abont three months.—That is, until Elisabeth’s delivery or until shortly before it.
It seems probable that on Mary’s return to Nazareth the events narrated in Matt. i. 18-24
took place.

Ver. 58. Cousins.—Rather, “kinsfolk,’’ which was the original meaning of “cousins.”
How the Lord.—Rather, “that the Lord” (R.V.).

Ver. 59. On the eighth day.—The stated time for administering the rite of circumcision

Gen. xxi. 4; Luke ii. 21; Phil. iii. 5). The custom from the first was to give the name
to the child at the time of circumcision (cf. Gen. xxi. 3, 4); perhaps it originated in the
change of names from Abram to Abraham, and from Sarai to Sarah, at the institution of


9


CHAP. I. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,





the rite (Gen. xvii. 5, 15). They called him, —Lit. “ they were calling”; the imperfect tense
being used idiomatically to denote an unfulfilled attempt—‘they were for calling him.”
After the name of his father.—We do not find traces of this custom in the earlier history
of the Jews.

Ver, 62. Made signs.—This seems to imply that Zacharias was deaf as well as dumb.

Ver. 63. A writing table.—JZ.e. a tablet: a board smeared with wax, on which they wrote
with a style, a sharp instrument used for the purpose. Marvelled.—At the agreement of
the parents on the unusual name.

Ver. 66. And the hand of the Lord.—A better reading is, “for the hand of the Lord”
(R.V.): a remark of the Evangelist’s, which sums up the history of John’s childhood.

Ver. 68. Blessed._Hence this song of praise has been called the Benedictus.

Ver. 69. Horn of salvation.—Z.e. a powerful deliverer and helper. ‘The figure alludes to
the horns of beasts as used in defence of themselves or of their offspring.

Ver. 71. Saved from our enemies.—‘ Salvation from our enemies” (R.V.). A political
element was undoubtedly present in the anticipation of the deliverance which Christ was to
accomplish ; but we see from vers. 74, 75 that Zacharias prized this as a means to a higher
end, viz. a more complete consecration of the Jewish people to the service and worship of God.

Ver. 72. To perform the mercy.—Rather, “to shew mercy toward our fathers” (R.V.).

Ver. 73. The oath.—This is recorded in Gen, xxii. 16-18.

Ver. 75. Holiness and righteousness.—As generally interpreted, “holiness” denotes the
observance of all duties towards God; “righteousness,” the performance of all duties we
owe to men. Godet, however, regards “holiness” as negative, and “righteousness” as
positive—freedom from defilement, and actual goodness, respectively. All the days of our
life.—Rather, “all our days” (R.V.).

Ver. 76. To prepare His ways.—Cf, Isa. xl. 3; Mal. iii. 1. The same passages are combined
in the same way in Mark i. 2,

Ver. 78. Tender merey.—Lit. “bowels of mercy”; the phrase is often found in the
Scriptures (Prov. xii. 10; 2 Cor. vii. 15, etc.). The dayspring.—The word thus translated
is used by the LXX. for both “the dawn” (Jer. xxxi. 40), and for “the branch,” as a title
of the Messiah (Zech. iii. 8, etc.). The former of these is evidently the meaning of the
word here. On high,—These words, which convey the thought of the Messiah as coming
from heaven, are slightly inconsistent with the figure of the dawn. Hath visited us.—A
better reading is, ‘‘shall visit us” (R.V.).

Ver. 80. In spirit.—That is, in mind and wisdom as contrasted with bodily growth
Compare the description given of the childhood of Samuel (1 Sam. ii. 26), and of our Lord
(ii. 40, 62). In the deserts. The wilderness of Judah (see Matt. iii. 1), not far from his
home in the hill country: a rocky tract in the eastern part of Judea towards the Red Sea.
There is no evidence of John’s having come in contact with, or having been influenced by,
the Essenes—the mystical and ascetical sect of the Jews that lived in the same neighbour-
hood. ‘In every point John the Baptist was at variance with the teaching of the Hssenes,
They had given up Messianic hopes; while that which inspired his soul and ministry was
an anticipation of Christ’s coming, and the belief that he (John) was to prepare the way
before Him. The Essenes taught that matter was the seat of evil; while John, by his
emphatic preaching of the necessity of conversion, plainly showed that he considered that
evil lay in a depraved will. The Essenes withdrew from society, and gave themselves up
to mystical contemplation ; John at the appointed time casts himself boldly into the midst
of society, and henceforward to the very end of his life takes a most active and zealous
interest in his country’s affairs”. (Godet). The day of his shewing.— Ze. of his manifestation
or of his entrance upon his official life as the forerunner of Christ. The passage implies
that on receiving a definite signal from God he withdrew from retirement and began his
great work. We are not told what this signal was, nor how it was conveyed to him-


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH. —Verses 1—4.


The Relation of Believers to the Written Word.

I. Faith in Christ and personal devotion to Him are the sources of religious
life, and not merely faith in a book.—Many early disciples had very imperfect
knowledge of Jesus, and had to draw upon materials of information very much
inferior to those in our Gospels, and yet manifested a love to their Saviour which
puts us to shame, The Christian Church, indeed, existed for several centuries
before the canon of the New Testament was fully formed. In the age in which
St. Luke wrote, and long afterwards, multitudes became Christians who never
saw a oopy of any of the Gospels, but relied upon the teaching imparted by

10


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. I,
ee a ee


evangelists and preachers. This explains the words of St. Paul: “ How shall
they believe in Him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear
without a preacher?” (Rom. x. 14). Specimens of this oral teaching are to be
found in Acts x. 36-43, xiii. 23-41. The fact that there may be vital religion
of the most genuine kind in the cases of individuals who have not very abundant
knowledge is a very significant one. We need to remember, too, that there
may be abundant knowledge and very little of the religious spirit.

II. Devotion to Christ will lead to our treasuring up everything that we
can learn concerning Him—every incident recorded, and every word that fell
from His lips. It was this motive no doubt that led to the writing of the
multitudinous narratives to which St. Luke here refers. People naturally
desired that history of such immense spiritual importance should be committed
to writing, and not merely to the fickle memories of hearers. Very early in
the history of the Church Papias endeavoured to gather up all the fragments
of oral traditions of the facts of the Saviour’s life that were still extant. This
interest in everything that concerns Jesus accounts for the extraordinary
fascination which the apocryphal gospels have had, in spite of their worthless-
ness, for many, in every generation of Christian history, As one who has
studied them carefully says: “We know before we read them that they are
weak, silly, and profitless—that they are despicable monuments even of religious
fiction—yet still the secret conviction buoys us up, that, perchance, they may
contain a few traces of time-honoured traditions—some faint, feeble glimpses
of that blessed childhood, that pensive and secluded youth, over which, in
passive moments, we muse with such irrepressible longing to know more—such
deep, deep desideration. We think that, though so many have sought amidst
all this incoherent tissue for the thin golden thread of true history, and have
sought, as they themselves tell us, so utterly, so bitterly in vain—still our
eyes may descry it—that we may see and realise in our souls some few
unrecorded words or deeds of our Redeemer that others have failed to appre-
ciate ” (Zllicott).

Ill. Christian belief is not allied to credulity—St. Luke writes that
- Theophilus may know the certainty of those things in which he had been
instructed. The basis of fact is essential to faith ; and therefore every believer
is convinced that, in the New Testament records of the life and ministry of
Jesus Christ, he has to do with genuine history, and not with cunningly devised
fables. This conviction rests upon reasonable grounds. Two of the evangelists,
St. Matthew and St. John, were themselves eyewitnesses of events they describe,
and were apostles of the Lord. St. Mark is generally considered to have drawn
the greater part of his Gospel from the testimony of another eyewitness—
St. Peter. While St. Luke writes as one who had had access to the fullest and
most trustworthy materials for the biography he has drawn up, and plainly
informs us that he had carefully traced out matters from the very beginning, and
had scrupulously adhered to the principles that should guide a historian. The
Gospels, therefore, submit to the test by which ordinary historical works are
to be tried, and come scatheless out of the ordeal. The general tendency of
modern criticism is to assign them to a period well within the time when persons
were living who could have exposed their falsity, if they had not been records
of fact.


Vers. 1-4. The True Teacher.—St. Luke alone, of all the evangelists, writes
a personal introduction to his Gospel. The historical is helpful to the doctrinal,
and the record of the individual is as necessary as that of thecommunity. Truth
passes through one individual to mankind; the few teach the many. This
preface is useful as a distinction, an explanation, and a reflection. It distin-


1]


CHAP. I, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





guishes the competent from the inadequate instructors, it explains the immediate
design of the Gospel, and it reflects light on the high character of the writer.
It has been remarked that St. Luke, in this preface, makes no claim to Divine
inspiration. The best men do not, as a rule, claim inspiration in so many words,
but evince it in their record. The sacred writers do not parade the super-
natural; their words are bright with its lustre. True inspiration is self-
revealing, and does not need to speak its presence any more than the star its
light or the rose its fragrance. Men who talk much about inspiration often lack
it. This preface is full of literary grace. A graceful style has its moral uses.
St. Luke was a cultured penman; he could employ either the graceful or the
rugged. This preface would be helpful to the circulation of the Gospel. Gospels
do not disdain the advantage of secondary aids. Eternal realities make use
of transient assistances; little things may sometimes advance redemptive
missions. Small prefaces may herald the Christ. But a preface of high periods
must never fall into a commonplace record; tho kindled fire must glow more
intensely as it burns. Thus is it with the Gospel of St. Luke. Here we have
a pattern of the true teacher.

I. That he comes under the sacred spell of truth.—This preface informs us
that ‘many ” had taken in hand to write gospels, and that St. Luke was one
of a multitude who had commenced a like task. Why so many scribes? Were
they mainly animated by a curious desire to investigate the history of the Christ ?
was their intellectual activity stirred by the strange facts and doctrine they
had heard? did they wish to gain fame by literature? Nay! These early
writers had come under a mighty influence—the history of the Christ had
awakened them to enthusiasm. The truths concerning Him burned in their
souls, and longed for outlet through the pen. This is the true history of
theological literature. It is the outcome of a holy enthusiasm stirred by soul-
moving and unique facts. It is the outcome of a living and acting Christ.
No other literature is written under such a constraining energy. Science has no
such moving power. All truth has a charm for the sincere mind ; but the charm
of Christian truth is incomparable. Hence the number of written gospels.
The enthusiasm is numerically strong as well as intense. Enthusiasm in the’
teacher awakens enthusiasm in the scholar. Christ has set many pens in
motion. He has awakened innumerable teachers. Christianity is the best
teaching power in the earth; it inculeates the most powerful knowledge—a
knowledge mighty because based on facts. Men write about it only as they
come under its sacred charm. The writer ignorant of this spell will never send
a gospel to his fellows. The true teacher is not a common man, but a man
in whose soul truth has been revealed, who strives to write in a book the inner
vision he has seen and the subtle power he has felt. Only such a man can
record miracles with grace. Such men must write gospels.

II. That he is not discouraged by the partial failure of others.—Many had
taken in hand to write the holy record of the Christ. St. Luke seems to imply
that their efforts were praiseworthy; he indeed ranks himself amongst them ;
he gives no censure; he implies their honesty. Doubtless they were zealous
but inadequate scribes ; had their histories been satisfactory, he would not have
added another. Zeal is not competency. Evidently St. Luke does not include
the other inspired evangelists as amongst “the many.” ‘The many” are
indicated as outside the apostolic circle. He probably refers to writings which
have not reached our age. Many feel the impulse of sacred literature ; few only
realise its ideal. The multitude write inadequate gospels ; few write gospels that
live. The numerous writers named by St. Luke indicate the difficulty of sacred
authorship ; in that even a multitude of men cannot accomplish it with success.
That in which many fail must be hard to achieve. It indicates the inexhausti-


12


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. I.
a a eee ee


bility of religious truth; though many write about it, none can exhaust its
meaning. The moral instructor can never wear out his theme. But inadequate
attempts to unfold spiritual truth are not without value; each mind has its own
peculiar view of Christ, and adds something to the universal conception of Him,
But religious literature must of necessity be inadequate, because eye hath not
seen, ear hath not heard, pen cannot describe, these inscrutable things. The
artist cannot paint the sun; he cannot even look upon its glory. Imperfect
gospels must be superseded; they place truth in undue perspective; they may
destroy the due proportion of the faith. The imperfect gospel must perish—time
will destroy it; the true only can endure. But the true teacher is not dis-
couraged by the multitude of imperfect gospels about him; he summons all his
energy, uses them as far as he can, enlarges and transforms them, and conducts
his own to a complete and perfect end. His gospel is immortal.

Ill. That his aim is to impart permanency to truth.—The “ most excellent
Theophilus ” had been orally instructed and catechised in the things most surely
believed. Rumour of them had reached him, and doubtless he had also enjoyed
the privilege of definite verbal teaching. The traditions of the past had been
related to him. But tradition was transient and uncertain, liable to corruption
and decay. St. Luke was not content with the oral; he wanted “to write” to
Theophilus, and through him to all subsequent ages. The true teacher is
anxious alike for the adequate and permanent embodiment of the truth. He
wants to write it in books, engrave it on immortal souls, embody it in human
lives, and associate it with enduring institutions. He would rather commit it to
the care of the pen than to the guardianship of the voice. The written Gospels
keep the facts of Christianity alive in the universal mind. The true teacher
does all he can to make the truth vital and permanent, so that when he is gone
his gospel may survive and instruct. He builds a temple for the truth, that it
may no longer live in a frail tent.

IV. That he exercises the highest qualities-—This preface proves that
St. Luke gave his best abilities to the writing of his Gospel and to the instruction
of Theophilus. He was not content to put forth an inferior effort or to gain a
partial success ; he engaged his whole being in the task. 1. Diligence. He was
diligent in the use of existing documents; he did not want to be original where
originality would be injurious. He was diligent in research; he traced the
history point by point to its commencement. He did not indolently accept con-
clusions or facts without testing them. He was diligent in personal application
and effort, so that he added much to existing information about the Messiah.
The true teacher must be diligent; he must be given to original research and
fervent endeavour. His mental activity will have a stimulating effect upon
the student. 2. Method. St. Luke wrote “in order.” He was methodical in
the arrangement of his materials. Truth is served by arrangement. It is
worth arrangement. Arrangement aids the student. God is not the author
of confusion. Order is heaven’s first law. It is visible in the material
universe. The true teacher will have due regard to the advantage of
arrangement ; he will secure it by industry and skill. The order of the record
will inspire order of mental conception and of moral life. 3. Completeness.
St. Luke had “perfect understanding of all things.” He investigated facts
both small and great; he allowed nothing to escape his observation; all
were of meaning in his history. He was not a careless student. He was not
a partial thinker. He was not a prejudiced investigator. He was not a
sectarian scribe. He had nothing to conceal. All relating to the Christ
was interesting and important to him, and would bear the light of day. The
true teacher seeks to gather into his instruction all the facts relating to his
theme, and so doing he need not fear results; they are in the safe keeping of


13


CHAP. L HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





truth. Completeness of instruction will lead to fulness of moral conduct.
4, Fidelity. St. Luke does not write as an ‘‘eyewitness”; the facts he narrates
were delivered to him and investigated by him. ‘Testimony is the basis of
Christian truth; and in the first instance it is the testimony of eyewitnesses.
St. Luke does not claim an authority he did not possess ; he presents his authorship
in its true light. This gives antecedent credibility to his history : a man true to
himself will be true to his facts. He will not be likely to avail himself of seeming
advantage in a clandestine manner. He will be characterised by candour and
modesty. The true teacher does not claim more than his due, and will not assert
an independence that does not belong to him. His fidelity will awaken a love
of truth in his students. 5. Courtesy. St. Luke in his preface addresses
Theophilus in the most courteous manner, both as regards his character and
official position. Truth gains by the courtesy of its teacher. The true teacher
is never rude; he has in him the wisdom that is gentle and peaceable. The
historian of Christianity must approach men on their best side, and seek the
advantage of conciliatory address. Courtesy reacts in the favourable disposition
of the student.

V. That he understands the worth of the solitary mind.—St. Luke wrote his
Gospel for the instruction and certitude of the most excellent Theophilus; the
instruction and confirmation of one mind were to him an object of desire. He
wanted to strengthen faith : how many teachers seem to awaken doubt! 1. The
man was attractive in disposition. Theophilus was attractive in disposition.
He was friendly toward the Divine. He would be likely to receive with meek-
ness the engrafted word. The true teacher is drawn to the receptive scholar.
2. He was influential in rank. Not many mighty are called. The poor have
the gospel preached to them. But the true teacher is also anxious to bring
wealth and rank under the influence of the truth as itis in Jesus. Theophilus
will be a helpful disciple in the future. Christ Himself sought the single soul,
the woman of Samaria. The good Shepherd goes after one lost sheep until He
finds it. The true teacher appreciates the value of the individual, and will write
a gospel for the one mind. 3. He was representative in position. Though
St. Luke. wrote to one man, yet his Gospel is characterised by universality. The
Gospel is sure to travel beyond Theophilus to the world. It will touch all ages.
Providence takes our gospels to people we never addressed them to, to ages
beyond our own. In St. Luke’s Gospel the light dawns upon the Gentile world ;
the true teacher has words of hope for the outcast, for universal man. He
is not exclusive in temper. He delights in wise men from the East, in certain
Greeks, as well as in the privileged people. One mind is worth more than a
world. The Bible is more concerned about souls than suns and material systems.
—Exell,


' SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 1—4.


Vers. 1-4. The Prologue-——In the
Muratorian fragment it is expressly
said of Luke that he had not himself
seen the Lord in the flesh, but, having


under contribution, that he may present
Theophilus with a reliable history.—
McCheyne Edgar.


drawn his information from as high a
source as possible, began his narrative
with the birth of John. In his pro-
logue we see the witness, as it were,
collecting the materials, and laying the
productions of his predecessors, as well
as the knowledge of his companions,


14


Ver. 1. “ Many have taken in hand.”
—We have here an incidental notice
of the sensation created in human
society by the mission and work of
Jesus Christ. Those who had seen
and heard Him could not but be
persuaded that His appearance upon


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,


CHAP. I.


—_————— eee


earth was the greatest event in history,
and those to whom they spoke of Him
sould scarcely fail to form the same
opinion. A’ the first generation of
believers who had had personal know-
ledge of the Saviour began to pass
away, oral statements concerning His
teaching and mighty deeds would
naturally be superseded by written
documents of a more or less imperfect
character. Fragmentary knowledge
would lead to the writing and circula-
tion of defective narratives of the life
of the Saviour ; and no doubt, in some
cases, legendary matter would find its
way into the record. There was an
opening, therefore, for the work of a
regular historian like St. Luke, who
would by personal labours fill up gaps
in the narrative of the life of the
Founder of Christianity, and reject all
such matter as was from its apocry-
phal character unworthy of a place
in it. The greatness of the task—
“to draw up a narrative concerning
those matters which have been fulfilled
among us” (R.V.), or an adequate
account of the life of Jesus—explains
why so many had failed in the endea-
vour. The life of any ordinary man,
who has been successful in accomplish-
ing a certain limited piece of work,
may with care be satisfactorily written ;
but that of those who have exercised
wide and deep influence upon the
society in which they have lived can
only be presented in an imperfect and
one-sided manner. In many instances
the biography utterly fails to explain
to a succeeding generation the extra-
ordinary personal influence exercised
by the subject of it upon those who
came in contact with him. A con-
sideration of this fact convinces us
of the enormous, if not insuperable,
difficulties in the way of writing the
life of One who was Son of God as well
as Son of man. Two reasons for the
failure that marked the tentative
biographies to which St. Luke here
alludes may be noted: (1) the incom-
pleteness of the historical material at
the command of the authors; and (2)
want of adequate spiritual sympathy


betwen them and Him of whom they
wrote. Hase felicitously compares
these early gospels which have now
passed into oblivion with the fossil
plants which have disappeared to give
place to existing vegetation.


“Among us.”—Whether we take
the latter clause of the verse to mean
“the events which have been fulfilled,”
or “the matters which are most surely
believed,” the words ‘‘among us” imply
that St. Luke is writing as a sacred,
and not as a secular, historian. The
readers whom he has in view are those
who are firmly convinced that the
kingdom of God has been established
on earth by the lifeand work of Jesus,
the Son of God. It is our being
convinced of this fact by the living
evidence of those who are believers in
Christ, and by the existence of His
Church in the world, that will enable
us to read the Gospels themselves so
as to understand them aright, and to
receive the testimony concerning Him
that they have to give. Faith in Him
as the Saviour will then enable us
to understand the significance of His
teaching and work.


Ver. 2. ‘* Hyewitnesses and ministers
of the word.” —Though St. Luke hints at
the unsatisfactory results of these early
attempts to write the life of Jesus, he
casts no slur upon the motives which
had influenced the authors of them—
indeed, he implies that these narratives
were in general based upon the oral
testimony of persons who had known
Jesus. The errors that characterised
them were, therefore, more likely to be
those arising from defective knowledge
than from intentional perversion of
fact. The sources from which St. Luke
drew his Gospel were threefold: (1) the
statements of “eyewitnesses and mini-
sters of the word”; (2) the results of
the inquiries which he himself had
made into events in the life of Christ,
which were not usually contained in oral
preaching or not prominent in it ; and
(3) no doubt material in the writings
to which he refers which was suitable


15


<


CHAP. I.


for his purpose. Examples of brief
narratives of the life of Jesus as given
in oral teaching are to be found in
Acts x. 36-43, xiii. 23-38. Both of
these start from the period of John’s
preaching and baptism. St. Luke
mentions two qualifications which gave
weight to the testimony of apostles
and original disciples: (1) they were
eyewitnesses of the life of the Saviour
from the beginning of His public
ministry; and (2) they had become,
after His ascension, ministers of the
word, 7.e. they had given themselves
up to the work of winning disciples
by witnessing to the things which they
had seen and heard. This second quali-
fication was equally necessary with
the first; for there were eyewitnesses
who were enemies of the word—the pre-
judices of scribes, Pharisees, and elders
of the Jews, who rejected Jesus, would
render it impossible for them to give
trustworthy information concerning
Him. The kind of“ tradition ” St. Luke
has in view is that of 1 Johni. 1: ‘That
which was from the beginning, which
we have heard, which we have looked
upon, and our hands have handled, of
the Word of life . . . that which we
have seen and heard declare we unto
you.” Among those who were both
eyewitnesses and disciples from whom
the Evangelist obtained information
were the twelve, the seventy, the
Virgin Mary, Lazarus of Bethany and
his sisters Martha and Mary, Mary
Magdalene, etc. “It is because the
Gospels are so primitive and authentic
that they bring before us so perfectly,
not some visionary ideal that grew up
in the mind and soul of Christendom,
not some legend of a glorified and
saintly figure, but the very picture and
image of Jesus Christ as He lived
among men,”


Ver. 3. “It seemed good to me also.”
—An interesting light is here thrown
incidentally on the nature of the pro-
cess of inspiration. The Evangelist
speaks of the composition of the Gospel
as having been a work which he felt
at full liberty to undertake or not.


16


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,


He evidently did not regard himself
as having been a passive machine
moved by the Holy Spirit, but as a
man attracted to write upon a subject
of absorbing interest, concerning which
he was able to give fuller information
than had as yet appeared. The method
he describes himself as following, too,
is that adopted by every conscientious
and painstaking historian or bio-
grapher. Yet no one can doubt that
his work rightly occupies a place in
inspired, as distinguished from ordi-
nary, literature. His Gospel has been
one of the great means employed by
the Holy Spirit for the regeneration
of mankind; and all who accept the
Christian revelation are firmly con-
vinced that it was composed under the
influence of inspiration, however un-
conscious the author himself may have
been of the fact. In this co-operation
of the Divine and the human, we have
a proof that the Divine sovereignty is
exercised without infringement upon
the freedom of our will.


“ Having traced the course of all
things,” etc. (R.V.).—‘ St. Luke seems
to compare himself to a traveller who
endeavours to ascend to the very source
of a river in order to trace it down
again all along its course, and to make
a full survey of its banks” (Godet).
If we might employ the same metaphor,
and apply it to the two historical
works which we owe to the pen of this
Evangelist—the Gospel and the Acts
of the Apostles—we could describe
him as following the stream of God’s
mercy as revealed in Christ, from the
source in the hills of Nazareth down
through many lands until it reaches
Rome, the centre of the world’s life,
from whence its healing waters are
to flow again to the nations under its
rule.


“All things.” —St. Luke’s purpose
seems to be to omit nothing worthy
of notice or of a place in the history.
St. John, on the other hand, admits
that he has in his Gospel merely
selected some incidents from a life


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP, I.





of unparalleled activity : ‘‘ Many other
signs truly did Jesus in the presence
of His disciples, which are not written
in this bok: but these are written
that ye might believe that Jesus is
the Christ, the Son of God; and that
believing ye might have life through
His name” (xx. 30, 31). And, again,
“« And there are also many other things
which Jesus did, the which, if they
should be written every one, I suppose
that even the world itself could not
contain the books that should be
written ” (xxi. 25).


“The very first.”—This is an earlier
starting-point than “the beginning”
of ver. 2. He goes back fully thirty
years before the Baptist’s preaching,
and begins with the announcement by
the angel of the birth of him who was
to be the forerunner of the Christ.
Some idea of the extent to which St.
Luke has supplied us with information
omitted by the first and second evan-
gelists may be formed from a considera-
tion of the fact that out of the
thirteen hundred and ten verses con-


tained in the first three Gospels, five °


hundred and forty-one are peculiar to
him. So that he has actually given
us more than one-third of the history
which we possess of the words and
sayings of Jesus.


“ Most excellent Theophilus.”—From
this form of address, used by an in-
spired writer, may be fairly deduced
the lawfulness and propriety, generally
speaking, of giving to men the ordinary
titles of respect. They err who think
that there is any propriety or religion
in assuming a singularity in such
things, or in sturdily refusing what
are usually considered marks of civility
and respect. It is unworthy at once
of the Christian and of the man to be
guilty of hollow hypocrisy or fawning
servility ; but it is both dutiful and
adorning to be courteous, and to give
honour to whom honour is due.—
Foote.


The Orderliness of Gospel Scripture.—


“To write unto thee in order.” St.
Luke hoped not only to write what
was true, but to write it in order.
He knew the importance of arrange-
ment, not least in the things of God.
“God is not a God of confusion,” St.
Paul says; and the saying has many
applications besides the one which he
made of it. It has an important
application to God’s revelations. The
Bible was many books before it was
one. The whole volume of the two
Testaments was some fifteen hundred
years or more in writing ;:and it was
written in order, not casually, and not
promiscuously, as regards the Divine
Author. There was method, there was
system, there was sequence and con-
sequence, in the writing of the Bible.
We can trace, too, something of that
orderliness of writing which the text
speaks of in the acknowledged diversity
amongst the three portions of our New
Testament. 1. The writings of St.
Paul. 2. The first three Gospels.
3. The writings of St. John. Does
God write in order, or does “‘ confusion ”
bewray the no-god, when He bids St.
Paul first write down the Saviour in
glory—then the three tell us what He
was on earth, and then the beloved
apostle, survivor of the eleven, spec-
tator of a new age with its troublous


' fortunes, build the little bridge which


shall knit together the two, and say,
“ He that ascended is the same also
that descended: I am He that liveth,
and I was dead; and, behold, I am
alive for evermore” ?—Vaughan.


Ver. 4. Hdification.—It is interesting
to notice that St. Luke dedicates his
Gospel to a fellow-Christian, to be used
by him for edification—that he might
know the certainty of those things in
which he had been instructed. One
might have expected that his purpose
would have been to appeal in it to
those who were still ignorant of Chris-
tian truth, in order to convince them
of the reality of those things about
which he wrote. But his actual pro-
cedure is in perfect harmony with the
general character of Holy Scripture.


17


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,





The word of God is so written as to
respond only to those who come to
it seeking salvation, or who desire
to be established and confirmed in the
faith they hold, or to make additional
attainments in knowledge with a view
to a more perfect and worthy service
of God. It is a sealed book to those
who do not feel the necessity of salva-
tion, and who do not hunger and thirst
after righteousness. In it, as in the
teaching of Jesus, which is its choicest
part, there are things which are hidden
from the wise and prudent, but which
babes can read and understand. For
its treasures are not the prize won by
force of intellect, but the gift of Heaven
to the loving, believing heart.


The Believer’s Faith confirmed.—We
know nothing of Theophilus beyond
the facts that he was one who had
received certain elementary instruction
in the articles of the Christian faith,
and that St. Luke wrote his Gospel with
the purpose of giving him firm assur-
ance of the truth of the great principles
and beliefs on which that faith was
founded. In one respect, indeed, he
was in different circumstances from
those in which we find ourselves: his
knowledge of religious truth was not
derived from a written revelation, but
from the oral teaching of apostles and
disciples who had known Christ, or of
their immediate successors. We can
scarcely make a mistake in saying
that, until he received this Gospel from
the hands of St. Luke, he had never
seen a page of any of the books which
now make up the New Testament.
But apart from this accidental differ-


ence of outward circumstances, his
experience as a believer was like that
of all who, since his time, have em-
braced the Christian religion. His
religious life was based upon the
following beliefs, in which he had been
instructed : 1. That God is absolutely
holy, and requires holiness in all whom
He has made capable of consciously
serving Him. 2. That he himself was
guilty and depraved, and consequently
exposed to the Divine anger against
sin, and that he could not by any
efforts of his own atone for the evil
he had done, nor attain to that holiness
which God requires. 3. That Jesus
Christ, a perfectly holy being, who was
Son of God and Son of man, had
made atonement for sin. 4. That in
the name of Christ free pardon of sin,
and the gift of everlasting life, were
now offered to all men, to be received
by faith in Him. All these beliefs
were fully confirmed by the history St.
Luke had to give of the life and teach-
ing of Christ. All through this Gospel
Christ claims and exercises the power
of forgiving sin ; and the record of the
mercy shown to the penitent woman,
to those who had lived lives like that
of the prodigal son, and to the dying
robber, abundantly proved that no
degree of human guilt need lead to
despair of forgiveness. (The incidents
referred to, and the parable, are pecu-
liar to this Gospel.) We cannot doubt
but that Theophilus derived from his
reading of this Gospel a deeper assur-
ance of the love of God revealed to
mankind in Christ Jesus than he had
had before.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH—Verses 5—25.


Human Life at its best.—We see here—
I. Human life at its best.—l. A devout and blameless course of conduct.


2. Honourable descent.


3. Sacred calling. 4, The enjoyment of high privilege


—that of being chosen to offer the incense which symbolised the prayers of the


nation.


II. Yet at its best human life is compassed about with sorrows and weak-
nesses.—Sorrows: 1. The heart of the man is troubled by his own personal
affliction, especially as childlessness was regarded in Israel as an indication of


18


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,


Divine displeasure.


CHAP. I.


2. The heart of the priest could not but be wrung by the


sinful state of the nation of whom he was the representative before God.
Weaknesses: 1. He is overcome by fear at the sight of a messenger from the


God whom he served so zealously.


2. He is slow of heart to believe the promise


made to him, though it was but the fulfilment of his own prayers.
III. The Divine compassion.—1. Towards this lonely pair in filling their


hearts with joy and gladness.


punishment for unbelief.


2. Towards the nation in sending one who would
prepare them to receive their Redeemer.


3. In inflicting merely a transitory


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 5—25.


Ver. 5. ‘A certain priest.”— One of
the special purposes of St. Luke’s Gospel
is to display the sacerdotal office and
sacrificial efficacy of Christ, the true
priest, and victim of the whole human
race; and he aptly begins his Gospel
by showing that the Levitical priest-
hood and sacrifices were imperfect and
transitory, but had a sacred purpose
as preparatory and ministerial to the
priesthood and sacrifice of Christ.—
Wordsworth.


“In the days of Herod.” —It makes
a great deal of difference in what times
and amid what circumstances and in-
fluences a man lives. In godly days
it is not remarkable that one should
live righteously ; but when the prevail-
ing spirit is unrighteous, the life that
is holy and devout shines with rare
splendour, like a lamp in the darkness.
Such were the times and the spirit of
“the days of Herod,” and such were
the lives of the blameless old pair here
mentioned. Amid almost universal
corruption, they lived in piety and godly
simplicity. The lesson is, that it is not
ne:essary for us to be like other people,
if other people are not what they ought
to be. The darker the night of sin
about us, the clearer should be the
light that streams from our life and
conduct.—Miller.


Ver. 6. A Definition of a Holy Charac-
ter and Life.—1. Piety towards God : it
is a realand not an apparent goodness,
for it is an omniscient Judge who here
pronounces sentence of approval: it is
manifested in a habitual obedience to all


the various commandments and ordin-
ances of God (walking describes habitual
action). 2. Good repute with men:
irreproachable or blameless. Both ele-
ments are essential to a perfect charac-
ter, and itis to be noted that righteous-
ness towards God will always, where
it is genuine, include blamelessness
towards men. A man may win the
approval of his fellows, and yet be
neglectful of his duties towards God ;
but no one can be approved of God, and
yet fail to deserve the respect of all
who know him.


“ Both  righteous.’—The _ peaceful,
pious home of the old priest is beauti-
fully outlined. Somewhere in the hill
country, in quiet seclusion, the priestly
pair lived in cheerful godliness, and
their content marred only by the
absence of child voices in their quiet
house. They presented a lovely example
of Old Testament piety in a time of de-
clension. Inwardly, they were “ righ-
teous before God”; outwardly, their
lives were blamelessly conformed to His
“ commandments and ordinances,” not
in absolute sinless perfection, but in the
true spirit of Old Testament religion.
Earth shows no fairer sight than where
husband and wife dwell as heirs to-
gether of the grace of life and fellow-
helpers to the truth. The salt of a
nation is in its pious home life.—
Maclaren.


“ Before God.”—It is not enough to
have human commendation. How do
we stand before God? How does our
life appear to Him? No matter how


19


CHAP. I,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





men praise and commend, if as God sees
us weare wrong. Weare in reality just
what we are “before God ”—nothing
less, nothing more. The question al-
ways to be asked is, “ What will God
think of this ?”—WMiller.


A Righteous Life.—Zacharias is the
first man of whom the Gospels tell us.
He was “righteous before God.” This
was shown by—1. His blameless life.
2. His faithful service as God’s priest.
3. His prayerful spirit. 4. His heart-
felt praise.


Ver. 8. “ While he executed the priest's
office." —How solemnly, how divinely,
the holy drama of a new revelation
opens! An angel from heaven, a man
on earth,—these are invariably the
two chief characters in the sacred
story; heaven acting upon earth, man
brought into contact with the beings
of the invisible world. On one hand,
an Israelite,—one of the peculiar people
to whom the promises belong; more,
one of its priests appointed to plead
for God to man, and for man to God ;
one specially chosen out of the chosen
nation. On the other, “I, Gabriel,
that stand before the presence of God.”
The scene is the most sacred spot of
the whole earth, of the Land of Promise,
of the city of the great King—namely,
the sanctuary of God’s house ; and here,
in the most holy retirement, an an-
nouncement is made, a dialogue held
between the two by the altar of in-
cense—type of the worship of the
saints—in the hour of public prayer,
while Israel is imploring the blessing
of Jehovah. Could the opening of the
Divine New Testament drama be more
solemn, more appropriate, more Israel-
itish, more sacred, either as regards
person, place, time, or action ?—
Pfenninger.


Ver. 10. “ At the time of incense.”—
The offering of incense was simulta-
neous with the prayer of the people
assembled in the court of the Temple.
There was a close relation between
these two actions. The one was sym-


20


bolical, ideal, and therefore perfectly
holy in its character: the real prayer
offered by the people was of necessity
imperfect and tainted by sin. The
former covered the latter with its
holiness: the latter communicated to
the former reality and life. The one
was, therefore, complementary to the
other.—CGodet.


Vers. 11-79. The Last Messianic Pro-
phecies.—The last of the long series
of prophecies that foreannounced the
Redeemer were in their substance and
form unlike any that had preceded,
thus marking the advent of a new
order of things. St. Luke presents
them to us in three most vivid groups,
ascending in their gradation of tribute
offered to the dignity of Christ.

J. An angel breaks the silence of
ages by predicting the birth of the
forerunner, but in such a manner
as to make the coming of the Lord
Himself the burden of his prophecy
(vers. 11-20).

II. Then follows the central an-
nouncement by an angel to the virgin
mother, in which the supremacy of
the Saviour’s personal dignity and
kingly rule is testified in terms that
are never surpassed in Holy Scripture
(vers. 26-38).

III. Finally, the Holy Ghost Him-
self, taking the angel’s place, pro-
claims by Zacharias, the last of the
prophets, the future and eternal do-
minion of the Christ (vers. 67-79).—
Pope.


Ver. 11. “An angel.”.—The third
Gospel is throughout a gospel of the
holy angels, i.e. we read more of their
ministry in connection with Jesus than
elsewhere. This is oes marked
at the outset (i. 11-26, 35; ii. 9, 10-16).
Our most complete revelations, whether
of the functions of the holy angels to-
wards the Saviour during His life-walk
on earth, or of their relation to us, are
to be found in St. Luke. His narra-
tive shows us in detail the living and
continuous realisation of the most
beautiful vision of the Hebrew story—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. I.


eee


“the angels of God ascending and
descending upon the Son of man,”—
Alexander.

?

“On the right side of the altar.”—
The Temple from which the prayers
of the people ascended to God is the
place where the first sign is given of
the coming fulfilment of the national
desire and hope of a Deliverer: here
in the presence and message of the
angel the first rays of light begin to
break through the darkness.


Ver. 12. “ He was troubled.”—Yet
the angel had come on an errand of
love. All through the Bible we find
‘that people were afraid of God’s angels.
Their very glory startled and terrified
those to whom they appeared. It is
ofttimes the same with us. When
God’s messengers come to us on errands
of grace and peace we are terrified, as
if they were messengers of wrath. The
things which we call trials and ad-
versities are really God’s angels, though
they seem terrible to us; and if we
will only quiet our hearts and wait,
we shall find that they are messengers
from heaven, and that they have
brought blessings to us from God.—
Miller.


“ Fear fell upon him.”—He that had
wont to live and serve in presence of
the Master was now astonished at the
presence of the servant. So much
difference is there betwixt our faith
and our senses, that the apprehension
of the presence of the God of spirits
_ by faith goes down sweetly with us,
whereas the sensible apprehension of
an angel dismays us. Holy Zachary,
that had wont to live by faith, thought
he should die when his sense began to
be set on work. It was the weakness
of him that served at the altar with-
out horror to be daunted with the face
of his fellow-servant.— Hall.


Ver. 13. “ Fear not.”—The first re-
corded words are thus those that banish
fear—an appropriate prelude to the
gospel of peace. St. Luke’s last sen-


tence tells of the apostle’s “ blessing and
praising God” (xxiv. 53).


Soothing Words.—The angel’s mes-
sage begins, as heaven’s messages to
devout souls ever do, with soothing
words—the very signature of Divine
appearances both in Old and New Tes-
taments. It is like a mother’s whisper
to a terrified child, and is made still
more caressing and assuring by the use
of the name ‘‘ Zacharias,” and by the
assurance that his prayer is heard.
Note how the names of the whole fu-
ture family are in this verse, as token
of the intimate and loving knowledge
which God has of each.—WMaclaren.


“ Thy wife Elisabeth shall bear thee a
son.” —W hat other home in Israel could
have been the training-ground of the
prophet? What more fitting nursery
for a personal force, inspired by and
steeped in the Scriptures, unindebted
and indeed hostile to contemporary
urban authority and petrified tradi-
tionalism? The prophet did not owe
all his originality and unique moral
force to himself. His character owed
its primary development to the home
of a devout priest, blessed by an imme-
diate Divine revelation, and living in
the light of a recognised Divine pur
pose.— Vallings.


Prayer granted at last.— ‘Thy
prayer is heard.” That this prayer
was not one which Zacharias had
offered that day is quite evident; for
when the angel told him that it was
to be granted to him he was surprised,
and doubted as to the possibility of its
being granted. It was, therefore, a
prayer which he had offered years
before, and which now perhaps he had
forgotten, until the angel brought it
to his remembrance. At any rate, for
some time, perhaps for a long time
past, he had given up all thoughts of
receiving an answer. Yet though he
may have forgotten it, God had it in
remembrance. In a general way we
all believe and admit that the omnis-
cient God is acquainted with all our


21


CHAP. I.


thoughts, and with the circumstances
of our lives; but we can scarcely help
being surprised at every new proof we
receive of the fact that God knows our
individual desires, and the trials and
difficulties of our individual lot. Such
wonderful acquaintance and sympathy
with the sorrow that lay beneath the
surface of Zacharias’ life is now shown
in the message sent to him. From it
he might learn, and we may learn,
three great lessons :—

I. That delay is not necessarily
refusal.—There may be delay in
answering prayer, which simply means
that God is postponing, and not refus-
ing, the gift of those things which we
ask from Him. We should, indeed, be
prepared for this; but in our actual
experience we are often surprised and
perplexed by it. The spiritual blessings
of pardon and of help in time of need
are, we believe, instantly given. God
would no more delay giving them than
a parent would delay giving food to his
hungry child. But other things—things
which we believe would be for our
present advantage and comfort—His
higher wisdom may lead Him to with-
hold, or to delay giving.

II. That God is not strict to punish
our loss of faith.—Our ceasing to offer
the prayer which has not been granted,
and even our becoming incredulous as
to the possibility of receiving it, do not
necessarily preclude our getting the

enefit we desire. God does, indeed,
require us to manifest faith in order
that we may receive; but He is merci-
ful towards our spiritual infirmities,
and is not strict to withhold what we
may have become unworthy to receive.
The strong faith we once had may
receive its reward—a reward which
rebukes the unbelief into which we
may have fallen, and arouses us out
of it.

III. That the purpose of the delay
may have been to give a fuller and
more satisfying answer to our prayer.
—Thus was it in the case of Zacharias.
The son for whose birth he had longed
was predestined to be the forerunner
of Christ. It was only now, when the


an
Med


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


angel appeared to him, that the fulness
of time was drawing near for the incar-
nation of the Son of God, and with this
great event the birth of John the
Baptist was associated in the counsels
of God. Zacharias and Elisabeth were
not only blessed with a son, but with
a son who was to be the herald of the
great King. In this way both the
prayer which Zacharias offered this
day on behalf to the people that God
would hasten the coming of the Messiah,
and that which in former years he had
offered for himself, were simultaneously
granted: both found their fulfilment
in what was communicated by the
angel. St. Luke elsewhere, in the
parables of the selfish neighbour and
of the unjust judge, commends impor-
tunate prayer, as having power to
prevail with God. The example of the
fulfilment of Zacharias’ prayer is full
of encouragement for those who cannot,
by reason of spiritual infirmity, mani-
fest heroic faith, and take the gate of
heaven by storm.


Ver. 15. “ Great in the sight of the
Lord.” —How true this prediction is
Christ’s eulogium witnesses, who de-
clared that no greater had been born
of women. Greatness, prophesied by
an angel, and attested by Jesus, is
greatness indeed. Greatness ‘in the
sight of the Lord” is measured by very
different standards from the world’s.
It does not le in the qualities that
make the thinker, the artist, or the poet,
but such as make the prophet and the
saint. The true ambition is to be great
after this pattern—great in dauntless
witness for God, in self-suppression, in
yearning towards the Christ, in point-
ing to Him, and in lowly contentment
to fade in His light, and decrease that
He may increase.—Maclaren.


“Great in the sight of the Lord.”—
The annunciation of the forerunner by
an angel, an honour which he shares
with other elect servants of God’s will,
derived all its meaning from the glory
of the Being whose herald he was.
The greatest of the children of men


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. I.


ee eee.


was raised up in this preternatural
way, and amidst these circumstantials
of dignity, not for His own sake, but
that His whéle life and mission might
proclaim to Israel, “Thy King
cometh ! ”— Pope.


“Great in the sight of the Lord.”—
Truly great, then; for just what a
man is in God’s eyes that is he indeed,
neither more nor less. A silent hint
also that no earthly greatness is to
be expected ; for that which is highly
esteemed before men is an abomination
in the sight of the Lord.— Lange.


“He shall drink neither wine nor
strong drink.” —The stiongly marked
features in the habits of the Nazarite
should be viewed as typically teaching
that not only the ministers, but all the
people of God, should abstain from sin,
be temperate in all things, be superior
to earthly pleasures and cares, and be
altogether a peculiar people, distin-
guished from men of the world.—
Foote.


“ Filled with the Holy Ghost, even from
his mother’s womb.”—As the more
plentiful influence of the Spirit was
in John an extraordinary gift of God,
it ought to be observed that the Spirit
is not bestowed on all from their very
infancy, but only when it pleases God.
John bore from the womb a token of
future rank. Saul, while tending the
herd, remained long without any mark
of royalty, and when at length chosen
to be king was suddenly turned into
another man (1 Sam. x. 6). Let us
learn from this example that, from the
earliest infancy to the latest old age,
the operation of the Spirit in men is
free.—Calvin.


Ver. 16. “ Many shall he turn to the
Lord their God.”—The word of John was
one of preparation and turning men’s
hearts towards God. It was a concen-
tration of the spirit of the law, whose
office it was to convince of sin, and he
eminently represented the law and the
prophets in their work of preparing
the way for Christ.—A/ford.


Ver. 17. “The spirit and power of
Elias.”-—I.e. after the model of that
distinguished reformer, and with like
success in turning hearts. “Strikingly,
indeed, did John resemble Elias : both
fell on evil times, both witnessed fear-
lessly for God ; neither was much seen,
save in the direct exercise of their
ministry; both were at the head of
schools of disciples; the result of the
ministry of both might be expressed in
the same terms —‘ many of the children
of Israel did they turn to the Lord
their God’” (Brown).


“ Turn the hearts of the fathers to the
children.”—The true sense of these
words seems to me to be indicated by
other prophetic passages, such as Isa.
xxix, 22, “Jacob shall not now be
ashamed, neither shall his face now
wax pale, when he seeth his children
[become] the work of Mine hands” ;
Ixii. 16, “Though Abraham be igno-
rant of us, and Israel acknowledge us
not, thou, O Lord, art our father.”
Abraham and Jacob, in the place of
their rest, blushed at the sight of their
guilty descendants, and turned away
their faces from them; but now they
will return with satisfaction towards
them, in consequence of the change
produced by the ministry of John.
The words of Jesus, ‘‘ Your father
Abraham rejoiced to see My day, and
he saw it, and was glad” (John viii.
56), prove that there is some reality
beneath these poetic images. In this
sense we can easily explain the modi-
fication introduced into the latter part
of the passage: the children who return
to their fathers are the Jews of the
time of the Messiah—the children of
the obedient, who return to the wisdom
of the holy patriarchs.—Godet.


“ And the disobedient to the wisdom
of the just.”—The very substitution of
this clause for the original of Malachi,
“and the hearts of the children to
their fathers,” seems suggestive at
least of the connection between filial
estrangement and a general ungodli-
ness—between a heart undutiful and


23


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





a heart irreverent, a son alienated
from his father and a man alienated
from his God. “He shall turn the
hearts of the children to their fathers”
is, in other words, “he shall turn the
disobedient to the wisdom of the just,”
It is remarkable, in this connection,
that we do not find any express men-
tion, in the Baptist’s ministry, of a
special appeal to parents and children,
such as he addressed to the soldiers,
the publicans, the Pharisees, or the
people at large. Parental and filial
discord was not so much one single
example, it was a general description
rather, of the dislocation and disorgan-
isation of society which the Baptist was
sent to remonstrate with and to heal.—
Vaughan.


Vers. 19, 20. “J am Gabried ...
thou shalt be mute.’—In comparison
with the angels man in his present
state seems but a feeble creature. He
is subject for the time being to their
control, and they rule over him. In
all their communications with men
they show that they mean to be
believed and obeyed. They are not to
be trifled with, any more than physical
nature itself, and cannot leave the
authoritative station in which the
eternal Word has ranged them.—
Mason.


Ver. 20. “ Thow believest not.”—In
the words actually employed by Zacha-
rias, and the blessed Virgin Mary,
respectively (see ver. 34), there does not
seem to be much difference; but the
speakers were very diversely affected.


While hers was the hesitation of faith
(see ver. 45), which timidly asked for
explanation, his was the reluctance of
unbelief, which required a sign. Hence
her doubt was solved, his punished.—
Burgon.


Ver. 22. “Remained speechless.” —
Origen, Ambrose, and Isidore see in
the speechless priest vainly endeavour-
ing to bless the people a fine image of
the law reduced to silence before the
first announcement of the gospel.—
Farrar.


“ Beckoned unto them.”—The sign
given to Zacharias was one that both
chastised and humbled him. His in-
firmity becomes a sign to him of the
power of God. In like manner Jacob
was lame after he had wrestled with
the angel and prevailed : Saul was blind
after he had been overcome by the
Lord Jesus on the way to Damascus
(vers. 24, 25).


Ver. 24. “ Hid herself.” —The reason
for Elisabeth’s seclusion is doubtless
that given by Godet. From the fifth
month the fact of a woman’s pregnancy
can be recognised. She will remain in
seclusion until it becomes evident that
God has indeed taken away the reproach
of childlessness. As he points out, the
combination of womanly pride and of
humble gratitude to God is a very
natural trait of character, and one not
likely to occur to a forger of a later
age, who might be supposed to have
invented these incidents.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 26—38.


A Chosen Vessel and an Angelic Declaration.

I. The chosen vessel of the Divine purpose.—A village maiden, of whose
previous ‘history we know almost nothing, has the quiet tenor of her life in the
little belated village of Nazareth strangely broken by the appearance of the
angel Gabriel. Of the maiden’s birth, parentage, and breeding we are told
nothing. An ancient and constant tradition asserts that she was one of the
many descendants of David who had sunk into obscurity and penury; and the
tradition must be true, if we are to read the title “ Son of David,” often given to
Jesus, in a literal sense. But we may infer from what we are afterwards told


24


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. I.
ee ee ne es ee Pe


of her that she was (1) a devout student of the prophetic scriptures, giving to
“hiding” and ‘pondering in her heart” any Divine word of hidden significance,
since her Magnificat is a chain of citations from, and allusions to, the Old
Testament writings ; (2) that she specially pondered the Messianic prophecies, as if
she cherished the hope, in common with all Jewish women, that Jehovah might
‘‘ condescend to her low estate,” and make her to be mother of the “ Son of the
Highest,” since she turns all the texts she cites to a Messianic use ; and (3) that
she was not simply “just” or “righteous” in the Jewish sense, but one of those
pure and saintly souls who are utterly devoted to a Divine life and service. There
must have been eminent spiritual preparedness in this “graced” flower of Israel
and humanity. For (4) when she understands the angelic errand and message,
and is conscious of all the pain and shame it will bring upon her, even to the loss
of her maiden name and honour, she meekly submits herself to the Divine will,
saying, “Be it unto me according to Thy word.” Mary asks no sign, like
Zacharias. Her question is one of maidenly simplicity. And “supernatural
faith, never so taxed in any earth-born one before or after, is rewarded with the
promise of the overshadowing Spirit and power of the Highest.”
“Yes, and to her, the beautiful and lowly,
» Mary, a maiden, separate from men,


Camest Thou nigh, and didst possess her wholly,
Close to Thy saints, but Thou wast closer then.”


II. The angelic declaration.—The angelic declaration gives the sum of Divine
revelation and the Church’s doctrine concerning the person and government of
the Redeemer. 1. His pure and perfect humanity is proclaimed. Jesus, the
Saviour of men, was to be conceived and born of a human mother, and therefore
possessed of every essential element of our nature, including its subjection to
infirmity and the possibility of death. He entered into the world a true man.
2. But He—the same Jesus—was to be the “ Son of the Highest,” having no father,
but God, through the power of the Holy Ghost. “The altar of the Virgin’s
womb was touched with fire from heaven.” “Conceived of the Holy Ghost” is
an article of faith on a level with “‘ born of the Virgin Mary.” In His eternal
generation Son of God, in His human birth Son of man, both names are for
ever to belong inseparably to His one person, to be used interchangeably in His
own Divine majesty. “He shall be great”; not,like His forerunner, “ in the sight
of God ”—“‘ great” as God’s equal, and head of humanity. 3. The angel adds
the substance of Messianic prediction concerning the “ increase of His government.”
Gabriel’s words are a text waiting for illustration and expansion by a higher
than angelic interpreter. (1) He is the Messiah, seated on the throne of “‘ His father
David.” These words descend from heaven to earth—from the ‘“ Son of God,” a
revealed truth beyond Jewish expectation, to the ‘‘ Son of David,”:the current
Messianic hope when Jesus appeared. (2) He is the Messianic King of an eternal
kingdom. The angel does not burden the Virgin’s soul with any announcement
of the via dolorosa by which her Son would reach His Messianic throne. He is
predicted to rule over the “house of Jacob,” the true spiritual Israel, in a
dominion which, unlike the kingdom of visible Israel, is to ‘‘ have no end.”
Beyond this the angel’s commission does not extend. In due time angels will
again take up the theme, and fill the world with its echoes.

III. The response of faith.—To such an undreamt-of, sudden, overwhelming
call—a call to such a glorious destination, and to such a pinnacle of unearthly and
unique greatness—the greatest summons ever sent from heaven to a mortal
creature—there is the prompt response of profound and humble obedience: ‘‘ Be
it unto me according to Thy word.” What tides of shame and wonder, fear and
rapture, swept through the pure heart of this gentle maiden we can not even
conceive. Betrothed, and standing on the verge of her new life with Joseph,


25


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





there is in the angel’s presence neither dejection nor exultation.
Virgin, after his departure, remains in her sweet humility the same.


The humble
With


perfect readiness of trust she receives her Divine commission, and surrenders
herself in lowly meekness to the Divine will.—Coz ; Pope.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 26—38.


Ver. 26. “ A city of Galilee.”—Very
different are the circumstances of the
two visits of the angel Gabriel to
announce the birth of John the Baptist
and of Jesus. The first is paid to the
priest engaged in sacred duties in the
Temple at Jerusalem, the second to an
obscure maiden in a humble dwelling
in Nazareth. Nazareth, as we know,
was held in ill repute by the Jews, and
indeed the whole province of Galilee
was regarded by them as semi-heathen ;
yet here it was that one was found
whose piety and faith were surpassed
by none of whom we read in Holy
Scripture—who was counted worthy to
be the mother of the Saviour. “ This
message announced the exaltation of
man’s nature above angels (Heb. ii. 5,
9, 16); yet an archangel joyfully brings
it, and‘angels celebrate the event (ii.
13). There is no envy in heaven”
(Wordsworth).


Ver. 27. “ House of David.”—The
royal house of Israel, with which were
associated the memories of the past
glory of the nation, and the hopes of
its future greatness, was now in very
humble circumstances. Its represen-
tative was now a village carpenter ;
while the throne was occupied by
Herod, who was regarded by the
majority of the people as an Edomite
and a usurper. The contrast between
the two illustrates the saying of
Solomon, “I have seen servants upon
horses, and princes walking as servants
upon the earth” (Eccles. x. 7). It is
interesting to notice that the mother
of John the Baptist, and his mother
of Jesus, bore names associated with
the first high priest of Israel: Elisabeth
is the same with Elisheba, the wife of
Aaron; Mary the same with Miriam,
the sister of Aarcn.


26


Ver. 28. “The angel came in.”—
There seems to have been less to
startle Mary in the appearance of
the angel to her than in the case of
Zacharias. He comes into the house
in a natural way; while Zacharias
sees him suddenly appear in the sacred
precincts of the Temple, from which
all were debarred but the priests in
the exercise of their office. She seems
to have felt more sperplexity at the
strange salutation that fell on her
ears than fear at the presence of the
heavenly visitant. There is nothing
in the salutation uttered by the angel
to justify the offering of anything like
worship to the blessed Virgin: she is
addressed as one who has received a
special blessing from God, which dis-
tinguishes her above all ordinary
women. The Vulgate rendering, gratid
plena, is ambiguous; it should rather
be gratid cumulata. She is not the
fountain of grace, but one who has
received grace, from God. Doubtless
Mary’s daily prayer had been that she
might enjoy the favour of God; and
now this prayer she learns is fully
granted, and, in addition to it, an
honour she would never have hoped to
possess is bestowed upon her,


Ver. 29. ‘She was troubled.” —In her
countenance her astonishment and per-
plexity are expressed. But she remains
silent. ‘‘She would rather not answer
the angel than speak thoughtlessly of
what she could not understand” (Bern-
hardt.)


Ver. 30. “ Fear not.”—So vast is the
distance between us as creatures from
our Creator, so deep the gulf that sin
has dug between us and Him, that not
even the holiest men or women can
fail to be affected with fear, whenever


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


the feeblest ray of the Divine glory
bursts upon them. Yet the purpose
of God in the revelation of His mercy
through Christ is to abolish this fear.
Hence the apostle says, ‘‘ For ye have
not received the spirit of bondage
again to fear; but ye have received
the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry,
Abba, Father” (Rom. vii. 15).


“ Found favour.”’—It is the conde-
scension and favour of God, and not
any merits of her own, which give Mary
her distinction. “ By these words the
angel witnesses that she is on the same
level with all other saints. He does
not praise her for her piety, but simply
because of the great grace of God by
which she is chosen to be the mother
of His own Son” (Luther).


Ver. 31. “Thou shalt conceive.”—
Now was the prophecy in Isa. vii. 14
to be fulfilled. And the angel fore-
tells that those other statements given
to Israel by messengers from God of
Messiah’s universal and unending rule
will in like manner find accomplish-
ment. The mind of Mary seems to
have been imbued with the scriptures
of the Old Testament, as is abundantly
indicated by the free use she makes
of them in her song of praise. To
her knowledge of them the angel now
appeals, and her firm faith that God
would fulfil all the promises He had
made to His people must have strength-
ened her to believe what was now
promised to herself personally.


“‘ Jesus.” —The reason for this name
being given is noted in St. Matthew’s
Gospel—“ for He shall save His people
from their sins” (i. 21). It is not a
name given by men to Him, after the
manner in which grateful nations have
bestowed titles of honour upon their
deliverers and benefactors, but is given
to Him by God. He is our Saviour,
not merely because we regard Him as
such, but because God has appointed
Him to this office: our faith is built
not on an earthly but on a heavenly
foundation.


CHAP. I.


Ver. 32. “He shall be great.”—In
these words Gabriel bows before the
majesty and power of Jesus—renders
to Him that homage which He is to
receive from all in heaven and earth.
“At the name of Jesus every knee
should bow, of things in heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the
earth” (Phil. ii. 10). He was great
in heaven, where all obeyed His will ;
but He is to acquire additional glory
by His life on earth, where He endures
the contradiction of sinners against
Himself. His humility and shame,
His immeasurable patience and love,
His submission to sufferings and death,
win for Him an even deeper adoration
than was rendered to Him _ before.
Not that He really became greater
than He was; but that His inherent
greatness became more fully manifested
by His condescension and love.


“Throne of His father David.”—
Jesus is head over all things to His
Church. He establishes His gentle
sway over the hearts of His people,
subduing them to Himself, ruling and
defending them, and restraining and
conquering all His own and all their
enemies. —/oote.


Ver. 33. “Reign over the house of
Jacob.”—But His kingdom is not to
be confined to one people. Israel is
indeed the centre of His kingdom, but
all nations are to become subject to
Him. The covenant being made with
Abraham and his seed, it was becoming
that Christ should belong to the chosen
people. But all who manifest the
faith of Abraham become his spiritual
children, and therefore subjects of
Messiah’s kingdom. In this way the
barrier that divides Jew from Gentile
is virtually broken down, and those
who had been afar off are brought
nigh. Nor is the prophecy annulled
by so many of the Jews having rejected
Jesus as the Christ; for their history
as a nation is not yet concluded, and
there is reason to hope that by re-
pentance and faith they will yet


27


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


be Se


submit themselves to the Saviour (see
Rom. xi. 25).


“ For ever.” —A kingdom that would
endure for ever had been promised to
David (2 Sam. vii. 16). But as long
as it was ruled over by men it was
not secure against loss and overthrow.
It was only when it came into the
hands of Christ that it became eternal
and unchangeable (Dan. vii. 14). Nor
are the words “for ever” to be taken
in any limited sense, as signifying for
a great while, or as long as the world
endures ; but as implying an everlasting
rule, to be manifested, indeed, more
clearly when this earth shall have
passed away.


Ver. 34. “How shall this be ?”—
The fact communicated by the angel
Mary accepts with implicit faith. It
is the manner in which it is to be
accomplished that she cannot under-
stand. Her question, therefore, does
not manifest unbelief, but a natural
wonder as to the method of fulfilment.
She indicates her astonishment, and
not her distrust. The incredulity of
Zacharias on receiving a much less
astonishing message is very marked,
if we compare it with Mary’s attitude
on this occasion. The lowly village
maiden shows herself possessed of more
faith in God than was found in the
priest whose duties brought him into
constant relations with God.


Ver. 35. “ The Holy Ghost shall come
upon thee."—Her wonder, not being
incredulity, is solved, in so far as the
mystery of God’s creative power can
be made clear to a finite mind; and a
sign, for which she had not asked, is
given to strengthen her faith.


“ That holy thing.” We may notice
in this phrase an implied distinction
between this child and all others. From
the first moment of His earthly exist-
ence He is holy in Himself. John the
Baptist was to be filled with the Holy
Ghost from his mother’s womb (ver.
15)—from the first he is to be conse-


28


crated and set apart for the great
work of his life. In this sense he may
be said to have been sanctified ; while
Jesus is one with that God from whom
sanctification proceeds.


“The Son of God.”—Not here (as
ver. 32) in the Messianic sense, nor
essentially by the eternal generation,
but because the human nature of
Christ was the direct and miraculous
production of Divine power.—Speaker’s
Commentary.


The Mystery of the Incarnation.—
The words spoken by the angels in
the synoptical evangelists are few
and brief. We can almost count the
syllables, accorded as if penuriously.
In particular we owe to St. Luke
those angel-uttered words which form
so exquisite a shrine for the dogma of
the Incarnation. In the angel’s answer
to Mary’s question we have a sentence
whose fulness of thought and delicate
transparency of expression come to
us from the sphere in which the
Miracle of miracles was wrought. The
whole sentence is packed with thought,
and is a Divine mixture of reserve and
enthusiasm. It is like a smile of
heaven over the glory of the eternal
wisdom and love in bringing its most
consummate work from the labyrinth
of antenatal fatalities through which
man passes into the world. It is thus
that the purity of an angel speaks to
the purity of a virgin. Yet if nota
word too much is said for the delicacy
of a maiden’s ear, not a word too little
is employed to indicate even the physio-
logical process by which the Incarna-
tion was effected. It is the 139th
Psalm translated into one of the tongues
of heaven. Yet not the less really is
the material process summarised which
had been so nobly prophesied in the
psalm of the Incarnation.— Alexander.


The Office of the Holy Spirit in the
Incarnation —The Holy Spirit was
the immediate agent in the immaculate
conception of “that holy thing.” Not
that He was therefore the Father of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. I.


eee


the blessed Son, but He was the
vehicle of the paternity. Not again
that He so acted that the Son as God
had nothing to do with the act of the
Incarnation. © The Son, in Divine
will, willed to assume our nature,
and so assumed it; but again the
blessed Spirit wrought the process
whereby the will was carried out.—
Moule.


The Beauty of the Narrative of the
Annunciation—I have always felt
myself at a loss to say whether the
sublimity or the exquisite delicacy of
the language here employed is the
more to be admired. Calvin seems to
have been struck with it, and the best
expositors have felt it.—Brown. ;


The Spirit in the Son of Man.

I. The early beginnings of this won-
derful life were implanted in the virgin
mother by an act of the Holy Ghost.—
In the annunciation to Mary not only
is the supernatural conception declared,
but the part of the Spirit in that
mystery, about which it is almost
impossible to speak, is defined and
emphasised. Before the first stage of
organic development had dawned He
so wrought and ruled that the life
fostered in this unique mother was
protected against all the frailties of
an earthly lineage, and made fit to
blend with that Divine consciousness
now or hereafter to be infused into it.
The Spirit antedated the conception,
and was present not as a competing.
but as a creative and dominating force
in life. So richly was the Spirit given
to Christ, that His holy influences were
pulsing in those rudimentary stages
of life which precede all signs of con-
sciousness and moral responsibility.

II. The part of the Spirit in the
conception (as well as in all the after-
work of Jesus Christ) seems to suggest
that independence of persons in the
holy and blessed Trinity, about which
we know so little, but which clearly
preceded all the economies of human
redemption. These sacred names of
Father, Son, and Spirit do not represent


merely latent potentialities in the
Divine nature waiting for some crisis
in human history before they can
awake to consciousness and effective
operation. In the eternal Godhead
there was a co-relation of life scarcely
suggested by the parallels of our rigidly
defined human personalities. And the
action of the Spirit in the miraculous
dawn of Christ’s earthly life was the
continuation of an influence which
penetrated His consciousness and be-
nignly wrought there prior to the
Incarnation.—Selby.


Ver. 36. “ Thy cousin Elisabeth.” —-
The sign given was one of a kind to
encourage the faith of Mary in the
message of the angel. The creative
power of God had been exercised in
the case of Elisabeth. Neither her
barrenness nor her old age could
nullify the promise which had been
made her of a son. In the gift of
a sign where no sign was asked, we
have an example of God’s constant
procedure. Each day we live we re-
ceive fresh testimonies of His goodness
by which our faith may be confirmed.
The mercy and favour which others
receive from Him should enable us to
trust all the more firmly in Him at
those times when we cannot under-
stand His dealings with ourselves.
Notice, “thy cousin Elisabeth.” The
relationship to Mary, and the name
she bore, are mentioned as known
to God. There is something wonderful
and affecting in this fact, though, after
believing that God is omniscient, evi-
dence of His being so may not seem
remarkable. But the truth is, that
we cannot realise what is meant by
omniscience, and therefore find special
knowledge of the kind here surprising.


Ver. 37. “ No word of God shall be
devoid of power.”—Nothing that God
promises is He unable to perform : all
that He says He does. “ This affirms
not only God’s almightiness, but even
more fully His absolute faithfulness to
His promises, the thought most neces-
sary to Mary. The denial of what


29


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





is miraculous is the denial both of
almightiness and faithfulness ” (Schaf’).


Ver. 38. The Humility and Faith of
Mary.—As David (2 Sam. vii. 28), so
does David’s daughter sink down in
child-like humility and faith into the
hands of her God, and let His will be
her will. It is well for us that the
Lord thus found on earth a believing
heart, devoted to God, otherwise He
could never have become man. “ She
was no unconscious vessel of the Divine
will, but, in humility and faith, a
fellow-worker with the purpose of the
Father ; and therefore her own unity
with that purpose was required, and
is here recorded” (Alford). Mary has
restored woman to honour: the faith-
lessness of Eve brought us to sin and
death ; the faith of Mary brought us a
Saviour from sin and death. ‘The
heart of Mary is now filled with the
Holy Spirit, who can also prepare her
body to be the temple of the God-man ”
(Lange). ‘‘The holy Virgin came to
her great perfection and height of piety
by a few, and those modest and unat-
tractive, exercises and actions. St. Paul
travelled over the world; preached to
the Gentiles and disputed against the
Jews ; wrote epistles ; suffered dangers,
injuries, affronts, and persecutions to
the height of wonder ; whereby he won
for himself-a crown. But the holy
Virgin attained perfection by the
means of a quiet and silent piety—by
internal actions of love, devotion, and
contemplation ; and instructs us that
the silent affections, the splendours of
an internal devotion, the union of love,
humility, and obedience, the daily offices
of prayer and praises sung to God, acts
of faith and fear, of patience and meek-
ness, of hope and reverence, repentance
and charity, and those graces which
walk in a veil and silence, make great
ascents to God, and as sure progress
to favour and a crown, as the more
ostentatious and laborious exercises of
a more public religion” (Taylor).


Complete Consecration of the Being
to God.—“ And Mary said, Behold


30


the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto
me according to Thy word.” So much
is said in the word of God concern-
ing the depravity of the human
heart, and so familiar is the fact to us
from what we know of ourselves, that
it strikes us with wonder and admira-
tion when we come across a record of
a human life in which we can find no
outstanding blemish. Acts of heroic
faith, and instances of remarkable
integrity in circumstances of tempta-
tion, are numerous in the sacred record,
but there are only very few examples
of persons who have, all through the
history that is given of them, lived
before God in all good conscience. The
Virgin Mary is one of these exceptional
cases. And we cannot doubt but that
piety like hers is the highest and purest
service that can be rendered to God.
The devotion that prompts to heroic
deeds at great crises in the life, or in
special circumstances of trial and diffi-
culty, is admirable; but that which
leads to quiet, unostentatious obedience
to God, in the unromantic circumstances
of every-day life, is surely superior to
it, as it is far more difficult to cultivate
and maintain. Several points in the
history before us are worthy of
notice.

I. Though the faith of the Virgin was
so mature and strong, there can be no
doubt but that she was young in years,
The piety of the young, when it is
spontaneous and deep, has a charm and
freshness all its own. Beautiful as is
the sight of the prodigal turning from
his errors and vices to a life of holiness,
a still more attractive charm is asso-
ciated with the goodness of those who
have never strayed from God—whose
memories are notsullied with the records
of a guilty past, and whose energies
have not been wasted in the service of
evil. Nor is there any reason in the
nature of things why piety like that
of the Virgin should not be the rule
instead of the exception. For devotion
to God, and holy obedience, are not a
yoke of bondage, which we can only
accustom ourselves to bear by long and
laborious effort: they are "the very


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHEAP. I.


eerie ce ee eee ae Me a Oe


conditions of our present peace and
happiness.

II. The qualities of mind and heart
displayed by the Virgin —her innocence,
integrity, simplicity, humility, and

_ obedience—prepared her for playing
her part well in the new circumstances
in which she found herself. She could
not have anticipated the possibility of
receiving such a message. For though
in the Old Testament Scriptures it had
been predicted that Christ would be
born of a virgin, the prophecy was
veiled and obscure, and it was not
until the angel brought this message
that the mystery was fully disclosed.
But her consecration of herself to God
in the ordinary circumstances of daily
life enabled her to meet this sudden call
upon her faith, and to rise to a high
degree of heroic self-devotion in this
new emergency in which she found
herself. A great lesson is suggested
to us all in this fact. How we shall
act in some sudden crisis of life is
predetermined for us by our habitual
conduct, and by the character we build
up in quiet times, when there is no
strain upon us, and we are simply face
to face with plain, every-day duties.
The sudden emergency is the test by


act nobly in special circumstances of
trial and difficulty, the only wise course
we can take is to do the duties that
meet us now in a spirit of uprightness
and of humble reliance upon God.

III. The spirit of true self-consecra-
tion shines out in the words, “ Behold
the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto
me according to Thy word.” It is not
merely that of passive resignation, in
which the human will is completely
subordinated to the Divine will; but
there is also a desire to carry out the
Divine will. We are often resigned
because we cannot help ourselves. But
a higher resignation is that which leads
us to yield ourselves to God in the full
confidence that He knows what is best
for us, and with the strong but humble
desire to co-operate with Him in the
promotion of His great designs.


“ Be it unto me according to Thy
word.’—Almost the very first word
which Scripture records of the mother
of our Lord is a word of piety—a word
of sweet maiden piety. It is a reve-
rent assent to a Divine revelation, and
complete submission to a conviction
which has entered her soul as a
message from heaven, setting her apart


which the strength or weakness of our
characters is brought to light. If,
therefore, we wish to be prepared


to a consecrated life. The spirit of this
noble expression of piety is not too
powerful at the present day.—Foberts.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 39—56.


The Communion of Saints with Hach Other and with God.—It was not merely
to obtain verification of the angel’s words that Mary travelled with haste into
the hill country, but to hold communion with her kinswoman Elisabeth to
whom God’s grace had been so signally shown. A common participation in
the Divine favour drew them together. This is ever the way with those to
whom God makes Himself known. They do not regard what they have received
as a private possession of their own, but long to make it known, and they have
especial delight in the society of those who share their faith. This communion
of saints differs in a marked degree from mere friendly intercourse ; for the bond
that unites those who enter into it is not similarity of tastes and pursuits,
but common allegiance to God. In the case before us we see this communion
in its purest and most intense form. We observe—

I. The elevation of feeling by which it is characterised.—This is indicated
by the holy salutations, the rapt outcry, and the inspired words that flow
in rhythmical utterance from the lips of Elisabeth and of Mary. It is not
mere excitement of mind that is displayed; but the special and unique


31


» ae °¢ var ir 29 ae


CHAP. I. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





circumstances in which they meet are fully realised by them, and the Holy
Spirit prompts the words they speak. Such fervid feelings as theirs can be
no example to us, since the experience which prompted them was unique in
its character; but something akin to them may be known by us all as we
join with our fellow-believers in celebrating the sacrament of the Supper—
as we commemorate the most signal proof of the love of that Saviour whose
advent to earth filled the hearts of these holy women with such exceeding joy.

II. The deep humility that distinguished these saints——They have been
the recipients of marked favour from heaven; future ages are thought of
as celebrating their blessedness; and yet both meekly declare their personal
unworthiness of the grace that has been shown them. They descend in humility
before God, and magnify His name, and praise His loving-kindness and con-
descension towards them. They clearly recognise, too, that God has mankind
in view in the revelation of His mercy that He has made to them, and they
are free from every tinge of spiritual pride. This combination of sobriety with
intensity of feeling is very remarkable, and distinguishes true elevation of spirit
from unwholesome enthusiasm. If those who received such wonderful proofs
of God’s favour were thus devoid of all spiritual pride and self-complacency,
what excuse can we find for ourselves if ever these feelings take possession
of our hearts ?

III. A practical result of this communion is seen in the words in which
Elisabeth confirms and blesses the faith of Mary (ver. 45).—The elder
encourages the younger, and assures her that her trust in God will be rewarded
by the fulfilment of His promises; and her words have weight, as coming from
one who had faithfully served God all ‘her life, and who had received undeniable
proof of God’s power and love. The confirmation of faith, the encouragement
of hope, and the awakening of deeper love to God and to each other, are all
results for which we should look from the communion of saints. We can
searcely make any mistake in regarding the song of Mary as owing something
of its intensity to the thoughts and feelings excited by the words of Elisabeth.
As an act of communion with God, it has a character of its own which dis-
tinguishes it from those in which we ordinarily engage. In it acknowledgment
of sinfulness and weakness, though not absent, is in the background, and the
thoughts are fixed upon the glorious attributes of God: in it we see one Divine
perfection after another rising into view, and receiving the homage of a devout
and grateful heart.

No very rigid marks of division need be looked for as separating the four
strophes of which this spontaneous song of praise is composed; but the
following may be regarded as the main lines of thought in it: 1. Mary
celebrates God’s condescension towards her, and the everlasting honour which
He has conferred upon her (vers. 46-48). 2. She speaks of God’s dealings with
her as proofs of His omnipotence, and holiness, and mercy, which He manifests
to all who fear Him (vers. 49, 50). 3. She extols the justice of God, as shown
in the humiliation of the proud, the powerful, and the self-satisfied, and in
the exaltation of the meek, the lowly, and the destitute (vers. 51-53). 4. She
praises God for His faithfulness towards His people in fulfilling the promises
made to their fathers.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 39—56


Ver. 39. “ Went... with haste.’—The eager (1) to obtain the sign indicated to
haste with which Mary set out on her her as a confirmation of the angel’s
journey to Elisabeth shows us that her words, and (2) to celebrate with her
faith was no transient mood: she is kinswoman the love and condescen-


32


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. I.


ee


sion of God in the exceptional privi-
leges He had bestowed upon them.
In the meeting of these two holy
women, as we see from what follows,
gratitude to God rises to its highest
pitch. As they communed together
the grace of God manifested to thém
would shine forth with double lustre.
Mary’s example teaches us that it is
our duty to use all means within our
power for strengthening our faith.
“Surely the mountains of that ‘hill
country ’—the forest, and every tree
therein—broke forth into singing, and
earth was joyful; for the Lord had
redeemed Jacob, and comforted His
people. ‘How beautiful upon the
mountains are the feet of Him that
bringeth good tidings.’ ”


Ver. 40. Tie Salutation.—Our saluta-
tions are often thoughtlessly given
and trivial in character: this was a
holy and sacramental action—a devout
heart invoking God’s blessing upon one
desirous of it and prepared to receive
it. What Jewish salutations were we
learn from Ruth ii. 4: “The Lord
be with you”; ‘“ The Lord bless thee.”
The mingled joy and ecstasy of this
meeting are unique in earthly history.
“Only the meeting of saints in heaven
can parallel the meeting of these two
cousins: the two wonders of the world
are met under one roof, and congratu-
late their mutual happiness.” In the
intercourse between Mary and Elisa-
beth we have a beautiful example of
the communion of saints. Those who
truly love God will draw near to each
other in holy fellowship to offer their
united thanksgiving for His goodness,
and to establish and strengthen each
other in the faith by mutual exhorta-
tions and counsels. ‘‘ Come and hear,
all ye that fear God, and I will declare
what He hath done for my soul”
{Ps. Ixvi. 16). “‘ Then they that feared
the Lord spake often one to another”
(Mal. ii. 16)


Ver. 41. “ The babe leaped in her
womb.” --Cf. Matt. xi. 25: “Thou
hast hid these things from the wise


D


and prudent, and hast revealed them
unto babes.”


Vers. 42-45. The Canticle of Elisa-
beth.—When read in accordance with
its structure, this beautiful canticle
is seen to be a celebration of Mary’s
faith; and, as leading up to this,
every part of it takes its proper subor-
dinate place. This faith, astounding
in itself, the most supreme example
probably of perfect trust in God, and
absolute self-devotion to His will, that
human flesh has ever given, was all
the more striking to Elisabeth on
account of its contrast with the unbelief
of her own husband under a far less
severe trial. No wonder that, when
Mary appeared before her S§pirit-
illuminated eyes (ver. 41), she seemed
the embodiment of Faith—that modest
virgin with clasped hands, whom
Hermas saw in vision, through whom
the elect of God are saved, and from
whom spring all the Christian graces,
as fair daughters of a fair mother.
Mary is thus, in Elisabeth’s eyes, the
most blessed of women, because the
most faithful; and it suits well that
the first psalm of the New Testament
should take the form of a praise of
the fundamental evangelical virtue.—
Warfield.


Ver, 42. “ Blessed art thou.”—At
certain times devout feeling cannot be
repressed, but will break forth, some-
times in a way that seems strange and
extravagant to those who are not under
the same influence. If Elisabeth had
been silent, surely the very stones would
have cried out. A still higher blessed-
ness fell to the lot of Mary when she
became a disciple and follower of Jesus.
This is distinctly implied in His own
words (see xi. 27, 28).


Ver. 43. “ The mother of my Lord.” —
Note the absence of anything like envy
on the part of Elisabeth at the higher
honour bestowed upon her kinswoman.
She acknowledges the superiority of
Mary as the mother of her Lord, and
speaks of being unworthy to receive her


37


CHAP, I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





under her roof. The more highly God
exalts us in favour, the more humble
in spirit should we become. Compare
as kindred examples of humility, David
(2 Sam. vii. 18), John the Baptist
(Matt. iii. 14), and the centurion (Luke
vii. 6).


“ My Lord.”—The application of
these words, which are equivalent to
“ Jehovah,” to an unborn child, can
only be justified or explained by the
fact of the divinity of Jesus. They
were probably suggested to Elisabeth
by Ps. cx. 1.


Ver. 45. “ Blessed is she that believed.”
—Though the faith of Mary was
tried in a special way, yet her case
is an illustration of the great prin-
ciple that those who place implicit con-
fidence in God obtain the fulfilment
of His promises. The greater the
faith displayed, the greater is the
reward it receives (cf. John xx. 29;
1 Pet. i. 7,8). “ God offers His benefits
indiscriminately to all; but faith, so to
speak, holds its lap to receive them;
while unbelief allows them to pass
away, So as not to reach us.”


Vers. 46-55. The Magnificat—The
mother of our Lord was a poetess. The
beautiful hymn which still has a fre-
quent place in Christian worship is by
her, and is another illustration of the
meditative, reverential, mystical spirit
whose steady fire burned within her.
The Magnificat is the first Christian
hymn—it is‘a hymn in the exact sense
of the word; for a hymn originally
means a poem sung in praise of the
gods or of heroes. Augustine’s defini-
tion of a hymn is, “ praise to God with
a song.” The Magnificat is a type and
model of what our hymns in church
should be; its form is the old Hebrew
form then passing away ; its spirit is
that of youth, of freshness of vision, of
abounding bright-eyed energy. There
is no pessimism in this morning hymn
of Ohristianity.— Roberts.


“My soul doth magnify the Lord.”—
34


Elisabeth sings the praises of Mary’s
faith; Mary answers by a praise of
God—His grace, might, mercy, justice,
and faithfulness. The difference is sig-
nificant—perhaps characteristic. The
tone of the Magnificat is happy, though —
solemn—such as befitted one so highly
honoured, and yet so unconscious of self.
The ground of Mary’s praise to God is,
that, in spite of her low estate, He has
selected her as the vessel of His election
for bringing the seed of Abraham into
the world; and this is the mighty, holy,
just, and faithful thing that He has
done which commands her song.—
Waryield.


The Magnificat.—In St. Luke’s Gos-
pel the picture of Mary is clothed in flesh
and blood. There is breath and there
is poetry upon her lips. Her heart
beats quicker at the angel’s salutation.
Maiden modesty and saintly resigna-
tion to burning shame fill her brief but
pregnant words. The hoarded music
of her soul finds measured utterance of
its serene and stately joy. The Magni-
jicat, chanted in so many churches, is
the highest specimen of the subtle in-
fluence of the song of purity, so exqui-
sitely described by a great poet. It is
the Pippa Passes among the liturgies
of the world. It is a woman teaching
in the Church for ever without usurpa-
tion of authority, but with a saintly
quietness, that knows no end.

I. The historical framework in which
the Magnificat is set (vers. 38-41),—
Mary was misconstrued by the world.
She was bearing a cross heavy to pure
souls—a cross of shame. In Nazareth
she could not remain. She turned to
the spot towards which she seemed
to be invited by an angel’s lips, and
pointed by an angel’s finger (ver. 36).
There must have been pathos in the
quiet word of the gentle maiden as she
saluted Elisabeth. Elisabeth, for her
part, knew her cousin’s voice, even
before she saw her pale and suffering
face.

II. The Magnificat itself—There is
a noble quiet in the one word “said.”
1. The personal traits by which the hymn


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


OHAP, I.


eee


is pervaded. Humility is the chief of
these. Mary does not profess humility ;
she practises it. Favoured, indeed, she
is. Yet she has no thought of that
which she 7s—only of that which, in
God’s free grace, she has received. In
the second line she counts herself among
the lost whom God has brought into a
state of salvation. Her joy and exulta-
tion repose upon that God who is her
Saviour. 2. The religious principles by
whichthe Magnificat is pervaded. Mary’s
soul is full of faith in the tenderness
and power of God—in the incarnation
of our Lord Jesus Christ. She has the
clear conviction that all which is sweet-
est and greatest in the attributes of
God meet in the gift of His dear Son.
Power, holiness, mercy, faith, and truth
are there. And she believes intensely
in the victory of that incarnation—in
the sure triumph of God. With the
instinct of a prophetess she sees an out-
line of all history, and compresses and
crushes it into four strong, rugged
words.

III. Some lessons, ecclesiastical and
personal, from the Magnificat.—1. This
poem is retained in the Reformed
Prayer Book. There are few Divine
songs in the New Testament. But
there are some; and surely they are
there for good reasons. And it is a
great thing to have some hymns in
public worship whose permanence is en-
sured by their being strictly Scriptural.
2. Not without propriety is the MJag-
nificat placed in the public service. It
comes after the Old Testament lesson.
Mary stood, as her song stands with
us, between the two Testaments. 3. By
using the Magnificat, we fulfil her own
prophecy, “ All generations shall call
me blessed.” Some forget this. She


is blessed—blessed, because consecrated °


as a temple for the eternal Word.
4, As to personal lessons. We may
well apply Mary’s words to ourselves
as a blessing common to us all. Her
blessedness is ours: ‘“ For whosoever
will do the will of God, the same is
My brother, and sister, and mother.”
Again, praise should be our work.
Once more, joy and peace are part of


our purchased inheritance: “ Thou wilt
keep him in perfect peace whose mind
is stayed on Thee.” And the more we
lean on Him, the more He loves us.
When we read or join in the Magnificat,
let us see to it that that peace is ours
which will make its words true for us.—
Alexander.


Ver. 46. Compare the Magnificat with
the Song of Hannah.

I. Points of similarity—1. Both
express gratitude for God’s compassion
and condescension. 2. Both rise from
particular instances of Divine pro-
cedure to the principles that regulate
the government of the world. 3. Both
anticipate the glories of Christ’s king-
dom.

Il. Points of difference.—1. Han-
nah’s words are animated by high-
spirited exultation over her enemies,
Mary’s by profound humility and self-
restraint. 2. In the one Christ is
“‘ Jehovah’s King,” to whom He will
“give strength ”— His anointed, “whose
horn He shall exalt”; in the other
Christ is the help of Israel.

From Mary’s hymn of thanksgiving,
which is filled with echoes from the
writings of the psalmists and prophets
of the Old Testament, we may see
how she had delighted in the word
of God, and how intimately she was
acquainted. with it. Perhaps we are
even justified in concluding, from vers.
47, 48, that she was acquainted with
the Greek Version of the OldTestament,
for the words there quoted agree with
it rather than with the original Hebrew
(cf. Ps. xxxi. 7 with the correspond-
ing passage in the LXX.: Ps. xxx. 7).
True piety will ever be found to lead
believers to value the Holy Scriptures,
and to appropriate for the expression
of their devout feelings the words used
by saints in old time.


“« Magnify.”—To make great or to
glorify. We cannot, indeed, add to
God’s dignity or power, but the word
“ magnify” is an appropriate one for
describing our giving God a larger
place in our thoughts and feelings, and

35


CHAP. I.


our publishing abroad the reasons we
have for giving Him praise. “ My
soul doth magnify. . . my spirit hath
rejoiced.” 1. True praise of God, with
mind and heart as well as with tongue.
2. Cheerful praise of God in the full
employment of every faculty.


Ver. 47. “ God my Saviour.”—It is
the recognition of God in this character
that alone dispels doubt and anxiety,
and imparts a true and full joy. Mary
refers, no doubt, to the name Jesus (i.e.
Saviour) to be conferred upon her Son.
Probably, like others, she anticipated
a reign of material prosperity in con-
nection with the coming of Christ, but
her deeply religious cast of mind for-
bids us to suppose that her hopes
were limited to it. The satisfaction of
spiritual needs was doubtless equally
looked for.


Ver. 48. ‘ Regarded.”—TI.e. looked
upon. It is a very beautiful fact, that
in the Scriptures God’s regarding or
looking upon is taken to be equi-
valent with having mercy upon, Cf.
Luke ix. 38 with Matt. xvii. 15. And
here we see a great difference between
God’s thoughts and our thoughts : God,
who is infinitely holy, is compassionate
also; we who are sinful are harsh and
unsympathetic in our judgment of our
fellows.


“ Low estate.”—The house of David,
to which Mary, as well as Joseph,
doubtless belonged, was now in obscurity
and poverty; but it can scarcely be to
this fact that the Virgin here alludes.
In her humility she is unable to
recognise any reason why she should
be the object of the Divine compassion
andcondescension. Sheisconvinced that
she is unworthy of the high honour
bestowed upon her. ‘ All generations
shall call me blessed.” The insight
of Mary is true: it is from the Divine
favour that the purest and most last-
ing fame springs. However the
admiration of those in any particular
generation may be fixed upon those
who are high in rank, distinguished


36


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


by wealth, learning, beauty, or natural
gifts, the general instinct of mankind
is true in cherishing the names of
those who have been holy, and of those
who have received honour from God,
as entitled to the highest place on the
roll of fame. For by general consent
a higher dignity attaches to saintliness
than to any other quality that distin-
guishes a man from his fellows.


Ver. 49. “ His name.”—In many
parts of Scripture the “name” of God
practically signifies God Himself. Cf.
Ps. xci. 14; 2 Chron. vi. 20. It is
that which suggests to us His adorable
majesty. Properly speaking, it is God
as revealed to us, or as known by us.


Ver. 50. “That fear Him.”—All
through the word of God true piety is
represented as fear of God. By this
we are not to understand slavish dread,
but that reverence which is due (1) from
children to a father, (2) from servants
to a master, and (3) from subjects to a —
king—a reverence which leads (a) to
obedience to His commandments, and
(6) to submission to His will. In
contrast with this “ fear,” which is an
attitude and state of heart, is hypocrisy,
or mere outward pretence of reverence
and service.


Ver. 51. “He hath scattered the
proud.”—With the mercy shown to
the lowly is contrasted the severity
with which God will chastise the
arrogance of the mighty. Mary speaks
of this as in the past instead of in the
future; but this mode of speech is
common in prophetic utterances. In
the choice of the lowly (of Mary her-
self and of Elisabeth) God has already
rejected the proud; and this principle
of action will be carried through to
the very end in the establishment of
the Messianic kingdom. “The proud,
the powerful, and the rich describe
Herod and his court, Pharisees and
Sadducees, as well as foreign tyrants,
Cesar and his armies and heathen
powers.”


“ Scattered.” —When God has for


Te =? Soe


~


Ree St ae


ee ee ee


A


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. I.


CO


a time looked down in silent mockery
on their splendid preparations, He un-
expectedly ,scatters the whole mass:
just as when a building is overturned,
and its parts, which had formerly been
bound together by a strong and firm
union, are widely scattered in every
direction.—Calvin.


Ver. 52. “He hath put down the
mighty.”—The humiliation of the
mighty and the exaltation of the
humble were facts remarked by the
ancients; and the explanation they
gave was, that the gods envied those
who were too successful in life, and
delighted in humbling them, and in
raising up others in their place. Sheer
caprice, and not moral principle, was
supposed to govern the Divine pro-
cedure. The figure frequently used
to present this capricious interference
with human affairs is Fortune’s wheel.
But in the Scriptures it is impiety and
the abuse of power that lead to the
degradation of the proud and mighty,
while those who are raised to honour
have already moral qualifications for
the places they are called to occupy.
Cf. the cases of Pharaoh, Saul, Nebu-
chadnezzar, and Belshazzar, and those
of Joseph, Moses, David, and Daniel,
respectively.


Ver. 53. “ He hath filled the hungry.”
—By the hungry we are to under-
stand mainly those who hunger and
thirst after righteousness, for here,
as in ver. 48, we have an anticipation
of the Beatitudes; but the destitute
in the literal sense of the word are
also probably kept in view. The latter
as a class contained those who longed
most eagerly for the blessings of
Messiah’s kingdom, Just as_ those
who were richly endowed with the
world’s goods were apt to be self-
satisfied and worldly-minded, those
who were poor were in many cases
prepared to receive the glad tidings of
blessings which the world could neither
give nor take away. Prosperity is
indeed the gift of God; but if it


leads to forgetfulness of Him, and if
the sense of dependence upon Him is
weakened, it becomes a snare.


Two Contrasted Classes.—Mary had
here two classes of persons before her
—the hungry and the rich; and she
employs these words in the spiritual
sense in which they are used in the
Jewish Scriptures.

I. “The hungry” mean those who
feel the sense of spiritual needs, who
are dissatisfied with present attain-
ments, who long for something beyond
themselves, and to be something better
than they are as yet. To be humble,
to be dissatisfied with self and with
our shortcomings, is to be on the road
to improvement, and God helps those
who know that they need His help.
When Mary announces the reward of
spiritual hunger, she touches on a
principle of wide range, applicable alike
to mental, moral, and physical life,
If human beings are to benefit by
nourishment, there must be appetite.
Nothing is more repugnant to the
physical nature than forcing food upon
a reluctant patient. If knowledge is
to do good, there must be an appetite
for it. Religious truth forced on the
soul when there is no desire for it does
not illuminate it. Appetite is the con-
dition for acquiring anything, whether
for body, mind, or spirit.

II. “The rich” Mary regards as those
who regard themselves as being just
as they should be—the self-satisfied.
To be satisfied with self is to believe
that there is no capability of improve-
ment; and God will not help those who
have made up their minds that they
can do without Him. Self-sufficiency
is a fatal bar to spiritual attainment.
The distinction between the two classes
is seen in illustrative cases—Jacob and
Esau, David and Saul. The same
clearly marked distinction continues
down to our own day. God gives to
every man an endowment which creates
in the soul a longing after Himself.
On the use made of this endowment
man’s spiritual destiny turns. Culti-
vate this hunger for spiritual things.


37


CHAP. I.


It is strengthened by exercise ; it is lost
by neglect.—Liddon.


Ver. 54. “ He hath holpen his servant
Israel.” From general statements
regarding Divine procedure Mary
comes to the particular case of Israel
at the time then present. What God
had formerly promised He was now
granting. He had, as it were, by
allowing the nation to fall into disorder
and misery, shown His displeasure at
their sins ; but now He is remembering
the mercy towards them which He
had pledged His word to bestow upon
them. For a time He had seemed
forgetful, but now He is mindful of
His ancient covenant with Abraham
and with his seed.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


Abraham.”—The promise to Abraham
was one that embraced all the nations
of the earth (Gen. xxii. 18), so that in
the thoughts of Mary far more than
Divine mercy towards Israel is now to
be revealed—even a blessing for all
mankind in connection with the advent
of Christ.


Ver. 56. “ About three months.”—
Though it is not distinctly stated, it
is probable that Mary stayed with
Elisabeth until the birth of John.
St. Luke is in the habit of rounding
off the narrative without scrupulously
adhering to the order of time (see ver.
65, ii. 19, 20), so that we are not
bound to take what is recorded here
in ver. 56 as having happened before


the events recorded in the paragraph


Ver. 55. “As He spake ... to beginning with ver. 57.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 57—80.


The Morning Hymn of the Gospel.The Benedictus, like the Magnificat, is
charged and surcharged with Old Testament allusions. All the people in this
chapter use the Old Testament forms of speech, and pursue Old Testament
ideals of conduct. It is difficult to analyse the beauty and the charm of this
“morning hymn of the gospel.” But we may treat it, throughout, as a hymn
of thanksgiving that—

I. The Messiah so long promised to the fathers has come.—At last, after
four hundred dreary years, God has “ visited” His people. To the Hebrew
mind the word has a specially large and benign meaning. And all the Divine
visits culminated when He came in the person of His Son to abide with men,
to be their Redeemer, to establish a new righteousness, to lift them into the
freedom of a glad and willing obedience to the Divine will, and so to turn all
their sorrows into joy. Hence the designation of the Messiah as a “horn of
salvation.” Strength in the ox culminates in the horns. So all the power
of deliverance that had ever been diffused throughout the house of David, in
kings, prophets, leaders, “‘saviours,” is but a faint and imperfect shadow of
“the Saviour” just born in. David’s city. All that they had ever done for
Israel is now to be outdone. Yet this was to be no new thing, but only a fulfil-
ment of what “the prophets” had foretold “since the world began.” All who
had led and saved Israel were figures of Him who was to come; all who had
taught Israel had borne witness to Him.. Yet how great must He be for
whose salvation there had been a preparation so long and great! Ais salvation
would be a salvation from “all our enemies,” and from “ the hand of all that
hate us.” And whatever the first intention of these words in reference to
foreign heathen rulers who oppressed the Jewish people, we are warranted
by them in thinking of the salvation of Christ as a perfect salvation, extending
to all the forces opposed to us, whether from within or from without. Nay,
more, it is a salvation which extends to the dead as well as to the living,
to “our fathers,” right away back to Abraham, the first of them all, since


38


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. 1.
Ts ae a


these too were waiting in the dim Hadean world for the fulfilment of the
promises and covenants vouchsafed to them. And, again, this was to be not
simply salvation political, but mainly religious, though involving political
deliverance. The end of it was to be to “serve Him without fear in holiness
and righteousness.” Zacharias, like the prophets, clearly discerns that the
Messianic reign is to be founded on personal holiness, that only those can enter
the new kingdom who make righteousness their chief aim, and freely serve
God in all that they do, consenting to His rule as good, and rejoicing to do
His will through every province and the whole extent of their “ days” or life.

Il. He thanks God for the distinction conferred on his son.—It was no
small honour to be a “prophet of the Most High,” but how much greater
to be prophet and forerunner of “the Lord,” i.e. of the Messiah, the Lord who
was to “come suddenly to His Temple”! This was the distinction conferred
on John in which his father rejoices by anticipation. But what need for
Messiah to have a herald? What need for the Divine Messenger to have
a messenger? To prepare His way. The people must be taught that Messiah’s
salvation was to involve and secure “the remission of their sins.” They had
misconceived the salvation of the Lord, assuming that He would come to work
political deliverance from Roman and Idumean tyrannies. Before the Saviour
could come His “way” must be prepared—gross and carnal misconceptions
of His mission must be removed. They must be taught that sim was their
true enemy, and salvation from sin their true salvation. Zacharias saw
what the true bondage of the nation was, and what the work both of the
Deliverer and of His herald must be. We need to be reminded that the only
salvation and deliverance which can do us any good consists in getting rid,
by pardon and by holiness, of the cords of our sins. He who could teach the
people this, and only he, would prepare the way of Him who came to accomplish
this very salvation, and no other.

III. Zacharias thanks God for the blessings which were to flow from the
Messianic salvation and reign.—The cause of all these blessings was “the
tender mercy of our God”: for from what could the “remission of sins” spring
save from the Divine compassion, the heart of love in the bosom of God 2
And having traced them to their heavenly Source, Zacharias sums up these
blessings in a figure of rare beauty and force. Isaiah had promised the
faithful ‘‘remnant” that the “glory of the Lord should rise upon them,”
and Malachi that the “Sun of righteousness should arise upon them.” Basing
himself on these images, Zacharias conceives of the men of Israel, if not of
men in general, as a vast caravan, which has strayed from the true path, the
way of life and peace, and has lost itself amidst the shifting and barren sands
of the wilderness. The night falls on them, and they huddle together in the
darkness, which seems the very shadow of impending death. But in the Divine
mercy a new and unexpected light dawns on them from on high; and as it
spreads they take courage, and gather themselves up for a new effort: they
find and return to the path, and their souls are filled with peace. In the
beautiful figure of the “dayspring from on high,” Zacharias sets before us
the happy effects of the remission of our sins, of that true salvation wrought
by Christ. The shadows which obscured heaven and earth flee away ; the path
of life becomes plain; and returning to that path, we walk thenceforth in
the light, and become children of the day. All Christ’s visitation and enlighten-
ment are meant to lead us into the path where we shall find peace with God,
and therefore with ourselves and all mankind. We are at rest only when
all our relations with God and the outer world are right, and our inner being
_at harmony with itself.—Cow.


39


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. 1.





SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 57i—80.


Ver. 58. ‘Her neighbours and
cousins.”—In these verses we get a
pleasing glimpse into the family life
of a Jewish household eighteen cen-
turies ago. Natural affections and
the courtesies of social life are seen to
be hallowed and refined by a devout
acknowledgment of God as the giver
of blesssing.


“* Rejoiced with her.” —Not only be-
cause of the gift of a son and her
safe delivery, but because of the sign
of special Divine favour towards her
in granting her the boon at an advanced
time of life, when all hope of receiving
it must have been given up.


Ver. 63. “ His name is John.” —The
emphasis with which the answer was
given is no doubt due to the fact that
this name was given by Divine com-
mand (ver. 13), This sentence on the
tablet was the first written sentence
of the new covenant; and it contains
the word “grace” (John=the grace
of Jehovah). The last sentence of
the old covenant concluded with the
word “curse” (Mal. iv. 6). If it had
pleased God to preserve any relics
connected with holy persons and
events of the New Testament, this
tablet with its inscription would
doubtless have come down to us.—


Bengel.


“ Marvelled.”—Probably because the
reason for imposing the name was
now disclosed to them.


Ver. 64. “Spake, and praised God.”—
The first use made by Zacharias of his
newly recovered faculty of speech was
to praise God. A pious heart, in such
circumstances, naturally follows this
course. It is appropriate (1) to admit
the justice of God in correcting us for
our sins, (2) to thank Him for the
removal of the chastisement which has
been the sign of His displeasure, and
(3) to acknowledge the benefits derived


40


from the painful discipline to which we
have been subjected.


Vers. 65, 66, *‘ Fear came on all.” —
Wonder and awe filled the souls of
those who heard of these things: in
some cases, no doubt, it took the form
of a guilty fear because of conscious-
ness of sin; In others, that of adoring
gratitude at the prospect of the fulfil-
ment of Messianic hopes; and in others,
that of mere empty astonishment.
Strangely enough all memories of the
events of this time seem to have died
out in the period that elapsed before
John begun his public ministry, as the
marvellous circumstances connected
with his birth are not again alluded to
in the Gospel history. The memory
is too often like a river which carries
down light and trivial matters, while
those that are weighty and valuable
sink out of sight.


Ver. 66. “ The hand of the Lord was
with him.”— 1. To strengthen. 2. To
protect.


The Anzwieties of Love.—‘* What
manner of child shall this be?”
This question has again and again
been asked by all sorts of parents,
about all sorts of children, ever since
the world began. The “best and the
worst of mankind have had their time
of innocence and beauty—have been
welcomed, caressed, talked over, by
those who cared more for them, and
deserved more from them, than any
one else in the world. [f in some
respects a useless question—for time is
indispensable for a full answer to it,
and those who ask it may have dis-
appeared long before the answer is
ready—it is a question full of nature
and pathos. Not to ask it is to be
quite unworthy of the blessing of a
child.

I. What goes to make a child what
Christian parents ought to wish it
to be ?—1. [ts own personality. Every


— 4 7 ee ae


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


human being is absolutely distinct
from every other in mental capacity,
tastes and gifts, disposition and phy-
sical nature. We must make the best
of this separateness. 2. Zhe home sur-
roundings. ‘These make an enormous
difference to a child’s future, whether in
material or spiritual things. Comfort
or discomfort, abundance or penury,
healthiness or squalor, protection from
temptation or exposure to it, the
suitableness or unsuitableness of social
environment, are all powerful factors
in moral development, gravely in-
fluencing a child’s future. 3. The
training. This is of unspeakable
moment. It includes the home atmo-
sphere, the tone of its conversation,
the aim of its ambitions, the spirit of
its pursuits, the scope of its activities.
Ordinary conversation at meal-times
or in the home evening hours moulds
character more than books. 4. The
grace of God. Promised at baptism,
given again and again to the receptive
heart in the opening years, asked for
by godly parents to be a continual
gift, and coming to the child through
the parents as its channels in many
unsuspected ways.

II. What share in the making of
a child is within a parent’s power?
—Helplessness and presumption are
equally fatal here. To know our limi-
tations is the first condition of success.
1. We cannot make a child to order.
Most of us would like to be able to do
so; and if we tried, the result would be
a curious creature. God reserves this
prerogative to Himself. We cannot
repeal the awful law of heredity. We
continually suffer from the consequences
of our parents’ sins. 2. We cannot, after
a certain age, lock up a child in a glass
case.
bad for the case, but much worse for
the child. 3. Wor cun we padlock a
childs mind. Any real or continuous
effort to conceal from the growing
faculties the laws of the universe, the
melancholy facts of the world, the
existence of unbelief, will only compel
a woeful “* Nemesis of faith” when the
padlock is forced open. 4. Much 1s,


If we try to do so, it is usually .


CHAP. I.


however, possible. Much that we can
do, and which God expects us to do.
There is no nobler opportunity, no
more awful talent, no loftier duty,
than that of nurturing and training a
Christian child in the love and fear of
God. By our own life, example, and
conversation we can make a good soil
for the young plant to grow in, and
set a high ideal of motive, and principle,
and duty before the young soul, which
sees, admires, loves, absorbs, unknow-
ingly. Wecan train a child from the
earliest to obey and to deny itself.
We can make them free of the Church’s
privileges. We can always give them
sympathy and love.— Thorold.


Vers. 68-79. The Benedictus.—
Zacharias, the humble father of the
greatest human prophet, closes the
strain of Old Testament prediction on
the threshold of the New Testament.
It is his honour to be the first of
whom it was said that he was “filled
with the Holy Ghost.” His prophetic
song, uttered over the infant fore-
runner, keeps steadily in view the
coming Christ. It belongs to the old
economy in its phraseology and tone,
while it is filled with the Spirit of the
new dispensation. Zacharias speaks
at the outset as one of the old pro-
phets risen again, but his closing words
might be an extract from an apostolic
epistle. To his prophetic glance the
Redeemer’s work is already accom-
plished. The Holy Ghost has raised
this prophetic priest from his incredu-
lity into the full assurance of faith ;
and, like Isaiah at the beginning of
his ministry, he sees in clear perspec-
tive the full development of the king-
dom of grace. The advent of Christ
is that of God “looking upon” His
creatures, “visiting” them to leave
them no more, and “ redeeming ” them
with a spiritual and eternal deliver-
ance. That salvation was to be pro-
vided in the “house of David,” in
performance of the mercy ‘‘ promised
to the fathers.” But it was a salva-
tion proclaimed by the prophets “ since
the world began,” and therefore for


41


CHAP. I.


the world; it was “the oath sworn to
Abraham,” and therefore an eternal
pledge, now virtually redeemed, to the
children of faith; and the blessings of
the everlasting covenant are personal
redemption from those enemies that
make God an object of terror, and
strength to serve Him in_ personal
holiness of consecration and righteous-
ness of life all the days of human
probation. But whatever Old Testa-
ment limitation may have seemed to
linger in this last prophecy vanishes
before the higher influence under which
Zacharias blesses his son’s commission.
In John he beholds “the prophet of
the Highest ” (the “ Highest” and the
“ Son of the Highest” are one), and his
office would be to herald the Light of
the world, coming to pour the day-
spring from on high on the nations
sitting in darkness, and guide the feet
of sinners into the way of peace—to
announce deliverance from no other
yoke than that of evil, “salvation by
the remission of sins.” In due time
that greater son will take up his
father’s prophecy and point to Israel’s
“Lamb of God” as taking away the
‘sin of the world.” But listening to
this closing strain of prophecy, we still
observe that the Redeemer’s dominion
is alone exalted; and as yet the mys-
tery of the Passion is kept veiled. All
is victory, redemption, peace. The eve
of the Incarnation hears no sound but
that of rejoicing ; for here the order is
inverted, and the sorrow of the night
will come after the joy of the morning.
—Pope.


“ Blessed be the Lord God of Israel.”
—Consider for a moment whether we
cannot find evidence in the context of
this canticle that it belongs to the time
to which it is assigned, and can be
referred to no csher, without supposing
an exquisite literary tact totally alien
from apocryphal forgeries. Take this
hymn of Zacharias. What should we
expect from him? The hope of Jesus
Christ and of salvation, rising indeed
a little beyond the Psalms, but. still
in Jewish colours, and under Jewish


42


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


images. Precisely such isits character:
The God whom Zacharias blesses is
Israel’s God. The mighty salvation
is in David’s house. It is the fulfil-
ment of prophecy in the pursuance
of the promise to Abraham. The whole
groundwork of the hymn is Jewish.
The time is felt to be a dawn at best,
“the dayspring from on high”; but
there are vistas which let us behold
the broad light upon the great deep.—
Alexander.


“ Redeemed His people.” —This utter-
ance of Zacharias is something more
than a song or poem—it is a treatise
on salvation. 1. Jts Author. “The
Lord God of Israel.” 2. Zts cause.
‘On account of the tender mercy of our
God.” 3. [ts essence. “Salvation, con-
sisting in remission of sins.” 4. Jés
blessedness and privileges. ‘“ Delivered

. serve without fear.” 5. Its con-
sequence. ‘‘ Holiness and righteous-
ness.” —T/bid.


Thanks to God.—The best expression
of joy, when long cherished desires are
at last on the eve of accomplishment,
is thanks to God. No wonder then
that the first words of the hymn are
a burst of blessing of “the God of
Israel.” —Maclaren.


The Fervour of the Hymn.—It
seems to be implied by ver. 64 that
this song was uttered immediately
on Zacharias’ regaining his speech.
“This canticle, which was composed in
the heart of the priest during the
time of his dumbness, issues solemnly
from his lips when they are unsealed,
as the molten metal flows from the
furnace when an outlet is given to
it” (Godet).


National Aspirations—The song of
Mary expresses her individual feel-
ings, that of Zacharias represents the
aspirations and gratitude of the nation
whom God has visited. Zacharias does
not simply express joyous feelings at
the birth of a son, or even exultation
at the glorious career that lay before


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. I.


eee"


that son. He does not dwell upon his
own relationship to the child, and even
the child himself is unmentioned, until
the mercy bf God in Christ has been
fully celebrated. As in the case of
the Magnificat, no very rigid lines of
division need be looked for in this
lyrical outburst of praise; but the
following are the topics contained in
it: 1. Vers. 68-70—a Deliverer raised
up for Israel in one of David's line.
2. Vers. 71-75—the nature of the
work He was to accomplish is de-
scribed. 3. Vers. 76, 77—the part
to be played by John, as the fore-
runner of Christ. 4. Vers. 78, 79—
the source of this fertilising stream of
grace is in the compassion of God
towards men.


Ver. 68. “ Visited His people.” —Four
centuries had passed since the last
direct communication between heaven
and earth. During that time God had
appeared, as it were, to be absent: no
prophet’s voice had been heard, no
angelic messenger had been seen. In
the Old Testament the purpose of
God’s visiting His people is generally
to judge them ; in the New Testament
it is to show mercy to them.


Ver. 69. “A horn of salvation.”-—Cf.
Ps. exxxii. 16. This may be reckoned
as one of the titles of Christ. The meta-
phor, appropriate enough in the lan-
guage of an agricultural people, is taken
from a bull’s defending itself and attack-
ing enemies with its horns. In Christ
power and authority are given (1) for
the deliverance and defence of His
people, and (2) for the defeat and over-
throw of all His and their enemies.
There is no reference to the horns of
the altar as a place of refuge.


Ver. 70. “ His holy prophets.”—Le.
as the organs made use of for com-
municating God’s holy will. The
prophets did not simply foretell events,
they strove to establish and maintain
right relations between men and God.
Bad men, like Balaam and the old
prophet of Bethel (1 Kings xii. 11),


might sometimes be inspired to predict
the future, but only holy men could
engage in the work of turning the
hearts of the people towards God.


Ver. 71. “Saved from our enemies.”
—In this song of Zacharias there is
more than an anticipation of merely
temporal prosperity for the Jewish
people. “It is the expression of the
aspirations and hopes of a pious Jew,
waiting for the salvation of the Lord,
finding that salvation brought near,
and uttering his thankfulness in Old
Testament language, with which he
was familiar, and at the same time
under prophetic influence of the Holy
Spirit ” (A/ford).


Ver. 72. “ Promised to our fathers.”
—He bethinks himself of those in
the long centuries of the past who
had eagerly desired to see the fulfil-
ment of Divine promises of blessedness
through Christ, and had died with the
desire ungratified ; and hespeaks of the
advent of the Messiah as being an
evidence of God’s mercy to the dead
as well as to the living. This poetical
language is not to be interpreted too
literally.


Vers. 72, 73. John, Zacharias,
Elisabeth—It can scarcely be acci-
dental that the names of the Baptist and
of his parents correspond to three succes-
sive clauses in these verses. John (“the
grace ” or ‘‘mercy of Jebhovah”)—to per-
form the mercy” (ver. 72); Zacharias
(“God has remembered”)—‘“ to re-
member His holy covenant” (ver. 72) ;
Elisabeth (‘God hath sworn ”)—‘ the
oath which He sware” (ver. 73).


Vers. 74, 75. “That we... might
serve Him.” — The spiritual element
in the aspirations of Zacharias here
comes clearly into view: the deliver-
ance of the nation from bondage and
oppression is not the great end in view.
It is desirable as a means for securing
a more perfect service and worship of
God.


43


CHAP. I.


“ Without fear.” —T.e. fear of enemies,
without being distracted by worldly
cares.


The Nature of True Service of God.
—The great purpose which God has in
view in sending Christ for our redemp-
tion is here plainly stated. 1. He
would lead us to serve Him: “that we
should serve Him” (ver. 74), 2. He
would free us from ull distracting cares
—“ without fear” (ver. 74). 3. He
would have this service to be in spirit
and in truth—“ in holiness and right-
eousness before Him”—in the dis-
charge of all the duties we owe to Him
and to our fellows. 4. He would have
us to serve Him thus “all our days”
(ver. 75).


Ver. 74. ‘ Delivered out of the hand
of our enemies.” —As for the prophetic
ideal of the kingdom, it is not so simple
a matter to determine as one may be
at first inclined to think. The general
strain of Hebrew prophecy seems, in-
deed, to point to such a state of things
as Zacharias longed for—Israel de-
livered out of the hands of her enemies,
and serving God without fear and amid
prevalent prosperity. Yet there are
stray utterances here and there which
suggest the doubt whether this idyllic
picture was ever to find a place in the
realm of reality.— Bruce.


The Christian's Priestly Service.—The
priest-prophet Zacharias views the life
of all the emancipated children of God
as one continuous worship, one endless
priestly service: “That we... should
continually do Him worship.” One
word summed up the whole meaning
and purpose of the priestly life of
Zacharias—to do God service, to be
worshipping Him. This word, this Jch
Dien of the faithful priesthood, he
makes the Jch Dien of every child of
God. The one true Priest, whose
coming is so near, shall enable all the
redeemed people to perform the true
service of priests, to celebrate God’s
worship in the long festivity of a
perpetual freedom. The motto of

44


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE,


Christ’s kingdom of priests comes fitly
from the lips of an inspired priest.—
Alexunder.


A Priests Thanksgiving.—tThe pre-
vailing priestly character of Zacharias
hymn is somewhat strongly marked.
It would have been natural to no one
but a priest to cast his Messianic
hopes so prevailingly in the moulds of
the sanctuary.— Warfield.


- Ver. 76. “ And thou, child.”—Zacha-
rias does not say “‘ my son”: the rela-
tion of John the Baptist to him as son
is lost sight of in the higher relation-
ship in which he stands to Christ as
His prophet and forerunner. ‘“ Child”
—lit. “little child”: i.e. “though now
such a little thing, thou shalt be,” ete.


“The Lord.”—This Divine title is
here plainly applied to Christ, as it is
for Christ that John is to prepare the
way.


“ Prepare His ways.’—TI.e. by con-
vincing the people that they stood in
need of redemption from sin rather
than of political emancipation. The
figure used is an allusion to the well-
known practice of Eastern monarchs on
their progresses,


Vers. 76, 77. ‘ Salvation.”—The
Benedictus brings before us, with mar-
vellous power and fulness, the great
gospel doctrine of salvation. “ Salva-
tion consisting in remission of their
sins.” It is evident, from the words
of Zacharias, that a knowledge of the
true nature of salvation was deeply
needed. A false notion of the char-
acter of this Divine salvation was
spread abroad in Israel. A carnal
patriotism was fed by a teaching which
corresponded to the miserable politics
of the pulpit among ourselves. The
distant prospect of political deliver-
ance was substituted for the blessed
certainty of spiritual salvation. There-
fore Zacharias, in his prophecy, gives
the true and sufficient account of the


essential character of salvation. The


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


CHAP. I.





worst slavery is that to evil. Sin is
the darkest “badge of conquest.”
Salvation consists in sins forgiven and
its blessed gonsequences.—A lexander.


Ver. 77. “ Salvation by the remission
of sins.” —J.e. not by merits of our own,
but by betaking ourselves to a free
reconciliation with God.


Vers. 78, 79. “ The dayspring from
on high.”— The various metaphors used
in these verses seem to be borrowed
from the following picture: a caravan
has lost its way, and is wandering in
the desert; the unfortunate pilgrims,
overtaken by the night, cast themselves
upon the ground, and in the midst of
a darkness which appals them wait
for death. Suddenly a bright star
rises on the horizon and fills the plain
with light. The travellers are en-
couraged by the sight, and rise to their
feet; guided by the light of the star,
they find the road which brings them
to the place where they desire to be.—
Godet.


Blessings of Christ's First Coming.
I. An ideal of life.
II. Ilumination.
III. Redemption from sin.
IV. The gift of a new nature.-—
Liddon.


Ver. 78. “ The tender mercy of our
God.”-—What would we ever have done
if God had not been merciful? ‘There
could never have been a soul saved in
this world. Not one of us can ever
find a refuge at any door save the door
of mercy. But here the vilest sinner
can find eternal shelter ; and not mere
cold shelter only, for God’s mercy is
“tender.” We are inside a sweet
home. Our refuge is the very heart of
God. No mother’s bosom was ever so
warm a nest for her own child as is
the Divine mercy for all who find
refuge in it.—WMiller.


Christ the Light of the World.—This
figure is used of Christ (1) by those
who prophesied of His coming (Isa.ix. 2;


Mal. iv. 2); (2) by Himself (John
viii. 12, ix. 5); and (3) by His apostles .
(2 Pet. i. 19; Rev. xxi. 23, xxii. 16).
Sometimes He is spoken of as the
morning star which is the herald and
pledge of the coming day, sometimes
as the dawn or dayspring, and some-
times as the Sun of righteousness.
Just as the sun gives life and warmth
to the earth, so Christ creates and
nourishes spiritual life in the souls
of men.

I. He reveals truth.—He shows
things as they really are: He makes
known what God is and what He
requires of man, and puts to flight
all the erroneous and _ superstitious
ideas which men in their blindness
and ignorance had formed of Him.
He also reveals man to himself, and
shows him his sinfulness and _help-
lessness and misery, and points out
the way by which to pass from sin
to holiness, and from death to life.

II. He gives guidance.—Not only
does He show the way of obedience,
but He has Himself walked in it, and
calls us to be His followers. By His
holy example He reveals to us how
we should serve God and man.

III. He gives strength.—As life
dwindles and grows weak in the
absence of the light of the sun, so does
it revive and flourish when exposed
to its genial influence. In like manner
Christ in His own person imparts
spiritual vigour to us; by His atone-
ment for sin He banishes the despair
which the thought of our past sins
is calculated to excite within us, and
by the present quickening influence
of His Spirit He gives us new supplies
of strength that enable us to overcome
all difficulties in the way of obedience.

IV. He gives comfort and joy.—To
those who are downcast and sorrowful
He imparts hope, to those that are
timid He gives confidence, and to those
that are strong in faith He gives help
to win even greater victories than any
they have yet won. He gives light
in virtue of His own Divine nature,
and hence it is of a higher kind than
that afforded by the teaching and


45


CHAP. II.


example of even the wisest and holiest
of men. He gives, but we receive:
there must be a sense of our own
insufficiency and weakness, and of the
darkness in which by nature we are,
before we can profit by the light He
gives. There must be spiritual life to
be nourished by His beams, or at any
rate a longing for what He has to im-
part ; aspiritual sense—like the natural
sense of sight—to take in the light.


Ver. 80. The Humanity of Christ.—
It is somewhat surprising to find the
growth—corporeal and moral—of John
the Baptist and of the Holy One of
God spoken of, up to a certain point,
in the same language (cf. 1. 40). At
least it witnesses that the second was
as truly human as the first.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


“‘ Wasin the deserts.” —Theadvantages
of this holy retirement: 1. Seclusion
from the world, from its errors, de-
filements, and cares. 2. Nearness to
God—away from the noise and tumult
of human society the voice of God may
be the more clearly heard, communion
with Him more perfectly realised.
Notice that John’s retirement was not
like that of an anchoret, a permanent
mode of life: he was in the deserts
till the day of his showing unto Israel.
Similar instances of temporary seclusion
from society are to be found in the
lives of Moses and St. Paul, and from
time to time in the life of our Lord
Himself. From retirement they come
forth strengthened for a more efficient
service of God and man.


CHAPTER II.


CRITICAL NOTES.


Ver. 1. All the world.—JZ.e. the Roman world (orbis terrarwm). Taxed.—Rather, “ enrolled.”
something like a modern census, but with a view to taxation. : ;

Ver. 2. This was the first enrolment made when Quirinius was governor of Syria (R.V.).—
As Quirinius was governor of Syria in A.p. 6, ten years later than this, and then carried out
a census, some have supposed that St. Luke made a mistake in referring to him here. This
can scarcely be, as St. Luke himself mentions this second “ taxing” in Acts v. 37. The most


satisfactory explanation of the matter seems


to be that Quirinius was trice governor of


Syria, in B.C, 4 as well as in A.D. 6. This seems to be a well-established fact, though there
is no other authority than the Evangelist’s for the “ taxing ” or “ enrolment” during his first


term of office.


Ver. 3. Every one into his own city.—As Judea was a semi-independent kingdom, the regis-
tration ordered by the Roman emperor was carried into effect in accordance with Jewish
customs. The Roman custom was to enrol persons at the place of residence.

Ver. 5. His espoused wife.— Rather, “ who was betrothed to him” (K.V.). “It is uncertain
whether her presence was obligatory or voluntary ; but it is obvious that, after so trying a
time, and after what she had suffered (Matt. i. 19), she would cling to the presence and


protection of her husband” (Farrar),


Ver. 7. First-born.—No inference can be safely drawn from this as to Mary’s having other


children afterwards,


The first-born had a peculiar position assigned to him in the law


(Exod. xiii. 2, xxii. 29). Inn.—A mere caravanserai, affording little else than shelter. The
stable may have been an adjoining cave, as reported by Justin Martyr and the apocryphal


gospels.


Ver. 8. Keeping watch, ete.—This affords no ground for concluding that the nativity cannot


have taken place in winter.


is of late origin.


After the rainy season, at the end of December. sh rds i
Palestine are still accustomed to lead out their flocks. Maite see a


The traditional date (December 25th)


Christmas was not celebrated in the Church till after A.p 3
to have been substituted for a heathen festival. peri aa


Their flock.— Dr. Edersheim has shown


that sheep needed for the daily sacrifices in the Temple were fed near Bethleh
Ver. 9. The angel of the Lord.—Rather, “an angel of the Lord” (&.V.). Came teee them.


— Stood by them” (R.V.).


Glory of the Lord.—“ By it we are to understand that extreme


splendour in which the Deity is represented as appearing to men, and sometimes called the


46


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: s Leyla CLKSE, CHAP, Il.





Shechinah—an appearance frequently attended, as in this case, by a company of angels”
(Bloomfield). Sore afraid.—Lit. “feared a great fear.”

Ver. 10. To all people.—Rather, “to all the people” (R.V.), ze. to Israel. The wider
import of the advent is foreseen by Simeon (ver. 32).

Ver. 11. A SAviour.—The name Jesus is not given, but the title Saviour is equivalent to it.
Christ the Lord.—Christ is the Greek word corresponding to the Hebrew word Messiah, and
' both mean the Anointed One. The Lord is the uniform name used in the LXX. as a
substitute for the ineffable name Jehovah. It is twice used in ver. 9 of God.

Ver. 12. The babe.—Rather, “a babe” (R.V.).

Ver. 13. Heavenly host.—The army of angels which is represented as surrounding the
throne of God (cf. 1 Kings xxii. 19; Ps. ciii. 20, 21, exlviii. 2). From this the title of Lord
of hosts (Sabaoth) is taken.

Ver. 14. In the highest.—In the highest places, i.e. heaven (Job xvi. 19; Ps. exlviii. 1).
Good-will toward men.—Rather, “among men.” By the insertion of a single letter the
nominative case of the word translated ‘‘ good-will” is changed to the genitive, and the
rendering would be, ‘among men of [God’s] good-will,” i.e. in whom He is well pleased.
This is the reading of the four most ancient MSS. and of the Vulgate (hominibus bone
voluntatis), and is followed by the R.V. It yields, however, a somewhat awkward and
unintelligible sense. The great mass of ancient authorities is in favour of the rendering
in our A.V., which is more in accordance with the spirit of the passage than the other.

Ver. 16. Found.—Lit. “ discovered,” after search. Mary and Joseph.—Her name naturally
comes first, in view of the peculiar nature of her motherhood. A manger.—Rather, “ the
manger ” (R.V.), that spoken of by the angel.

Ver. 19. Pondered.—/.e. revolved, put together the various circumstances. She had
evidently not a full understanding of the matter.

The order of events: The flight into Egypt was from Bethlehem, and must have occurred
after the presentation in the Temple. The forty days of purification (ver. 22) are too short
for the journey into Egypt and a returnto Jerusalem. The adoration of the Magi must have
occurred immediately after the presentation. That it could not have occurred before it is
rendered certain from the facts that the revelation of danger to the child Jesus would render
a visit to Jerusalem unsafe, and the gifts offered by the Magi would have provided means for
a richer sacrifice than that described in ver. 24. The return to Bethlehem after the presenta-
tion may indicate that the holy family would have taken up their abode there instead of
returning to Nazareth, but for the danger to which they were exposed by the jealousy of Herod.
Bethlehem was only six miles from Jerusalem.

Ver, 21. The child.—The best MSS. read ‘ Him.”

Ver. 22. Her purification.—The true reading is, “their purification” (R.V.). The mother
was ceremonially unclean by child-birth, the others of the household by daily contact.
The law of purification is given in Lev. xii. At the conclusion of forty days a lamb was to be
offered as a burnt-offering, and a turtle-dove or young pigeon as a sin-offering. In case of
poverty two turtle-doves or young pigeons were to be offered instead, one as a burnt-offering
and the other as a sin-offering. To present Him.—As a first-born male. ‘“ The first-born
-male of every species was sacred to the Lord, in memory of the delivery of the first-born of
the Israelites in Egypt (Exod. xii. 29, 30, xiii. 2). But the first-born male child was to be
redeemed for money (Exod. xiii. 11-15; Num. xviii. 15, 16), and the whole tribe of Levi was
regarded as having been substituted for the first-born (Num. iii. 12, 13)” (Speaker's
Commentary).

Ver. 23. That openeth the womb.—Figurative for ‘ first-born.”

Ver. 24. A pair of turtle-doves, etc.—As no mention is made of the lamb, it has been
reasonably inferred that the holy family were poor.

Ver. 25. Simeon.—According to some the son of the famous Rabbi Hillel and the father
of Gamaliel. This is scarcely possible, as the Simeon of the text seems to have been in
extreme old age (vers. 26-29), while the other was president of the Sanhedrim some seven-
teen or eighteen years later. The name was at this time very common among the Jews.
Just and devout.—Cf. i. 6. The one epithet describes external conduct, the other the
inward, spiritual character. The consolation of Israel.—A beautiful title of Christ or
description of the blessings expected from His coming. Cf, Mark xv. 43.

Ver. 26. The Lord’s Christ.—J.c. the Anointed of Jehovah. Cf. Ps, ii. 2.

Ver. 27. By the Spirit.—Z.e. under the influence of the Spirit.

Ver. 29. Now lettest Thou.—Death seemed near and sure since he had seen the Lord’s
Christ.

Ver. 31. All people.—Rather, “all peoples” (R.V.), divided in ver. 32 into Gentiles (sitting
in darkness, to whom Christ was to be a light) and Jews (whose glory He was to be).

Ver. 32. To lighten the Gentiles.—Rather, “ for revelation to the Gentiles” (R.V.).

Ver. 34. Is set.—Lit. ‘‘lies” : perhaps the figure is akin to that of the stone lying on the
path, which is to some a stone of stumbling, to others a stone of support, The fall and rising


47


cuap. 1,  HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE, :





again.—Rather, “ the fall and rising up” (R.V.), i.e. ‘for the fall of many who now stand,
and for the rising of many who now lie prostrate, ‘that the thoughts of many hearts may be
revealed.’ The child was to be a touch-stone of character, of faith, and of love. God’s true
but hidden servants would embrace Him; the hypocrites would reject Him” (Speaker's
Commentary). The prediction finds fulfilment in the fall of Pharisees and scribes, and the
rising of publicans and sinners. A sign, etc.—That His life and teaching would provoke
violent opposition—a prophecy only too abundantly fulfilled.

Ver. 35. Yea, a sword.—Reference having been made to opposition excited by the life
and teaching of Christ, it is natural to see here an allusion to the grief this would excite in
the heart of His mother; the sword would pierce deepest at the cross. This idea pervades
the Stabat Mater dolorvsa. Any reference to Mary’s anguish for sin, or doubts concerning
the Messiahship of her Son, seems out of place.

Ver. 36, Anna.—The same name as Hannah. A prophetess.—Known as such previous to
this time. Cf. cases of Miriam, Deborah, and Huldah in the Old Testament, the daughters
of Philip in the New (Acts xxi. 9). Aser.—JZ.e. Asher. It is interesting to note the presence of
one belonging to the ten tribes in the Holy Land at this epoch. Had lived, ete.—J.e. had
been married for seven years, and was now a widow of fourscore and four years of age.

Ver. 37. Departed not.—Probably denotes assiduous attendance (cf. Acts ii. 46): it may
mean that her home was in the Temple, that as prophetess she lived in one of the chambers
of the holy building. Fastings.—Only one fast appointed in the law, that on the great Day
of Atonement. The Pharisees were in the habit of fasting twice in the week (xviii. 12), on
Mondays and Thursdays.

Ver. 38. Looked for.—JZ.e. “ expected.” The readings of the last clause in the verse vary:
the R.V. gives it, “looking for the redemption of Jerusalem.” Jerusalem regarded as the
place where redemption would begin. The expectations of these devout souls would be
checked by the flight into Egypt, the withdrawal to Nazareth, and the long years of silence
before the prophecies concerning Christ began to find fulfilment in His public ministry.

Ver. 40. Waxed strong.—The words “in spirit” are added from i. 80; omitted in R.V.
Filled with wisdom,—Lit. “ becoming full of wisdom.” The grace of God.—The favour of God.
The first point noted is healthy physical growth, the second a proportionate increase of
knowledge, and the third an enjoyment of God’s favour.

Ver. 41.—The male Israelites were commanded to attend the three yearly feasts
(Exod. xxiii. 14-17); but the custom seems to have fallen into abeyance. The attendance
of women was not enjoined; but the great Rabbi Hillel had recommended it.

Ver. 42.—At the age of twelve a Jewish boy became “a son of the law,” and came under
the obligation of obeying all its precepts, including attendance at the Passover. It was
probable, if not certain, that this was the first time Jesus had been in Jerusalem at this
feast.

Ver. 48. The days.—The seven days of the feast (Exod. xii. 15). Joseph and His mother.
—‘“ His parents” is the reading of the R.V.

Ver. 44. The company.—The caravan, made up of those of the same district from which
the pilgrims came.

Ver. 46. After three days.—According to the Jewish idiom, this would be equivalent to
“on the third day.” The days are easily accounted for: at the close of the first day Jesus
was missed; the second day would be occupied with searching for Him on the way back to
Jerusalem ; on the third they found Him in the Temple. In the Temple.—T.e. in the part of it
to which Mary could go (ver. 48), probably in one of the porches of the court of the women.
The doctors.—Teachers of the law, Jewish Rabbis. Hearing them, and asking them ques-
tions.—The order of the words precludes the idea of Jesus sitting among them as a teacher.
He was there rather as a learner, and, according to the custom of Jewish scholars, asking
questions.

Ver. 48. Thy father and I.—The use of this phrase is natural enough; but it is really
inconsistent with the facts of the case. Jesus by implication draws attention to this fact
in His reply. “He knew and felt that there was something in Him and in His previous
history, which ought to be known to Mary and Joseph, that justified His being where He was,
and forbade their anxiety about Him” (Popular Commentary, Schaff).

Ver. 49. About My Father’s business.—Rather, “in My Father’s house” (R.V.). The
phrase in the original might be translated in either way; but the latter rendering is so vivid
ale happily suited to the circumstance of the case as to make it seem the more probable
of the two.

Ver, 51. Subject unto them,—Probably wrought at His reputed father’s trade (Mark vi. 3).
This is the last notice of Joseph : tradition speaks of him as advanced in age on his marriage
with Mary. Probably he died at some time during the eighteen years which elapsed between
this time and the beginning of our Lord’s public ministry.

Ver. 52. Increased,—Rather, “advanced” (R.V.). Stature,—Or, “age.” The word, if taken
in the latter sense, would include the former.


48


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE. CHAP. It.


Arr


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—20.


The Vollntary Self-humiliation of Jesus.—This history, it has been said,
begins with great majesty, as it tells of the Emperor Augustus, at whose feet
lay the whole known world, and to whose command obecience was rendered in
every country, and city, and village. It descends to tell of the humble circum-
stances in which a child was born in one of the obscurest villages in one of his
provinces ; but it rises again into majesty as it describes the appearance of
angels to celebrate the true glory and greatness of this child. But we may see
in the passage a detailed account of that great act of self-renunciation of which
the apostle speaks: ‘‘ Ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that, though
He was rich, yet . . . He became poor.” The Evangelist first records the lowly
circumstances that attended His advent to earth, and reveals the true majesty
that clothed Him even then.

I. There is nothing to distinguish Him to outward appearing from multitudes
of other of His fellow-subjects in the kingdom of Herod, or the empire of
Cesar Augustus. His parents are enrolled. with their neighbours in the
register at Bethlehem; for though they are of royal descent, their claim to
exceptional rank has fallen into abeyance. It is now a mere genealogical
curiosity, and the fact that the carpenter of Nazareth can trace up his lineage
to David is not likely to trouble the peace of the most jealous of tyrants. It
is as the son of an artisan that the name of Jesus would be enrolled.

II. Poverty and hardship mark His nativity.—Not even a house to shelter
her can His mother find when the time comes for His birth. The inn was full:
no friendly roof afforded the comfort and hospitality of which she stood in need,
and it was a stable that first covered His head, and a manger that formed His
first cradle.

III. He passed through the stage of helpless and unconscious infancy—
being in all things made like His brethren. No preternatural glory shone
about Him: it is by His wearing the first childish swathings, hastily extem-
porised perhaps by His virgin mother, and by the rude fashion of His resting-
place, that the shepherds are to discover Him. Yet even while He lies on His
hard bed in poorest guise there are not wanting signs of His great and
unapproachable majesty. 1. Heaven opens, and angels descend to proclaim and
celebrate His birth ; the glorious light that breaks in upon the darkness of
earth, the multitude of celestial beings, and the song of praise, bear witness
to the greatness and significance of the event that has just taken place in
Bethlehem. 2. In no uncertain terms the angel speaks of Jesus as the possessor
of a mightier throne than that of Cesar. He is Lord of angels and of men.
He is the Anointed One, whose power, and authority, and dignity are typified
and faintly shadowed forth in kingly, priestly, and prophetic offices. 3. He not
only deserves but receives homage and worship from men. The shepherds hasten
to find the new-born babe, that they may kneel at His feet; and in them He
receives the first-fruits of that loyal service which one day will be fully rendered
to Him by all created beings.

It is by the eye of faith that the majesty of Christ is discerned ; it is the
loving heart that believes the heavenly message. If, therefore, we would follow
the example of the angels and of the shepherds, and receive Christ in His true
character as our God and Saviour, we must have a faith and love like theirs.


CHAP, II.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE,


er.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 1—20.


Ver. 1.“ A decree from Cesar Augus-
tus.”—The providence of God is dis-
covered to us in the Bible, overruling
the actions of mankind, and adapting
them to ends and purposes of which
their authors were little conscious.
Thus the present “ taxing,” whether
dictated by the ambition, or the curio-
sity, or the avarice of the Roman
emperor, is shown to have furnished
an occasion for drawing this holy pair
from their remote home in Nazareth
of Galilee to Bethlehem of Judza—the
village which the finger of Provi-
dence had long before pointed out as
destined to be the place of Messiah’s
birth; so entirely was Augustus
ministering to the Divine pleasure,
while in the exercise of imperial power
he followed the dictates of his own
unfettered will.—Burgon.


Ceesar’s Unconscious Obedience to God.
—The unconscious obedience of Cesar
Augustus to the Divine will illus-
trates the statement in Prov. xxi. 1:
“The king’s heart is in the hand of
the Lord, as the rivers of water: He
turneth it whithersoever He will.”


“ The whole world.” —The whole habit-
able world is related to Jesus, who
was willing to be enrolled in the same
catalogue with them, and not with

Jews alone.—Wordsworth.


A Testimony to Christ's Greatness.—
The whole world was moved to bring
about the fulfilment of the prophecy :
this a testimony to the pre-eminent
greatness of Jesus.


“ Should be taxed.”—-Though Judea
was still under the rule of a king of her
own, he was subject to Cesar, and even
this semblance of independence was now
passing away. This “ first enrolment ”
was but preparatory to the subsequent
transformation of Judea into a Roman
province. “The sceptre was just de-
parting from Judah” (Gen. xlix. 10)
when Christ was born.


60


Ver. 4. “ Joseph also went up... to
Bethlehem.” —It had been foretold that
there Christ was to be born. Yet the
fulfilment of the prophecy was not
brought about by any human con-
trivance or plan. Joseph and Mary
went up to Bethlehem in obedience to
the emperor’s decree; and, so far as
the fulfilment of the prophecy was con-
cerned, were led like the blind by a
Divine hand.


Ver. 7. ‘‘ She brought forth her first-
born son.”—As by a woman death
had been conveyed to all mankind, so
was now a woman made the blessed
instrument whereby He who is our
life came into the world.—Burgon.


“ Swaddling clothes and . . . @man-
ger.’ —No man will have cause to com-
plain of his coarse robe, if he remembers
the swaddling clothes of this Holy
Child ; nor to be disquieted at his hard
bed, when he considers Jesus laid in a
manger. The lowly circumstances con-
nected with the birth of Jesus served two
purposes: 1. They concealed the great
event from the eyes of the thoughtless,
sinful world. 2. They revealed the
Divine condescension—the Son of God,
who, though rich, for our sakes became
poor (2 Cor. viii. 9; Phil. ii, 5-8),
The humility of His birth was char-
acteristic of His whole spirit and life.
‘“‘ For our sakes He was born a stranger
in an open stable ; He lived without a
place of His own wherein to lay His
head, subsisting by the charity of good
people ; and He died naked on a cross
in the close embraces of holy poverty ”
(a saying of St. Francis of Assisi).
His example rebukes the worldly
spirit which prizes outward pomp, and
wealth, and rank, and despises things
that are unpretentious and lowly—
which is captivated by the transitory
and blind to the eternal.


Christ in the Manger.—In the’
manger, where lay the food for cattle,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





there now lies the bread of angels, the
sacred body, which nourishes us for
eternal life.— Bede,


“Vo root for them in the inn.” —
“He came unto His own, and they
that were His own received Him not”
(John i. 11). The silent entrance of
the Son of God into the world is very
striking. ‘The unfathomable depths
of the Divine counsels were moved;
the fountains of the great deep were
broken up; the healing of the nations
was issuing forth; but nothing was
seen on the surface of human society
but this slight rippling of the water.”


The Purpose of Christ's Humiliation.
—We see what sort of beginning the
Son of God had, and in what cradle
He was placed. Such was His con-
dition from His birth, because He had
taken upon Him our flesh, that He
might ‘empty Himself” (Phil. ii. 7)
on our account. When He was thrown
into a stable and placed in a manger,
and a lodging refused Him among men,
it was that heaven might be opened to
us, not as a temporary lodging, but as
our eternal country and inheritance,
and that angels might receive us into
their abode.—Calvin.


Vers. 8-20. “ The herald angels sing.”

I. The angel is the first evangelist.
—-Mark how steadily his words climb
up from the cradle to the throne. The
full joy and tremendous wonder of the
first word are not felt till we read
the last. It was much that there
was born a Saviour, a Messiah; but
the last word “Lord” crowns the
wonder and the blessing, while it lays
the only possible foundation for the
other two names.

II. The message is for men.—‘“ To
you” first, to Israel; but its proffer
stretches far wider, and includes all
mankind. The angel speaks as one
who has no share in the blessing.
There is no envy, but there is the
consciousness of non-participation. Yet
the blessed life and death which are
our salvation are their instruction in


CHAP. It.





depths of Divine love, which could
not else be disclosed to them who
never fell.

Ill. The confirming sign.—This
might rather have seemed fitted to
contradict the glad tidings. It is a
strange mark by which to identify
one born to such lofty tasks and digni-
ties, that He is, like all other infants,
wrapped in swaddling clothes, and,
unlike the child of the poorest, lies
ina manger. Humiliation is the sign
of majesty, the depth of lowliness, a
witness of the height of glory. The
cradle that was too poor for a child
of man is fitting for the Son of God.

IV. The angelic chorus.—The one
angel voice has barely time to tell its
message, when, as if unable longer to
be silent, “‘suddenly” the “ multitude
of the heavenly host pours out its
praise.” I adhere to the old reading
which divides the angel chorus into
three clauses, of which the first and
second may be regarded as the double
result of that birth, while the third
describes its deepest nature. The
incarnation and work of Christ are
the highest revelation of God. The
wondrous birth brings harmony to
earth.— Maclaren.


The First Gospel Preaching.

I. The message is good news.—
Christianity 1s not a mere re-enact-
ment of the moral law, but news of
salvation to those who have broken
that law.

II. Of great joy.—Neither conviction
of sin, nor admonition of punishment,
is the gospel, for these are not mess-
ages of great joy; they are the ground-
work of preparation for the gospel.
Nothing is gospel that is not joy-
producing in those receiving it.

III. To all people.—To all ages,
all nations, all classes, in society.
Primarily, to the Jewish people, out
the larger meaning is implied in this
and in the preceding chapter.

IV. The cause of this joy.—The
advent of a “Saviour” to save His
people from their sins, “Christ” the
anointed High Priest of God; “the


51


OHAP II.


Lord,” the very incarnation of Jehovah
timeself.

V. The sign.—The proof of His
divinity—the very humility of love;
that He should be found cradled in
a manger.—a bboit.


Ver. 8. “ Shepherds.” —This employ-
ment of tending sheep had _ been
honoured in the earlier times of the
Jewish people by its having been that
in which Jacob, Moses, and David had
been engaged ; but now it was a calling
that was looked upon by the Jews
with contempt. The prophets had often
made use of itin figurative descriptions
of the work of the Messiah; and our
Lord frequently spoke of Himself as
having that relation to His people
which a shepherd has to his flock.


The Spiritually-minded first hear of
the Advent.—It was necessary that, as
Christ had been born into the world, the
fact should be communicated to men.
He must be known in order that men
might be drawn unto Him. But the
annunciation of His advent was not
made, in the first instance, to the
rulers of the people or to the priests ;
for, as far as we can judge, both these
classes of men were under the influence
of worldly thoughts and ambitions,
which blinded them to spiritual things.
These shepherds, on the other hand, if
we may judge from analogy, belonged
to the class of those who were ‘ wait-
ing for the consolation of Israel.” The
character of the others, to whom the
special revelations recorded in these
first two chapters of St. Luke’s Gospel
were given—of Zacharias, Elisabeth,
Simeon, and Anna—justifies our coming
to this conclusion,


“ Keeping watch over their flock.”—-
It was while they were engaged in
their calling that they saw the heavenly
vision—a, privilege denied the hermit-
like Essenes, who forsook secular
employments, and gave themselves up
to mystical contemplations, and to
what they regarded as exclusively
sacred exercises.


52





pa =


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


Ver. 9. “ The glory of the Lord.” —At
every period in the humiliation of Christ
some notable declaration of His Divine
glory is given. In this place, it is by the
angel’s message; in His circumcision,
it is by the name Jesus; in His pre-
sentation in the Temple, it is by the
testimony of Simeon ; in His baptism,
it is by the protest of John; and the
same fact was manifested in many
ways in the course of His passion,—
Bengel.


“ They were sore afraid.” —The cause
of their fear was a sense of sinfulness
and of alienation from God, and a
dread of His righteous displeasure.
This fear could only be dispelled by
an authoritative doclaration, such as
that now given, of God’s compassion
towards the sinful, and of His gift
of a Saviour. These good tidings
were the source of true joy; for until
men have peace with God, through
Christ, all joy is deceitful and short-
lived.


Vers. 10, 11. The First Christmas
Sermon.—We are justified in calling
it a sermon because of the angel’s
words : “I bring you good tidings” ; or,
“T preach the gospel” (<dayyeAiZo).

I. The preacher.—< The angel.” So
great was the message that no less a
personage was worthy to bear it. The
angels desire to look into the things
that concern the salvation of men.
God’s dealings with men reveal to
them the depths of Divine wisdom and
love. They are intimately associated
with the history of Christ's redeeming
work, Angels told beforehand of His
birth, and that of His forerunner; here
they celebrate and announce His birth;
they ministered to Him after His
temptation in the wilderness ; an angel
strengthened Him during His agony
in the garden; an angel rolled away
the stone from His sepulchre; and
angels announce to the disciples the
fact that He had risen from the dead,
and at His ascension angels prophesy
of His second coming.


II, The audience.—“ Said unto


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CLAP, IL,


ae i eee es,


them,” 7.e. to the shepherds. As the
message the angel bore concerned all
men, any men might have been selected
to hear it first: any on whom he
chanced to come would have been
_ qualified to receive it—for he came to

tell of the birth of a Saviour of whom
allstandin need. But there was special
appropriatenessin these shepherds being
_ the first to hear of it. For they were
Jews, and therefore acquainted with
the promises of deliverance and re-
demption which now were to be fulfilled
in Christ : they followed a simple mode
of life, and were evidently of a devout
frame of mind, so that they were not
likely to be biassed by the prejudices
and misconceptions which prevented
so many from recognising the Divine
glory of Christ ; and then, too, they
were in the immediate neighbourhood
of ‘the place where this great event
had occurred.

III. The message.—‘ Be not afraid,”
etc. 1. The first words are to allay
their fears—“ Fear not”; it is not ill
news he brings, but good news: they
are to be made partakers of a “ great
joy ”—a ‘joy so great as to gladden
the heart of every member of their
nation and of the human race.
2. Then the glad tidings are fully
unfolded. “To-day,” in the village
hard by, Ore has been born who is
“a Saviour ”—for the sick, the sinful,
the lost, and the perishing—who is
“ Christ,” anointed of God to fulfil all
the offices of expiation, enlightenment,
and rule, prefigured and signified by
priests, propl ets, and kings—and who
is of Divine nature, ‘the Lord.”
Others had in some special emergency
and for a portion of their lives been
deliverers or saviours of God’s people
from temporal evils; but He is Saviour
from the first, and all through His
life, and the evils from which He
delivers are the worst which assail
and destroy the bodies and souls of
men.

The duties that rest upon us are to
hear the glad tidings as specially con-
cerning us, and as being the best news
that could be brought to our knowledge,


and to receive the Saviour sent to us
from heaven.


Vers. 10-15. Luke's Narrative of the
Incarnation.—The leading ideas of the
narrative of the Incarnation in Luke’s
Gospel, the aspects from which he
regarded it, and from which he wished
the Church to regard it, are suggested
in a summary form by this glorious
passage.

I. The Incarnation is real.—The
Saviour is no shadowy, unreal being.
he is really born, a real babe, wrapped
in swaddling clothes, in a definite place,
at a definite date in human history. It
was a true human birth; it was a true
human body. There was with equal
truth a true human soul. The reality
of the Incarnation, according to Luke,
was twofold: 1. Physiological (i. 35).
It is natural that the physician-
evangelist should note the successive
stages in the early development of
Him who was so wonderfully born.
He is ‘conceived in the womb of
Mary”; “the fruit of her womb”;
“the Holy Thing to be born”; “the
Babe”; ‘Her Son”; “the Child”;
“the Boy”; the Man “about thirty
years old.” 2. Historical. See i. 3.
In the present section the reality
is emphasised by a date which was
intenced to fix its place in the domain of
history (‘the taxing under Cyrenius ”).
This is supplemented by other chrono-
logical marks which touch upon the
records of several governments, and
which, when compared with the state-
ment of the Saviour’s age, materially
aid in bringing us to the period of
His birth.

II. The universality of the Incarna-
tion.—The remedy is not merely for
the Jewish race, or for a selected few,
the special favourites of Heaven. It
is for the whole diseased material of
human nature; for all the sinful, the
weary, the suffering; for the whole
great army of the miserable and guilty
in every land. Hence in Luke’s Gospel
Jesus meets all who cross His path
with impartial sympathy. Hence Just
before He leaves the earth He com-


53


<


OMAP. II.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





mands His disciples to preach ‘“ re-
pentance and remission of sins in His
name among all the nations.”

III. The Incarnation is joy-bringing.
--When the voice of her who had
conceived “ the Holy Thing which was
to be born” reached Elisabeth, the
Holy Ghost filled her with a sweet
surprise, and ‘‘the Babe leaped in her
womb for joy.” The angel of the Lord


upon the first Christmas eve struck °


the key-note not only of the Incarna-
tion prelude, but of the whole gospel.
“ Behold, I bring you good tidings of
great joy.” As it begins, so it ends.
** And they worshipped Him, and re-
turned to Jerusalem with great joy.”—
Alexander.


Ver. 10. “Good tidings of great joy
. to all people.”—The word “ joy”
fills a larger place in Scripture than in
ordinary Christian life. In Scripture
we find joy not only as a promise, but
as a precept, imperative, unconditional,
oft-repeated: ‘ Rejoice in the Lord
alway.” Joy is the overflow of happi-
ness. Before joy in the Christian
sense there must be happiness.

I. The messenger of joy.— An angel.
To a fallen being great joy can only
come in the form of tidings from
heaven. Earth is dark with sin and
woe, Happiness is out of reach of the
sinner, unless God shall say to him
some entirely new thing. “ Revela-
tion” is the one hope for all that
concerns happiness of the creature
that has sinned. “ Tidings” then—
but what tidings? A new revelation
of duty, or a new gospel ?

II. The message of joy.—A birth.
The gospel is a Divine incarnation ;
the removal not by us, but for us,
through the death of the God-man,
of human guilt. Believe this, and you
have life. Christ born on purpose
that He might die—this is the gospel.

III. The recipients of joy.—‘ All
people.” Joy to the whole of each
people. The Jewish people was only
the sample of all peoples. ‘‘ Whosoever
will” is the gospel call. It is our
bounden duty to present the gospel to


54


the world as good tidings of great
joy to all people. The gospel
preached as joy for all people, so large
and free that it has room for all, unites
all, has a voice for all characters, and
prevails already with all kinds—this
is God’s gospel. Let this be the joy of
each receptive heart.— Vaughan.


“To all the people” (R.V.).—While
there is a seeming restriction, the word
chosen, ‘‘to all the people,” would in
due time bear its largest and most com-
prehensive application.—Pope.


“Good tidings.”—-The words of the
angel to the shepherds fulfil the
prophecy of Isaiah (lxi. 1), which
Christ afterwards quoted as setting
forth the greatest of the blessings He
was to bestow: “The poor have good
tidings [the gospel] preached to them”
(Matt. xi. 5).


“ Great joy.” —These words show us
that until men have peace with God,
and are reconciled to Him through
the grace of Christ, all the joy they
experience is deceitful and of short
duration. Ungodly men frequently
indulge in frantic and intoxicating
mirth ; but if there be none to make
peace between them and God, the
hidden stings of conscience must pro-
duce fearful torment. The beginning
of solid joy is to perceive the fatherly
love of God toward us, which alone
gives tranquillity to our minds.-—
Calvin.


“ To all people.” —The announcement
is national in its character, for “ the
people” here referred to are the de-
scendants of Abraham. Yet the
message is sent to Israel in order that
it may be communicated by them to
all mankind. Both in ver. 14 (“ good-
will toward men”) and in ver. 32 (“a
light to lighten the Gentiles”) the
wider import of Christ’s birth is
recognised. See how the circle widens :
1. Good tidings to the shepherds (“I
bring you). 2. Joy for ‘all the people,”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


z.e. the Jewish people. 3. God’s mercy
and love are for all mankind (‘“ good-
will toward men,” ver. 14).


Vers. 11, 12. “Christ the Lord . . .
the Babe.”"—The angel of the Lord
described Jesus Christ by most re-
markable names—the Saviour, Christ
the Lord, and the Babe! This mar-
vellous combination of almightiness
and helplessness has its counterpart
in the whole doctrine and history of
Christianity itself. Viewed in its
merely human and literary aspect,
what can be less pretentious than
Christianity—expounded in the small-
est of books, upheld by unlearned and
ignorant men, without a temple, a
priesthood, a ritual? On the other
hand, viewed in its spiritual aspects,
what can exceed in grace and glory
the idea of subduing, regenerating,
and glorifying the whole world ?—
Parker.


Ver. 11. “Unto you.”—The words
are emphatic, and perhaps may be
taken as implying that the anticipa-
tion of a coming Saviour had been
strong in these men’s minds.


“Oity of David.”—It is taken for
granted that the shepherds were ac-
quainted with those prophetic passages
of Holy Scripture which (1) declared
that the coming Deliverer would spring
from the house of David, and (2) which
pointed out Bethlehem as the place
where He would be born.


“4 Saviour.”—The name Jesus is
not given here, but the title of the
“ Saviour” is equivalent to it.


Salvation.—It is a curious fact that
“ Saviour” and “salvation,” so common
in St. Luke and St. Paul (in whose
writings they occur forty-four times),
are comparatively rare in the rest of
the New Testament. “Saviour” only
oceurs in John iv. 42, 1 John iv. 14,
and six times in 2 Peter and Jude;
“salvation” only in John iv. 22, and


CHAP. II.


thirteen times in the rest of the New
Testament.—farrar.


Ver. 12. “A sign.”—Rather, “the
sign” (R.V.). A sign is not asked for by
them, yet one is given them. God does
not always call for the manifestation
of a heroic faith, but is sometimes
pleased, in His mercy, to strengthen
faith when it is subjected to a test
that might break it down. It put,
indeed, no slight strain upon faith to
be asked to believe that an infant, a
few hours old, and born in poverty and
obscurity, was Christ and Lord. The
sign given served a twofold purpose:
(1) it enabled the shepherds to identify
the child of whom the angel spake, and
(2) it confirmed their faith in the good
tidings brought to them.


Ver. 13. “ Suddenly.”—As if eager
to break in as soon as the last words
of the wonderful tidings had dropped
from their fellows’ lips.—Brown.


“ 4A multitude.”—Among men the
testimony of ‘‘two or three witnesses ”
(Matt. xviii. 16) is sufficient to remove
all doubt. But here is a heavenly
host with one consent and one voice
bearing testimony to the Son of God.—
Calvin.


“ Praising God.”—It was the birth-
day of the new creation. A new
corner-stone was being laid. Well,
therefore, may the morning stars have
sung together, and all the sons of God
have shouted for joy.— Burson.


Ver. 14. “Glory to God im the
highest.”"—The song of the angels
expresses the wonder and joy which
God’s redeeming love towards mankind
excites in their hearts (cf. 1 Pet.i. 12).
It consists of a twofold prayer: (1)
that praise may ascend from earth,
and pass through the heavens to the
throne of God exalted above them all;
(2) that all through the earth there
may be that peace that comes from
reconciliation with God: and it closes
with a statement of the reason for


55


CHAP. Ii.


“are t


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY :ST. LUKE.





this praise and of the Sround of this
peace—God’s good-will is now made
manifest to men and dwells among
them. ‘Glory [be] to God in the
highest, and on earth [let there be]
peace, [because of His] good-will to-
ward men.”


The Worship of Angels.—The words
of the angels present us with an ex-
ample of the worship rendered to God
in heaven, which consists, aS we see,
of praise and thanksgiving, without
petitions or supplications. With it
we may fitly compare the adoration
rendered in heaven by redeemed souls
(Rev. v. 9,.10).


“Glory to God,” ete—The hymn
consists of three propositions, which
may be taken either as expressions of
desire or of actual fact: “Glory [be]
to God”; or, “ Glory [is] to God.” It
seems more natural to take the first
and second propositions as being of the
nature of prayers, and the third as a
statement of the fact upon which the
devout aspirations which precede it are
based. In the first— Glory to God in
the highest” —the angels who have come
down upon the earth ask that, in the
heavens above them up to the very
throne of God, the blessed spirits of
whom they are but a small company,
should begin a song of praise in honour
of the Divine perfections which shine
forth in the wonderful gift bestowed
upon men. Zhe second—‘‘on earth
peace ”—1is the complement of the first.
The angels ask that on this earth,
troubled by sin and disturbed by strife,
the Divine peace which they themselves
enjoy may descend—a peace which
should result from the reconciliation im-
plied in this birth. And then the third
—‘“ good-will toward men” —affords jus-
tification of the two preceding prayers.
This is the reason why praise should be
rendered to God in heaven, and why
peace should henceforth reign on earth.
God has manifested in a signal manner
His special good-will towards men.—
Godet.


56


The Angels’ Song—The whole life
of our Saviour was a commentary on
these words. His aim was to glorify
His Father’s name, to establish peace
between heaven and earth, and to mani-
fest God’s good-will to men.

I. Glory to God.—This is the first
thought in the angels’ minds, and
should be our ruling motive in all our
conduct. ‘‘ Whether, therefore, ye eat
or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to
the glory of God” (1 Cor. x. 31). In
the Lord’s Prayer Jesus has taught us
to utter prayers and aspirations for the
hallowing of God’s name, the coming of
His kingdom, and the doing of His
will, before we offer petitions on our
own behalf.

II. Peace on earth.—Christ was the
ambassador telling us that God was
willing to pardon our sins, and to lay
aside His just anger against them, and
seeking to lead us by repentance and
submission to a firm and lasting peace
with Him. His object was to abolish
all fear, and anxiety, and enmity: to
give our disturbed consciences rest ; to
free us from the cares, and doubts, and
perplexities which so often distract our
thoughts ; and to fill our hearts with
love to God and to our brethren.

III. “@ood-will to men.”—God’s
good-pleasure toward us, and not any
merits of our own, forms the ground
on which we look for salvation. His
pity for us in our helplessness moved
Him to send His Son for our redemp-
tion. “God commendeth His love
toward us, in that, while we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us” (Rom.
v. 8). The thought of this great and
undeserved love that has been shown
to us should fill our hearts with humility,
and gratitude, and faith,


The Angelic Doxology—The angels
themselves retire, no more to be seen
until the second coming of the Lord—
their Lord and ours. But their song
of sympathy with man remains, to be
studied and echoed in innumerable
songs by those whom it most concerned.
Their doxology is at once prophecy and
hymn. Its strain makes heaven and


=


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


earth one. In Christ, on the night
beginning His new hfe in human
nature, they behold accomplished re-
demption. ¥* Glory” redownds to God
in the accomplishment of iis eternal
counsel for the salvation of men}; and
that glory is declared by anticipation
to be rendered on earth, as it is already
rendered in heaven. As to mun, the
prophetic doxology of the angels speaks
of “ peace”—-the peace of a reconciling
gospel, proclaiming the Divine recon-
ciliation to the world. We hear in
the angels’ hymn the most perfect
tribute to the finished work of “ Christ
the Lord.”—Pope.


Ver. 15. “ Leé us now go even
unto Bethlehem.” —The angels withdraw
from the scene; the shepherds at once
seek the infant Redeemer. That which
to the heavenly visitants is a matter
of interest is to men a matter of
concern, for He is their Saviour.


The Hidden Beauties of Bethlehem.

I. The darkness that enfolds the
wonderful Incarnation by night.—We
would have expected the “ Light of
the world” to be born in the sunniest
hour of the day—the day most full
of light in that briliant Eastern land.
Yet it is far otherwise. Does He not
love to be born in our souls, now, not
in the noontide of sin and passion,
but in sad and lonely hours, in dark
seasons ¢

II. Notice next the stillness around
Bethlehem.—The strange, awful peace
reigning in this cavern nursery. The
villagers are not thronging the streets
in wonder. What a surprise to the
shepherds to find the streets empty,
and none crowding in before them at
the stable door! They look in. Only
a poor Jewish maiden, and an old man,
bending over a little child. In this
silence we learn one of the greatest
secrets of our holy religion. Jesus
can only come to the silent, waiting,
prayerful soul.—WMellor.


Ver. 16. The Manger Scene.
I. The scene as a whole.—lIit repre-
sents pre-eminently the disclosure of


CHAP. II.


Divine love, God’s self-disclosure. God’s
revelation of Himself all through the
universe has here reached its culmi-
nating point.

II. Each particular figure in the
group. —1. Jesus in His hel; less infancy.
The lesson of humility, the lesson of
obedience. Realise the sin of man’s
claim—utterly false claim—to be inde-
pendent of God. Jesus teaches that
the true worth of human life is just
in proportion as men learn to obey.
Look at the infant Saviour, and learn
this dignity of utter, boundless de-
pendence upon God. 2. Mary bending
over the cradle. What is the secret
of this majestic pattern of womanhood
and motherhood? It is the same
thing under another form. Lvye’s dis-
obedience was a demand to be inde-
pendent of God. Mary reverses the
disobedience'of Eve. “ Be it unto me
according to Thy word.” Mysterious
and majestic was the claim which
came upon her. In principle the
same claim comes upon us. God needs
us, has work for us to do. Our self-
surrender, our correspondence with
God, makes it possible for God to use
us. Will we correspond? Will we
take Mary’s words into our lips, ‘ Be
it unto me according to Thy word” ?
3. Joseph is the third in the group.
We do not think enough of his glory
in that he yields himself with such
quiet dignity to the strange claims of
God upon him. He accepted the ex-
traordinary claim which religion laid
upon him. He constituted himself
the foster-father, the protector, of
Mary and her Divine Child. And
there is asked of us all an ordinary
thing, which does lay upon men some-
thing of the same sort as was laid
upon Joseph-—the requirement that
we should be the protectors of religion,
even though it costs us much.—Grore.


The Beginning of Christian Worship.
—When the shepherds with Joseph
and Mary knelt at the manger-cradle,
they inaugurated Christian worship,
and the communion of saints: by
making known “the saying told them


57


OHAP. II.


HOMILETICG COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





concerning this Child,” they became
the first preachers of the gospel. They
received no commission to spread the
glad tidings; but doubtless they felt
like Peter and John, “‘ we cannot but
speak the things which we have seen
and heard” (Acts iv. 20).


Ver. 17. “ They made known abroad
the saying.’—We see in the shepherds
an example (1) of faith in the message
from heaven; (2) of obedience to the
command to seek the Saviour; (3) of
zeal in commun iating to others the
glad tidings concerning Jesus, and
(4) of attention to present duties ; for
after adoring their Saviour they return
(ver. 20), with love to God in their
hearts, and with praise to Him on
their lips, to the duties of their daily
life.


Vers. 18, 19. ‘‘ Wondered . . . pon-
dered.” —The impressions formed upon
different hearts by witnessing these
great events, or by hearing of them:
1, Mere wonder excited, which soon
passed away. 2. A retention of them
and meditation upon them.


Ver. 19. The Grace of Meditation.—
The text gives more than a mere
feature of Mary’s character: it pre-
sents: to us her main and distinctive
quality.

I. She kept these things in her
heart.— How marvellous the experience
of that one year! The Annunciation,
the Birth, the Angelic Choir, the
Shepherd Visitors,—well can we under-
stand how she, the blessed and
honoured mother, kept all these sayings
in her heart ; lost not the remembrance
by day or by night, but treasured it in
her inmost soul as that which could
not pass nor be forgotten.

II. She pondered them in her
heart..-The word denotes putting
together, combining and harmonising ;
that process which is a first condition
of all true knowledge. Much, in her
case, needed such harmonising. Who
was she, te have such a destiny ?
Who was He of whom she had become


58


the mother? The wonder is, not that
she long pondered, but that she ever
believed. The very possession of the
earthly presence must have impeded
rather than facilitated the realisation
of the heavenly. Do we, however,
follow Mary’s example? We have in
its full compass, God’s revelation—our
own individual history—our spiritual
condition—our hopes for the future—
abundant materials for meditation.
But we must first realise such things
before we can either keep them or
ponder. One great temptation of our
age is to neglect reflection. How “
different our restless modern life from
the still, tranquil life of the villages of
Palestine. We are in danger of dis-
sipating even religious thoughts, and
of drowning the very voice of con-
science in the multitude of our pro-
fessions and the variety of our doings.
Let us then cultivate the peculiar
grace which shone in the Lord’s
mother. If we read little, let us
keep it well: if we read much, let it
be because we have time to ponder.
Haste in Divine things is ever a sign
of heartlessness. A. moment spent in
self-recollection is worth hours of
sacred reading without it. The test of
true religion lies, for every man, in this
self-examination. Without this there
cannot be a heart right with God, nor
a mind resolutely set on things above.
Where there is a want of this ponder-
ing, of this musing and meditating, on
the things of God, there can be but
a feeble hold upon spiritual realities.
Mere familiarity with the sound of
God’s revelation may lead as much to
spiritual ignorance as to intellectual
knowledge.

III. There are many ways of prac-
tising this grace of meditation.—Firm,
resolute self-examination is one of
these ; and earnest, steady contempla-
tion of God, and Christ, and the Holy
Spirit as revealed to us in the Scrip-
tures is another one of these; and
praying over a verse or two of the
Bible, on the strength of their being
true, and in reference to their spiritual
teaching, is another of these. So, too,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP, II.





a most impressive exercise is the act
of Holy Communion. There we ponder
His truth in His presence; there in
an especial manner is the Master
with His disciple, and the Revealer
with His word.— Vaughan.


Ver. 20. “Glorifying and praising
God.” —The greatness of the work, and
the goodness of God, as manifested by
it, are respectively implied in these two
words, “ glorifying” and “ praising.” —
Godet.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 21—39.


The Holy Spirit testifies to Christ—The veil which concealed the glory of
Christ had for a moment been drawn aside by the angels, and the shepherds had
seen in Him their Lord and Saviour. But after this revelation the veil falls
again, and He takes His place among men without anything to distinguish Him
from them. He is treated as ordinary Jewish children were; He is circumcised
on the eighth day, presented in the Temple on the fortieth day ; the Virgin offers
sacrifice for her purification, and makes the offering by which He, like other
first-born children not of the tribe of Levi, was redeemed from service in the
Temple. The only remarkable circumstance is that the name (not in itself an
uncommon one) was that appointed by the angel before His conception. But
when He appears in the Temple, the veil that conceals His glory is again drawn
aside: at the very moment when He is subject to the ordinances of the law,
witnesses are raised up and inspired by God to declare that He is the Desired
One for whose coming Israel had long waited, and who was to be the Light of
the world. Special interest attaches to those who on this occasion were the
organs of the Holy Spirit to make this announcement to men. We notice :—

I. Both Simeon and Anna were persons of holy character.—They had that
purity of heart which enables us to see God—to have understanding of Divine
things.

II. Their faith and hope were strong.—They waited for the consolation of
Israel as those who expected to see it, and God rewarded the confidence they
placed in His promises.

III. They were not of official rank, yet they received revelations which were
denied to priests and doctors of the law. This is in accordance with the Divine
procedure in the case of many who were called to be prophets. The majority of
the prophets were laymen, whose words had weight from the fact of their being
immediately inspired of God, and not because the speakers had a claim to be
heard apart from that which their message gave them. Nor can it be without
significance that the one of these witnesses was a man and the other a woman,
since under the new covenant inaugurated by Christ both sexes are on an
equality Lefore God which was before but imperfectly indicated.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 21—39.


Ver. 21. “The circumeising of the
child."—By circumcision Jesus en-
tered into the covenant relationship
with God in which the Jewish nation
stood, and of which that rite was the
seal. Henceforth there rested on Him
the obligation to keep the law and
commandments laid upon the children
of israel. The purification from sin
whicn circumcision symbolised was an


element in the rite which had no per-
sonal significance for Him. Yet His
submission to circumcision, as after-
wards to baptism, was necessary to
His becoming “like His brethren.”
‘ Wherefore in all things it behoved
tim to be made like unto His brethren,
that He might be a merciful and faith-
ful high priest in things pertaining to
God, to make reconciliation for the sins
59


CHAP. II.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





of the people” (Heb. ii. 17). “ When
the fulness of the time was come, God
sent forth His Son, made [born, R.V.]
of a woman, made [born, R.V.] under
the law” (Gal. iv. 4). “God, sending
His own Son in the likeness of sinful
4esh, and for sin, condemned sin in the
flesh” (Rom. viii. 3).


“ Was called Jesus.”—Less stress is
laid upon the fact of Jesus receiving
circumcision than upon that of the
significant name bestowed upon Him
at the- time. His Divine character
and His freedom from taint of sin
are implied in the title of Saviour:
the name given Him by the special
appointment of God distinguishes Him
from all others born of woman, as One
who would save the sinful, and therefore
of necessity be Himself free from sin.


“ Before He was conceived.”—The
unique glory of Christ as one in whom
the Father was well pleased is delicately
implied in the name bestowed upon
Him before He was conceived in the
womb of the Virgin.


“ When eight days were accomplished.”
—Our celebration of December 25th as
the day of Christ’s nativity makes the
first day of the new year to correspond
with the date of His circumcision and
of His receiving the name Jesus. The
putting away of the sinful nature, and
the acceptance of obligation to obey
the law of God, which are implied
in circumcision, suggest appropriate
thoughts for the beginning of the new
year ; and along with them the name
of Jesus should suggest the absolution
of our past offences, and the gift of
spiritual strength for the time that is
to come.


The Circumcision of our Lord.—
As man our Lord underwent in infancy
the rite which was enjoined by the
Jewish law. As God He willed to
undergo it. He might have ordered
. things otherwise. But He freely sub-
mitted to this, as to all the humiliations
of His earthly life, and to death itself.
Notice, in this submission—

I. Our Lord gave emphatic sanction


60


to the principle that a feature of
heathen practice or religion might be
occasionally consecrated to serve the
purpose of religious truth.—It is cer-
tain that from early times some heathen
nations did practise circumcision.
Abraham would not regard it as a
new rite; for it was common, if not
universal, in Egypt. With him, there-
fore, it was an old rite with a new
meaning. The Holy Spirit lays under
contribution for His high purposes
various words, thoughts, arguments,
customs, symbols, rites, associated be-
fore with false religions or with none;
He invests them with a new and
higher meaning, and thus enlists them
in a holier service.

II. Our Lord became obedient to the
whole Mosaic law.—“ Made under the
law.” This was the meaning of cir-
cumcision, so far as man was concerned ;
it was an undertaking to be true
to everything in the covenant with
God, of which it was the initial rite.
Our lord voluntarily submitted to
ordinances which He Himself had
instituted, but to ordinances which had |
no purpose or meaning except as refer-
ring to Himself. He could not have
done more had He been consciously
ignorant or criminal. He could not
have done less if He was to represent
us, in His life of perfect obedience, as
well as on His cross of shame. ‘Thus
it becometh us to fulfil all righteous-
ness.” What a lesson of obedience !
When do many get into trouble with
God? When they make their estimate
of their wants, and not God’s declared
will, the rule of conduct. Our Lord
submitted, because the Father so
ordered, and because we needed the
bright example and moral strength of
His submission.

III. Our Lord submitted to this rite
in order to persuade us of the necessity
of that spiritual circumcision which
was prefigured by it.—Even the Old
Testament teaches a moral and spiritual
as well as a literal circumcision.
Heart, lips, ears, must be circumcised,
For us the literal rite is of no value:
the real rite is spiritual. Its essenee


a


invigorate and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. It.





is the mortification of earthly desire.


Desire no longer centres in God, but is
mainly lavished upon objects of sense.
Thus the soul is degraded ; it beeomes
animalised. fience the necessity for
spiritual circumcision. The mortifica-
tion of degraded desire. is the most
serious business of a true Christian
life. ‘If thy right hand offend thee,”
etc. Our Lord meant by these search-
ing words the mortification of desire
which no longer centres in God.—
Liddon.


The Name of Jesus.

I. Why should this importance be
attached to a name, even although it
be the name of our Lord ?—We think
lightly of names. We contrast names
with realities, words with things. Not
so in the Bible. Names there are sig-
nificant. The name of God is treated
as if it were a living thing. Is this
merely an orientalism? No. Is it
not better to feel one language, as the
Hebrews felt theirs, than to use the
words of two or three as mere counters.
A name is a power. Some names
illuminate; others
darken and depress by reason of their
associations. ‘The choice of a child’s
name is not to be left to chance.
Every child possesses in his surname
a social and moral inheritance; it is
lecided for him before his birth: but
what of his Christian name, which you
are to fix on him indelibly ? Our Lord
entering the world as a Jew, His
human name was constructed on the
Hebrew type. It belongs to a large
class of personal titles in which the
sacred name of God—Jehovah—is con-
nected with some one of His works
or attributes.

II. We might have expected that


our Lord would have chosen a unique
name, unshared by any of the sons of


men.—But He willed it otherwise. In
His name He had many forerunners,
the greatest of whom is Joshua, the
“saviour” of Israel, a man of “ blood
and iron.” This greater Joshua is a
Saviour in a higher sense. Is He not
the Author of all the self-restraint, the





truthfulness, the courage, the purity,
the disinterestedness, the sacrifice,
which save society ? Joshua (or
Hoshea) was a name borne of old by
intellectual deliverers, Jesus Christ it
is who has saved the human race from
ignorance of the truths which it most
concerns man to know. Another
Joshua was the Ligh priest of the
Restoration, an earthly anticipation of
of our ascended King and Priest upon
His throne. He is a Saviour who
delivers us from sin’s guilt by His
sufferings, and from sin’s power by His
grace. —Ibid.,


Ver. 22. The Consecration of the
Family to God.—The law of Moses
prescribed (1) the purification of the
mother, and (2) the presentation of
the first-born son to the Lord. So
close were the ties by which God
and His people were bound together,
every mother in the time of her new-
found happiness was called to appear
before God, to receive purification from
the taints inseparably connected with
the transmission of a sinful nature,
and each first-born son was acknow-
ledged as so specially His that he
could only be redeemed from service
in the Temple by payment of a fine
in money. This consecration of the
family to God was one of the noblest
features of Judaism.


Ver. 24. The Sacrifice of Purification.
—Humble circumstances, but not
abject poverty, are implied in the
offering presented by. Mary for the
sacrifice of purification; for in the
Mosaic law provision was made for
those who might be too poor to afford
the offering specified in the text. The
considerate spirit in which that law
was drawn up is manifested, not only
in the scale of sacrifices to suit persons
in different conditions of life, but also
in the alternative of ‘‘a pair of turtle-
doves or two young pigeons.” ‘The
turtle-doves being migratory birds
might not be procurable at the time
when they were needed in any par-
ticular place, and it might be ditiicult


61


CHAP. II.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,


ee SS EE ne


to catch old pigeons, so it was allowable
to bring young pigeons taken from the
nest.


An Appropriate Offering.—There is
something in the birds themselves—
the doves—characteristic of the love,
purity, and meekness of Christ, anointed
above His fellows with the gifts of the
Divine Dove.— Wordsworth.


The Lamb of God brought into the
Temple.—Mary cannot bring a lamb
for an offering; she brings something
better, even the true Lamb of God,
into the Temple.—Van Oosterzee.


Vers. 25, 26. ‘A man, whose name
was Simeon.”—His character is de-
scribed in a few pregnant words. As
regards his relation to the spirit of
the law, he was “just.” In relation to
God, he possessed that careful reveren-
tial spirit which is ever cautious not
to offend. His heart was not wanting
in that attitude of sweet expectation,
that flower-like unfolding to the dews
of promise, characteristic of true holi-
ness under the older dispensation ; he
waited in hushed expectancy for the
“consolation of Israel.” And that
consolation implies a Consoler. Such
influence of the Spirit was upon him
as was yet vouchsafed under the first
covenant. To this man God’s will
stood revealed in a way which Luke
describes with a sweet and subtle
antithesis: “It was revealed unto
him that he should not see death before
he had seen the Anointed of the
Lord.” Just as the Virgin and Child
were coming up, Simeon “came in the
Spirit into the Temple courts.” God
directs the path of His faithful servants,
that good may meet them on the way.
We go here and there, and at times
seem to ourselves as if we were floating
half at random. But there is a guid-
ing purpose. Then the Evangelist tells
us with simple emphasis, “And he
himself also received Him into his
arms.” Now he feels that he may and
must soon go home. S8o arises his
sontinel-song.— A lexander.


62


“4 man in Jerusalem,” etc.—The
description given of Simeon may be re-
solved into seven distinct statements,
proceeding from the general to the
particular—seven concentric circles:
1. A man—his dignity consisting not
merely in official standing, wealth,
notoriety, or gifts, but in his man-
hood. 2. In Jerusalem-—in the pos-
session of special privileges as a Jew.
3. Just—upright in his outward life.
4, Devout—in spirit, as one who loved
and obeyed God. 5. Animated by re-
ligious hopes—looking for the conso-
lation of Israel 6. An organ of the
Holy Ghost—the Holy Ghost was
upon him. 7. One who had received
a special revelation and promise (ver.
26).


“ Waiting for the consolation of Israel,’
or rather looking for it as something
which was now close at hand, as he
was assured by the infallible testimony
of the Spirit that it was.


“Tt was revealed unto him.”—Not
to the priests, or to a priest, for they
as a class were at this time cor-
rupt and unspiritual, as we see from
their unsympathetic and even hostile
attitude towards Christ during His
public ministry. God therefore passes
them by, and chooses unofticial persons,
such as Simeon and Anna, to be the
organs of the Holy Spirit.


Vers. 25-32. Hope Realised.—The out-
ward circumstances of the presentation
in the Temple are devoid of anything to
arrest attention or to appeal to a love of
the marvellous. No miracles dazzle the
senses of beholders. Nothing is seen
but two parents of humble rank of life
presenting their child to God and offer-
ing the sacrifice of the poor. Simeon,
who greets them, is no official of high
rank; his only claim to distinction is
the beauty and elevation of his char-
acter—“ just and devout, waiting for
the consolation of Israel.” It is this
last-named circumstance which gives
significance to his action and words.
He is a type of those who under the
old covenant had waited for and longed


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.
ee.


for the coming of the Saviour. We
see in him the Church of the patriarchs
and prophtts, which takes the new-
born Christ into its failmg arms and
presents Him to the Church of the
future, and says, ‘‘ As for me, my task
is accomplished; here He is whom I
have so ardently desired to behold;
here He is who is Saviour and King.”


Simeon’s Hope and Faith—1. The
first remarkable feature in the char-
acter of Simeon was the firmness of
his hope. He looked forward to the
future in the firm conviction inspired
by the Holy Spirit that before he saw
death he would see the Lord’s Christ.
The attitude he maintained was not
peculiar to him, though the special
prophecy in which he trusted was
given to him alone—it was that of
the devout in Israel in all ages of their
history. Their golden age was in the
future, and not in the past. And we
as Christians look forward to a brighter
and happier time than the present,
when the kingdom of Christ shall have
fully come. Our Master is absent, and
we look for His return. 2. The second
remarkable feature is the greatness
of his faith, What was it that his
bodily eyes beheld? A child a few
weeks old—the child of poor and
obscure parents. What appeared to
the eye of his spirit? The Saviour
of the world, who was to raise up the
fallen nation of Israel to more than
its former glory, and give light and
hope to the heathen world. And can

our faith languish and die when we
have before us Christ, not as a helpless
child, but as the Redeemer who has
made atonement for sin and has as-
cended to the right hand of God—when
we have before us His Divine teaching
and holy life, and all the influence
which He has exercised upon human
society 2 His hopes realised, his faith
assured, he has but one emotion—that
of joy ; his soul enters into a holy peace.
Nothing now can move him to desire
to linger longer upon earth; it only
remains for him to leave the post
he has occupied for so many years,


CHAP. II.





from which he has eagerly looked for
the rising of this star, and to enter into
his rest.


Ver. 27. “Came by the Spirit into
the Temple.” —It might seem accidental,
but was not so. A secret impulse urged
him to go into the sacred precincts at
that particular moment; it was one
of the great crises of his life, when
all depended upon obeying the Divine
intimation pointing out his course, but
not compelling him to take it. Do not
many of our failures and disappoint-
ments in life result from ignoring or
disobeying what we believe to be good
impulses ¢


A True Priest.—The parents brought
in the child Jesus, and Simeon received
Him into his arms, as a true priest
appointed of God, though not anointed
of man.


Ver. 28. “Then took he Him up
in his arms.” —The aged and righteous
Simeon—the good old man of the law
—received into his arms the child
Jesus presented in the Temple, and
signified his desire to depart ; and thus
represents to us the law, now worn out
with age, ready to embrace the gospel,
and so to depart in peace.—Words-
worth.


Vers. 29-32. Hope fulfilled.—As the
swan is said to sing just before its death,
so does this aged saint break forth into
a psalm of thanksgiving as he beholds
the Saviour, whom it had been predicted
he should see before he should taste of
death. With devout gratitude he takes
farewell of life, now that he has received
the object of his hopes. The anticipa-
tion of seeing the Lord’s Christ had
made him cling to life; but now that
the Holy Child is within his arms, he
has nothing more to wish for, and is
ready to depart. ‘‘ Now let me die,
since I have seen Thy face.”


The Sentinel—Simeon represents him-
self under the figure of a sentinel whom
his master has stationed upon an ele-
vated place to watch for the appearance


63


CHAP. II,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


ST. LUKE.





of a certain star and to give notice to
the world of its arrival. He sees the
wished-for star, and announces that it
has risen, and asks to be set free froin
the post he has occupied so long. It
is thus that, in the opening of the
Agamemnon of A*schylus, the sentinel
stationed to watch for the signal-fire
that would tell that Troy bad fallen
when he at last beholds the long-
expected blaze, celeLrates in verse both
the victory of Greece and his own
release. —Grodet.


A Rebuke to our Unbelief.—The faith
in a Saviour who had just appeared
which sustained Simeon in the near
prospect of death is a rebuke to our
unbelief and fears in view of that
great change. We know Jesus as the
conqueror of death and sin.


Ver. 29. Nune Dimitiis.—In this
apparently unremarkable little group
there is something really remarkable
in each of there four living souls. We
recognise in the words spoken the
Nune Dimittis of eighteen centuries
of the Church’s worship. What is
there in these pathetic and beautiful
words, suggestive of thoughts which
should be our life ?

I. The speaker is an Old Testament
saint.—Just and devout, yet waiting
for the consolation of Israel by the
actual coming of “the Coming One.”
He had a revelation common to him
with his nation; he had also a private
revelation of his own.

II. The message.—1. The thought
comes to us-—Blessed is the man who
has the Lord for his God, the man
whos: life was in the hands of an
Owner. Very real and veiy dear to
the heart of Simeon was the relation-
ship of servant and master. It was
the chosen title of the apostles; it
was the secret of their success, the
rest and stay of their anxious and
homeless life, Later saints have felt
the same thing, and expressed it in the
same way. 2. Simeon has still to cee
the Lord’s Christ. It is a parable for
all time. There are-many who say,


64


“Be just, and it shall be counted to
you for righteousness.” There are
many who say, ‘ Be just and devout,
fear God and pray to Him alway, and
assuredly you shall lack nothing of the
fitness for glory.” Simeon had both
these graces, and yet he must not die
till he had seen Jesus. There are
many who have all else—every grace of
uprightness and devoutness, every char-
acteristic of seriousness and earnest-
ness, of piety and charity ; only Christ
they have not yet realised. It does
not come home to them why “ Believe
in God” should not suffice for them
without the added clause, “ Believe
also in Me.” We must not idly wait
for that peradventure of illumination
which Simeon’s case suggests. Upon
us the true Light has already shined ;
it is ours to see it, and to walk in it.
We cannot say the Nunc Dimittis till
we can say with it, “ Mine eyes have
seen Thy salvation.”

Jil. Another thought remains,—
The Divine office of ‘“ dismissing.”
“Thou art letting Thy servant depart.”
What would these partings be, how
sad, how hopeless, without a gospel—
without the knowledge, such as we
can only get from Jesus Christ, of a
life out of sight, in which present and
absent are one—of a real heaven,
opened and set open to all who are
travelling life’s journey in the faith
of a Father, and Saviour, and Comforter
who has us all in His holy keeping!
With this gospel in our hearts, we can
hear of each other’s deaths with no
disconsolate sorrow, because in Him,
living or dying, we are one. The
dismissal Simeon spoke of was dismissal
by death. He was ready for it now.
He spoke of it as a release, a setting
free, a desired change, a transition, all
for good. When the great departing
comes for each of us, we shall need
all Simeon’s hope, and all the support
of his dismissal. We know not any
of us what that departure is. It is
no lack of courage to confess that it
is formidable in the prospect.. Let us
think of it now, earnestly endeavouring
so to live that there may be no spectres


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,





and no voices to terrify the act of
dying.— Vaughan.


?

Simeon’s View of Death.—It is not
the removal of a reluctant, unwilling
man from the scene of all his joys and
all his interests; it is the releasing
of a weary man at evening from the
toil and heat of a long, fatiguing day ;
it is the desirable and peaceful dis-
missal of one who has done his work
to a rest which toil has earned and
which promise has sweetened. It is
worth while so to live as that the
Nune Dimitiis may express our own
true thought when we die.—/did.


Vers. 29, 30. Christ and Old Age.—
One of our Lord’s epiphanies; His
epiphany to old age. A subject of
pointed application to the young, for
the young expect to be old. The
present sowing of youth is for the reap-
ing of age. What is a “ good” old
age? All old age is not good. There
is an old age which mars as well as an
old age which makes reputations.

I. Few men in the abstract desire
old age.—Few men in their experience
find it desirable. It needs practising
for. A good old age comes to no
man by accident. Rare, probably un-
exampled, is that natural and durable
sweetness which could make the trials
of protracted age light or enjoyable.
Tt is bitter to feel yourself in the way,
and to see no help for it ; to ke beyond
the age of activity, of independence,
of importance, of admiration; to be
reminded daily that you are the sur-
vivor of a past generation; to know
that the only prospect is a narrowing
of action and interest, to make room
for new energies and young self-
sufficiencies : this is a severe trial, on
the acceptance of which, for good or
evil, will depend the real character and
complexion of the individual old age.
Well-principled and __ sclf-controlled
patience is one condition of a good old
age.

cn. A foremost condition of a good
old age is the preservation of a
thorough harmony and unity with the


CHAP. IL





young.—Old age is naturally impatient
of the new. But still the old may
succeed in being young in feeling;
and where this is so they attract the
young. ‘The young delight in their
experience, their mellowness, their
sympathy. This special characteristic
cannot be put on; it must be cultivated
and lived into, Let each age be in
harmony with the age below. Let the
continuity never be broken. Lead by
going before, help by feeling with, and
old age will but complete and crown
the work of the manhood and the
activity.

III. There are, however, besides
trials and risks, incomparable privi-
leges in old age.—These should be
faithfully treasured ‘and “occupied.”
An intelligent old age is a storehouse
of precious memories, which no
chronicles can rival nor libraries super-
sede. An old man should use his
opportunities of testifying to a younger
geueration the living sights and sounds
of hisown. It is a debt due to history ;
it is a debt scarcely less to the verities
of Christianity and Christ. And,
besides, the influences of old age are
incalculable. Let a man give himself
to this work, and he may mould the
young almost to his will. Let the old
make the young feel that they are
worth helping, listening to, answering.
By a generous, manly interest in the
coming generation who are what he
was, by deep, true, noble sympathy
with their difficulties, struggles, un-
avoidable ignorances, the old » an may
write himself unconsciously upon the
young, and keep up the continuity of
that work of God on earth which
consists in the amelioration, emancipa-
tion, and transfiguration of His crea-
tures. But such a work needs for its
accomplishment the epiphany of our
Lord Jesus Christ to oldage. Natural
gifts and graces do not suffice for this
apostleship of the aged. O miserable
spectacle a Christiess old age! Pity,
yet despise roc, the old man whose
testimony, rightly read, is all on the
side of materialism and infidelity. How
different the evidence of him whose


65


CHAP. II.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





old age has been brightened with the
epiphany of Jesus Christ! He, the
“Ancient of Days,” is still, as ever,
young with a perpetual youth: herein
lies the virtue of His epiphany to the
old. He tells of a world where they
reckon not by years, where past and
future are not, where the weakness of
old age is made strong in the first
sight of the Immortal. He draws
nigh to the solitude, He comforts the
isolation, He calms the irritation, He
inspires the languor, He fills the void
ofoldage. Hemakesits age venerable,
its weakness dignified, its deathbed
beautiful, its last departure blessed,
and its funeral “‘a door opened in
heaven.” —Jbid,


Vers. 29-35. Nunc Dimittis—Simeon
is the reverend type of Old Testament
piety, waiting for the consolation of
Israel. His inspired words (1) express
the perfect homage of his individual
soul ; (2) expand into a glowing pro-
phecy of the gospel future; (3) through
a side glance of benediction on Mary
utter the first disguised prediction of
the Redeemer’s darker, as well as of
His brighter, destiny as the Saviour and
Judge of mankind.—Pope.


Tre Nune Dimittis a pre-Christian
Hymn.—Our Church uses the song of
the blessed Virgin and the song of
Simeon as daily psalms, and applies
them to Christ. But those who had
seen the incarnate Lord, and who
had beheld Him risen and ascending,
would have spoken far more strongly.
Their sonzs would have been more
like “ Rock of Ages,” or “When I
survey the wondrous cross.” They
would not have been echoes of the
harp of David, so much as of the harps
of heaven. “Thou wast slain, and
hast redeemed us to God by Thy blood.”
Such silence as to the details of re-
demption could only belong to the thin
border-line of a period which was neither
quite Jewish nor quite Christian. A
little less, and these songs would be
purely Jewish ; a little more, and they
would be purely Christian, —Alewander.

66


Vers. 29, 30. Simeon.

I. Simeon himself.—1. His character.
He was just and devout, upright in
his relations to men, pious towards
God. And he lived in faith, “ waiting
for the consolation of Israel.” Doubt-
less the blessed prophecies of Isaiah,
“Comfort ye, comfort ye, My people,
saith your God,” were dear to the old
man’s heart. He was one of those
who were “ looking for the redemption
of Jerusalem.” He lived in the faith
of the Messiah who was to come,
who was to bear our griefs and carry
our sorrows, who was to make inter-
cession for the transgressors, to justify
many, who should see of the travail
of His soul and should. be satisfied.
2. His privileyes. (1) The promise.
The Holy Ghost was upon him. That
gracious Presence which is vouchsafed
in a greater or less measure to all
true believers rested on the faithful
Simeon. Special revelations were
granted to him: he was not to see death
till he had seen the Lord’s Christ ; he
was to see in this earthly life the
Messiah of whom the prophets had
spoken, the Lord’s Anointed, who was
to be, in the highest sense of the words,
the Prophet, Priest, and King of His
people—the Prophet like unto Moses,
but greater far than Moses (Heb. iii. 3),
of whom Moses spake; the great High
Priest, who “is able to save to the
uttermost all who come unto God by
Him, seeing He ever liveth to make
intercession for them”; the King of
kings and Lord of lords, whose kingdom
shall have no end. (2) The fulfilment
of the promise. The time was come:
the Spirit led the holy man to the
Temple of the Lord; “he came by
the Spirit into the Temple.” So we
should now come to the church by the
guidance of the Spirit, led thither by
the Spirit, that there we may find the
Lord, and worship Him in spirit and
in truth, “praying in the Holy Ghost”
(Jude 20). They who thus come in
faith and prayer ever find the Lord.
Simeon found Him now. It was not

,perhaps what he had looked for; it
was but a little Babe lying in His


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


mother’s arms. But Simeon doubted
not; the Spirit taught him that that
little Babe ywas indeed the Christ of
God, who was come into this world
to save sinners, to conquer back the
world from the dominion of the wicked
one. He took Him up in his arms;
he blessed God, and poured forth his
thankfulness in the words so familiar
to us all.

II. The utterance of Simeon.—1. His
view of life. It isnot a prayer. We
may well pray for a happy, holy death;
it is the greatest of earthly blessings,
the crown of a holy life. But these
words are not words of prayer: it is
an utterance of recognition and assent.
He says (to translate the words
literally), “ Master, now Thou art
releasing Thy slave.” He recognises
the fulfilment of the Divine promise:
he has seen the Lord’s Christ. That
sight means that the end is close
at hand: he is about to die. He
recognises the intimation of the Divine
will; he receives the solemn announce-
ment with cheerful acquiescence—he is
ready to depart. ‘‘ Master,” he says,
“now Thou art releasing Thy servant.”
Life, he means, is a time of service,
work to be done for God. He calls
God his Master; he speaks of himself
as the slave of God. Indeed, Almighty
God has permitted us to address Him
by another name: He bids us call
Him “ Father,” “our Father in heaven.”
We are not worthy to be called His
children, but He is our Father still.
He gave His blessed Son to die for us,
that through His atoning blood we
might be restored to the privileges of
sonship ; He gives us His Holy Spirit.
“ He hath sent the Spirit of His Son
into our hearts, whereby we cry, Abba,
Father.” But while we thank Him
for His gracious condescension, and
claim His holy promises, we must not
forget that He is our Master too.
The word here translated ‘ Lord”
means properly Master—a Master in
relation to slaves. God is our Master ;
we are the slaves of God. We are not
our own; we are bought with a price


(1 Cor. vi. 19, 20); our souls and


CHAP. II.


bodies are God’s, not our own. We
are His by creation: He made us.
We are also His by redemption: He
bought us to be His own, not with
corruptible things such as silver and
gold, but with the precious blood of
Christ (1 Pet. i. 18). And because we
are His, we have work.to do for Him.
He teaches us that solemn lesson in
the awful parable of the talents. He
“¢ giveth to all men liberally ” (Jas. i. 5);
He worketh in us both to will and to
do; therefore we must work out our
own salvation with fear and trembling.
All that we have comes from Him—
life, health, worldly means, intellectual
gifts. All these are talents intrusted
to our keeping for a while. But
spiritual gifts must be chiefly signified
by the talents distributed among the
servants; for spiritual gifts are the
only coin current in the kingdom of
heaven. Without the grace of the
Spirit we are helpless, we can do
nothing good; we cannot become
‘approved money-changers” (a saying
attributed to our Lord by several of
the Fathers), unless we have from God
a portion of the heavenly treasure.
All the servants in the household of
the great Master receive their portion
from Him ; they have to use it to His
glory and their own good, to work out
their own salvation, to beware lest
they receive the grace of God in vain
(2 Cor. vi. 1). Two servants were
faithful. Outwardly there was a great
difference between them. One was far
more highly gifted than the other ;
his gains were far greater; he was
a man of great energy, great resources
—like St. Paul, who laboured more
abundantly than all the rest (1 Cor.
xy. 10). But the second servant also
did his best, his very best according
to his power; his gains were much
less than those of his fellow-servant,
but they were in the same proportion
to his endowments; and he received
the same reward. The Lord judgeth
not according to the outward appear-
ance; he looketh on the heart. He
regards not the outward work, not
the amount of work done, but the


67


CHAP. II.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





inward temper of heart and mind—
the faithfulness, the love with which
the work is done.
done, good and faithful servant,” to
the humblest Christian who in faith
and self-denial has done his httle best.
The slothful servant had done nothing
for bis Lord; he may have worked
hard for himself, but he let his Lord’s
money lie unused and uncared for ; he
neglected the precious means of grace;
he lived as if he had no Master—as if
he was his own master, as if his time
was his own, to waste it or to use it
as he pleased; therefore he was cast
into the great outer darknes:, where
is weeping and gnashing of teeth.
Simeon had been a good and faithful
servant ; he was just and devout; the
Holy Ghost was upon him. Now his
life-work was over; the Master was
releasing him from his labours; he was
ready, cheerful, and happy. We may
well long to be like him, to share his
faithfulness and his peace. 2. Simeon’s
view of death. It was not to be
dreaded: it was to be welcomed; it
was a release from the labours of life.
Simeon’s life, we may be sure, had not
been miserable. Doubtless he had had
his troubles, perhaps great troubles,
for God’s holiest servants are sometimes
most severely tried. But the Holy
Ghost was upon him; and “the fruit
of the Spirit is love, joy, peace.” The
faithful servant has an inner source
of joy even amid tears; he is, like


St. Paul, ‘“sorrowing, yet always
rejoicing.” Nevertheless, death was
a release. Sometimes death is very


thoughtlessly described as ‘‘a happy
release”: people think only of the
cessation of bodily pain; they do not
think of what comes after death.
Simeon looked forward to the rest that
remaineth for the people of God. To
the faithful ‘servant, who has striven
to work ont bis own salvation with
fear and trembling, death is a release ;
for life is full of work, bodily, intellec-
tual, spiritual work, sometimes very
hard and exhausting. And _ that
spiritual work which is of all work
the most momentously important is
BR


He saith, “ Well ©


sometimes full of fear and trembling:
our past sins affright the conscience,
the old temptations which once seemed
overcome reassert their power, Satan
is strong, we are weak, we seem to
have no streagth, we are tempted to
fear, sometimes in very agony of soul,
lest we ourselves may be castaways
at the last. Therefore, to the faithful,
death is a true release: it sets them
free from anxiety and fear, from toil
and labour. ‘ Blessed are the dead
which die in the Lord. Yea, saith
the Spirit, for they rest from their
labours, and their works do follow
them.”

III. The ground of Simeon’s con-
fidenca.—1l. Tie promise. He was to
depart, according to God’s word, in
peace. He is faithful that promised.
He that hath begun the good work
in His people will perform it until the
day of Jesus Christ (Phil. i. 6). We
might well despair if we were left to
ourselves; but we have tha _ blessed
promises, and we must trust. ‘“ He
that spared not His own Son, but
delivered Him up for us all, how shall
He not with Him also freely give us
all things?” We must trust, and not
be afraid. 2. The earnest, the pledge


of fulfilment. “ Mine eyes have seen
Thy salvation.” Simeon had seen the
Lord’s Christ, the Saviour Jesus,


whose blessed name means the salvation
of Jehovah. That was his hope; and
that is the hope of the faithful Christian
now. We see not tho Holy Babe with
our outward eyes; but we may see
Him still with the eye of faith, we
may embrace Him with the embrace
of faith, and cling to Him with our
whole heart as our only Saviour and
Redeemer. We have His blessed
promise: “The world seeth Me no
more, but ye see Me”; “I am with
you all the days, even to the end of
the world.” We must pray, “ Lord,
increase our faith”; we must pray
for a strong, living, earnest faith, that
seeing Christ now by faith, and living
in spiritual communion with Him, we
may at last, through His grace and
the power of His atoning blood, depart


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP, II.


‘





in peace, and rest with Him for
ever.—Caffin.


Ver. 30, « Salvation.” —To see Christ
is to see salvation—to see Him, as
Simeon saw Him, with the eye of faith.
If Simeon had not seen Him thus, he
would not have seen in Him God’s
salvation; for everything to the out-
ward eye was against His being so.
“Every one,” our Lord says, ‘ who
seeth the Son, and believeth on Him
hath everlasting life.” We who have
not “seen” may yet believe. Is this
our idea of salvation—Christ Himself ?
If it be, are we looking for Him?
When we can see Christ by faith, then
we shall be fit to die.— Vaughan.


Assurance of Salvation.—This is one
chord of Simeon’s swan-song. Does it
not remind us that—

I. The great aim of Jesus Christ
is to bring salvation?—Not simply
mental light, or national renewal, or
even spiritual comfort, but salvation
from sin as a ruling principle, as a
terrific power, and as entailing an
awful penalty.

II. This salvation can be clearly
realised?—-Not dreamed of, talked
about, expected, hoped for only, but
“seen” : its purpose, method, and result
“seen.”

III. This salvation should be real-
ised in its personal relation ?—1. As
saving the individual—‘‘ mine eyes.”
2. As wrought by God— Thy salva-
tion.”

IV. This clear consciousness pre-
pares for death?—He who can make
these words his own can sing Vune
Dimittis.—Thomas.


Preparation for Death.—No one is
ready to die in peace until he has seen
Christ ; but when he has seen Him,
he needs no further preparation for
dying. He may not have carried out
one of his own ambitious plans in life,
nor have achieved anything great or
beautiful; but no matter, the one
essential achievement in life is to see
Jesus.— Miller.


Vers. 29-35. Simeon’s Twofold Pro-
phecy.—Simeon is not expressly said to
have been an old man ; but he probably
was so. How striking is the picture
of the aged, worn face bending over the
unconscious Child, whom he clasped in
his withered arms! His two short pro-
phetic songs are singularly contrasted
in tone—the one all sunny and hopeful,
the other charged with sad forebodings.

I. The one tells what Christ is sent

to be.—'The joyful welcome of the new
by the expiring old. Simeon lives in
the forward-looking attitude proper to
Old Testament saints. Is not the
ideal for us the same? We too have
to base our morality on religion, and
to nourish both by hope, which burns
the clearer the nearer we come to the
end of earthly life. When he actually
touched the long-promised Hope of
Israel, an infant of six weeks old, no
wonder he broke into praise. But the
course of his thoughts is noteworthy.
His first thought—and it is a glad
thought to him—is, “ Here is the order
for my release.” Is there not a tone
of relief and of hailing a long-wished
blessing in the ‘“‘now”—as if he had
said, ‘“‘ At last, after weary waiting, it
‘has come”? He speaks as a servant
getting escape from toil. The words
are not a prayer, though this is the
application often made of them. He
teaches us what death may be to us if
we hold Christ in our hearts. It may
be the crowning act of obedience.
Death is to Simeon the sweet rest after
the day of toil, and the satisfied close
of long expectancy. Life can give
nothing more than the sight of the
Christ. The latter part of the song
tells us what the eyes of faith see in
the Child in whom the eyes of sense
see only weakness. This feeble suck-
ling is the God-appointed means of
salvation for all the world. The pre-
cedence given to Messiah’s work among
the Gentiles is very remarkable.
Simeon rejoices over a “ salvation pre-
pared” for “all peoples.” No shadows
darken the glad picture. The Divine
ideal and purpose are painted in un-
shaded colours,


69


CHAP. II.





— ae


II. What men’s sin will make of
God’s salvation.—Can it be that the
salvation prepaied by God is a salva-
tion not accepted by men? Who could
suppose that in the very Israel of
which Messiah was meant to be “the
glory” there would be found tongues
to speak against Him and heirts to
reject Him? But the wonder is true,
and that Child is charged with the
terrible power of being ruin as well as
blessing. There is no more mournful
nor mysterious thought than that of
man’s power to turn the means of life
‘into the occasion of death, and that
power is never so strangely and mourn-
fully displayed as in men’s relations to
‘this Child.” Christ may be either of
two things. One or other of them He
must be to all who come in contact
with Him. They can never be quite
the same as before. How do we fall
by contact with Christ? By the
increase of self-conscious opposition,
by the hardening following rejection,
by the deeper condemnation which
necessarily dogs the greater light with
its blacker shadow. How do we rise
by Christ? In all ways and to all
heights to which humanity can soar.
From the depth of sin and condemna-
tion to the height of likeness to Himself,
and finally tothe glory of participation
in His throne. Heis life to those who
take Him for their all, and death to
those who turn from Him. Simeon
further forecasts the fate of the Child
asa ‘sign that shall be spoken against.”
A sign from heaven, yet spoken against,
is a paradox which only too accurately
forebodes the history of the gospel in
all ages. How strange to the virgin
mother, in all the wonder and joy of
those blissful early days, must that
prediction of the sorrows that were to
pierce her heart have sounded! Mary’s
grief at her Son’s rejection culminated
when she stood by Calvary’s cross.
Her heart was to be pierced, the
thoughts of many hearts to be laid
open. A man’s attitude to Jesus
Christ is the revelation of his deepest
self. Itis the outcome of his inmost
nature, and betrays his whole char-


30


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE,





acter. Christ is the test of what we
are, and our reception or rejection of
Him determines what we shall be.—
Maclaren.


Ver. 32. “A light to lighten the
Gentiles.”.—The Gentiles are repre-
sented as enveloped in darkness, the
Jews as abased and down-trodden.
Christ, therefore, appears in two
aspects corresponding to the conditions
in which the two great divisions of
the human race are placed: 1. He
gives light to those in darkness.
2. He gives the promised glory to the
chosen people; they derive from Him
an imperishable renown, for the great
claim of the Jew to honour among men
is that Christ was one of His blood.


“The Gentiles . . . Israel.”—There
seems to be some significance in the
Gentiles being named before the Jews,
as though Simeon had some prophetic
intimation of the fact that the Jews as
a nation would reject Christ. His
words might be taken to imply that
the conversion of the Gentiles would
precede and bring about that of God’s
ancient people to faith in Jesus. This
seems to be the tenor of the teaching
in some parts of Scripture, eg. in
Rom. xi. 25, 26.


Ver. 33. ‘“ Marvelled.”—Doubtless
the surprise was due to testimony thus
coming from all quarters to the great-
ness of the destiny in store for the
Holy Child: the angels, the shepherds,
Elisabeth, and Zacharias had all hailed
His advent; and now in the Temple
aged saints of prophetic rank bear
witness to Him. Already the wise
men from the East are on their way,
as representatives of the Gentile world,
to do Him honour,


Ver. 34. “And Simeon blessed them.” —
It is noticeable that Simeon pronounces
a benediction on Joseph and Mary, as
distinguished from Jesus, of whom he
proceeds to speak. On the principle
that ‘‘the less is blessed of the better”
(Heb. vii, 7), he would naturally


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





abstain from even the appearance of
superiority to the Child whom he held
in his arms. He addresses Mary with
special emphasis, as though acquainted
with the fact of the miraculous
conception.


“Sign which shall be spoken against.”
—The allusion is evidently to Isa,
viii. 14, 15, where the Messiah is
represented as a rock on which the
believing find a refuge, but against
which the rebellious dash themselves.
In many parts of the Gospels we read
of violent opposition excited by the
teaching and actions of Christ, and He
Himself frequently speaks of divisions
and conflicts arising In consequence of
the proclamation of the truth—e.g.
xii. 49-53. He is appointed to try
men’s hearts and tempers, whether they
will humbly and carefully examine the
truth, and receive it with joy, and
bring forth its fruits in their lives;
and according to the result of this
moral probation, He will be for their
weal or woe (John iii. 19; 2 Cor.
ii. 16). As Greg. Nyssen says, the
fall will be to those who are scandalised
by the lowliness of His humanity ; the
rising will be to those who acknowledge
the truth of God’s promises in Hin,
and adore the glory of His divinity.
Other passages in which this testing
of human character is described are:
1 Cor. i. 18 e¢ seqg., i. 14; John ix.
See tebe ito) gO.) Heb: iv. 125
John xii. 48.


Ver. 34. The Blessedness of the Virgin
is proclaimed over and over again
in the early chapter of this Gospel.
The angel Gabriel salutes her as
“blessed among women”; Elisabeth
repeats the phrase ; she says of herself,
« All generations shall call me blessed” ;
and here the aged Simon bestows his
benediction on her and on Joseph.
Yet it is instructive to notice that
this blessedness did not imply a life
of unmixed happiness. Here, indeed,
her future sorrows are spoken of in
no uncertain manner: “ Yea, a sword


CHAP. II.


shall pierce through thine own soul
also.” The prophecy was not long in
finding fulfilment. The jealousy and
malice of Herod expose the life of her
Son to great danger, and she is obliged
to find safety for Him in flight. The
fatigues and anxieties of a journey
into Egypt have to be encountered by
her. Then some years after she under-
goes the agony of losing Him for three
days at the Passover feast in Jeru-
salem. Nor were her sorrows at an
end when He reached the years of
manhood. She had the grief of seeing
that He was despised and rejected of
men, hated even by His own townsmen,
and in risk of being murdered by them.
She saw Him weary with labours for
the good of others, and yet treated with
ingratitude, contempt, and contumely.
And finally she was witness of His
death at the hands of His enemies,
after an unjust and shameful trial ;
she saw Him expire upon the cross
after hours of pain and _ suffering.
Scarcely any griefs could be more
poignant than hers, and the name by
which she is frequently described—
Mater dolorosa—commemorates her
pre-eminence in sorrow. One great
lesson we may learn from her history
is that immunity from suffering is not
necessarily enjoyed by those who are
truly blessed of God ; and the thought
is one that should console us in times
of trial and suffering. Outward
troubles may not be a sign of God’s
displeasure with us: they may be a
form of discipline to which in His
wisdom and love He subjects us.


Ver. 35. ‘Yea, a sword shall pierce.”
—Undue elation on the part of the
parents, and especially of the virgin
mother, must have been repressed
by the ominous tone of Simeon’s
words, and still more by the special
reference to the sorrow which was to
pierce her heart like a sword. The
full meaning of this latter prophecy
she must have realised as she stood
beside the cross. No lamentation of
hers is recorded as having been uttered
in the hour of her greatest grief; but


71


CHAP. II.


. HOMILETIC.COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


ne 5 oe


her silence is that of ineffable anguish,
and not of insensibility.


“The thoughts . . . revealed.”—In
and by Christ’s sufferings it was shown
what the temper and thoughts of men
were. Then Judas despairs, Peter re-
pents, Joseph of Arimathza becomes
courageous, Nicodemus comes by day,
the centurion confesses, one thief blas-
phemes, the other prays; men faint,
and women become strong.


Vers. 36-38. Anna the Prophetess.—
God’s book is a book for all. The
aged are not forgotten. They need
support and comfort. This history of
Anna, with many a word besides, is
proof that they are not passed over by
God. In the life of Anna we have—

I. The grace of God sustaining a
believer in the midst of afiliction.—
She had met with trials—widowed in
her youth; but she had learned to
look beyond the blow to the Hand that
had inflicted it. She had found in
Him the widow’s stay through long
years of sad memories; her heart re-
newed many a time all its grief, but
she ever found fresh comfort in God.
So may every aged Christian in like
trying experiences. Bereavements will
come, even though long delayed. The
effect of trial to Anna was doubtless
most blessed. One great affliction at
the beginning of life may bless the
sufferer to the close of it.

IT. The grace of God supporting a
believer in privation—Anna had to
face the world’s struggles all alone.
We know not if she had relatives to
advise or aid, or outward means of
sustenance to depend on. If so, God’s
grace was as much manifested in pro-
viding and continuing these as it would
have been in maintaining her without
them. It is not only those who are
ever on the verge of want who illus-
trate God’s care. So do those who
have what is called a competency.
They are as surely dependent on God.
They are exhorted to trust not in
uncertain riches, but in the living God.
In this humble trust rich and poor


12


meet together. Anna had been thus
divinely helped. So is every aged
Christian. Each is a living monu-
ment of God’s faithfulness, of God’s
perpetual providence. A life of four-
score years bears manifold inscriptions
of the grace of God. At this advanced
age He writes on her briefly told
history Jehovah-Jireh, “ Let thy widows
trust in Me.” ;

III. The grace of God strengthen-
ing a believer in duty.—“ Anna .
served God... night and day.” A
long course, but not dreary or monoto-
nous. The spectator sees only the
outward form of service, not the in-
ward life and love that animate it.
The freshness and constancy of aged
Christians in the performance of duty
is one of the most delightful proofs of
the unfailing power of gospel truth,
and of the faithfulness of the renewing
Spirit. Their activity, though it differ
from that of youth, will continue.
“They shall still bring forth fruit in
old age.” None of God’s children be-
comes sated with prayer or praise, with
the exercise of trust and hope. In a
higher sense than that of Moses “ their
eye is not dim nor their natural force
abated.”

IV. The grace of God consoling a
believer in the decline of life.—There
is much externally to make the last
years of life cheerless and comfortless.
The bodily powers decline. The old
familiar faces disappear. The sense of
solitude deepens. Still the setting sun
has more glorious hues than at his
dawning, and autumn has a beauty
which spring knows nothing of. So
God’s saints may have their brightest
hours at the close of life, and ‘the
day of death be better than the day
of birth.” So it was with Abraham,
Jacob, Moses, Paul, and John. As the
world faded their eyes saw ‘“‘ the King
in His beauty.”

V. The grace of God sealing a
believer's parting testimony. —This
aged saint gives thanks for herself, and
speaks of Christ to others. God
makes her useful to the latest close,
and dismisses her bearing testimony to


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. II.





His faithfulness and mercy in the gift
of His Son. It is a happy thing to
be willing to serve God to the end.
Aged sufferers serve by waiting. Thus,
certainly, “‘they also do His will.”
To bear, to submit meekly, to praise
God in fainting and decay—this is the
prerogative of earth. Let none think
the time of trial too long, when the
time of triumph shall be eternal. The
aged Christian should be concerned to
make his closing days a testimony for
his Lord.—Ker.


Ver. 37. “A widow.”—Perhaps it
was in allusion to her that St. Paul
depicted the manner of life of one who
was a widow indeed, and desolate—
“she trusteth in God, and continueth
in supplications and prayers night and
day” (1 Tim. v. 5).


Asceticism commended.—It is im-
possible to overlook the fact that
the Evangelist speaks with emphatic
approval of the ascetic mode of life
followed by Anna—her abstinence
from second marriage, her residence
in the Temple, and her fastings and
prayers night and day. Perhaps our
recoil from the abuses of a monastic life
has carried us too far in the opposite
direction, and blinded us to the beauty
and worth of a type of piety which
may have its home in a cloister. It
aims at a complete and single-hearted
service of God, and it is lacking in the
important element of religion which
concerns service of man. In our philan-
thropical forms of religion we are
specially in danger of losing sight
of the service of God in serving our
fellow-men.


Ver. 38. A Small Congregation.—
But one old man and one old woman
recognised the Lord when He came


to His Temple. Priests and wise men
and the world knew Him not. They
two alone witnessed the fulfilment of
Malachi’s prophecy (iii. 1) ; so it may be
with other prophecies yet to be fulfilled.


Ver. 39. “ Returned into Galilee.”—
The evangelists constantly speak of
Galilee as a different country from
Judea. The fact that there‘ were
considerable differences between the
two needs to be kept in mind, if we
woull unde:stand many parts of the
gospel history. The inhabitants of
Galilee were despised by those of Judea
as rude, illiterate, lax in religious
practices, and almost semi-heathen.
The people of Judea were more
cultured, strict in religious observances,
under the rule of custom, and priest-
ridden. The ministry of Jesus was
more successful in Galilee than in
Judea, and it is plainly indicated that
the enthusiasm manifested on the day of
His triumphal entrance into Jerusalem
was largely owing to the pride of
Galilean pilgrims in the greatness of
their fellow-countryman. Of the twelve
apostles, eleven evidently were from
Galilee, and only one—Judas Iscariot
—from Judea.


Respect for the Law.—It is signi-
ficant that St. Luke, who in so many
parts of his Gospel reflects the Pauline
teaching, gives no indication of any
contempt for the ceremonial laws of
Judaism. It is only after his parents
had “performed all things according
to the law of the Lord” that they
returned to Nazareth. The antagonism
between adherents of the Old Testa-
ment economy and those of the New
belongs to a later generation, and finds
no justification in the inspired docu-
ments on which Christianity is based.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 40—52.


Growth in Strength, Wisdom, and Grace.—The fact that Jesus passed through
various stages of development in bodily, mental, and spiritual life is one of great
significance and importance, though we may find it impossible to reconcile it
with our thoughts of Him as a Divine Being clothed with our nature. ‘Lhe


73


CHAP. II. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





assertion, however, that such was the case is made here, and in other parts of
the New Testament we have testimonies of a similar kind. Thus in Heb. ii. 10
we read of His “ being made_perfect through sufferings,” and in v. 8, “though
He were a Son, yet learned_He obedience.” Three stages of growth seem to be
indicated in this brief record of His infancy and youth.

I. There is that of childish innocence.—No instances of supernatural
knowledge or of miraculous deeds are recorded in connection with His early
years. The idea is conveyed to our minds that He lived a simple, blameless life,
unconscious of the high calling that lay before Him, subject to His parents in
the same way that ordinary children are while they are too young to think and
act for themselves, and that neither His parents nor fellow-townsmen saw
anything in Him to prepare them for the claims He put forward when He grew
to manhood and entered public life.

II. There is that in which He first began to realise and manifest a sense of
personal responsibility to God.—This is indicated by His action in leaving His
parents on the occasion of His first visit to Jerusalem to keep the Passover, and
by His words in reply to their questions, in which He places His duty to God as
an obligation superior even to that of ordinary filial obedience. He begins to
distinguish between duties, and to give those which have paramount claims their
due place. This stage is marked by the awakening of new and strange thoughts,
and by His making inquiry concerning spiritual things from those who were
qualified to teach ther.

III. The third stage is that in which He finds the way in which to reconcile
higher and lower obligations, so as to render perfect obedience to the law of God
as it touches the duties we owe to Him and to our fellow-men.—He returns to
Nazareth, and is subject to His parents ; but His obedience to them is of a higher
cast than that which He had formerly rendered. It is intelligent, voluntary
acceptance and discharge of duty, such as can only come with maturity of age.
In all these stages of growth Christ has afforded a perfect example for all to
follow.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 40—52.


Ver. 40. A Picture of an Ideal Life.— “ Filled with wisdom.”—Lit. * be-
Gy Physical health —* grew and waxed coming full of wisdom.” The peculiar
strong.” (2, _Intellectual_and_moral phrase here used implies both growth


development —“ filled with wisdom ” ;
acquiring true ideas (1) concerning
God, and (2) concerning men and the
world. 3. Having intimate relations
with God : (1) the object of His favour,
and (2) serving Him and loving Him
perfectly and constantly.


Various Stages of Physical Growth.—
St. Luke mentions in order all the
stages of life through which Jesus passed
—an unborn infant (i, 42), a babe
(ii. 12), a boy (ver. 40), a youth (v. 43),
a man (xxiv. 19). He did not, like
Adam, first appear of full stature ; but
sanctified every stage of life from in-
fancy to manhood. Old age became
Him not.-- Bengel


74.


from less to greater and perfection
at every point in the process; just
as, if we could imagine it, a vessel
increasing in dimensions and always
remaining equally full, yet containing
far more at the end than at the
beginning.


Ver. 41. “ Went to Je
year.”—A hint is given of the pious *
atmosphere of the home in which Jesus
grew up by the mention of the care-
ful attendance of His parents year by
year at the Passover feast in Jerusalem.
His mother, like Hannah in earlier
times, accompanied her husband, though
the law did not prescribe her presence
on the occasion. The fact of the cor-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,


CHAP. II.





rupt and degenerate condition of religion
and of the priestly order did not lead
them to the disuse of public worship ;
and their example is a rebuke to those
who become separatists on the ground of
being unable to find that ideal purity
in the Church which they desire.


Ver. 42. The First Pilgrim-journey
of Jesus. —This was apparently the
first time Jesus had attended the Pass-
over feast or been in Jerusalem since
He was presented as a babe in the
Temple. No doubt He came up regu-
larly to the feast e.e-y year after this.
“‘ Every one who can remember his own
first journey from a village home to the
capital of his country will understand
the joy and excitement with which
Jesus set out. He travelled over eighty
miles of a country where nearly every
mile teemed with historical and inspir-
ing memories. He mingled with the
constantly growing caravan of pilgrims
who were filled with the religious
enthusiasm of the great ecclesiastical
event of the year. His destination
was a city which was loved by every
Jewish heart with a strength of affec-
tion that has never been given to any
other capital—a city full of objects and
memories fitted to touch the deepest
springs of interest and emotion in His
breast. He went to take part for the
first time in an ancient solemnity,
suggestive of countless patriotic and
sacred memories. It was no wonder
that when the day came to return
home He was so excited with the new
objects of interest that He failed to
join His party at the appointed place
and time” (Stalker).


“ When He-was. twelve Yeurs gides—
The age of twelve is no doubt specified
as marking a new epoch in the life of
Jesus, and a new attitude towards the
law of God; for now, as having arrived
at years of discretion, He, like other
Jewish children, took upon Him the
moral responsibilities of an adult.
This corresponds to the action of joining
the Church with us, an occasion when,


in many Christian communities, the
rite of confirmation is administered.


Ver. 43. The Child__Jesws.—The
silence of Scripture is as eloquent as its
speech. Here, as so often, the veil is
the picture. There is a profound lesson
in the fact that only one of the four
evangelists has anything to tell us of
the still unfolding of that perfect life
before Christ’s entrance on His public
ministry. The contrast between the
one paragraph given to His childhood
and youth, and the fulness of the
narrative of His works, and still more
the minute particulars of His death,
ought to teach us that the true centre
of His worth to the world les in His
“ ministering,” and the vital point of it
all in His giving His “life a ransom
for many.”—Macluren.


The Educata. .—That Jesus
was a solitary child seems unnatural to
suppose. Compulsory education was
the law of the land. If the law was
in force in Galilee, He must have at-
tended the national synagogue school,
and formed one of a circle of children
around the minister of the synagogue ;
joining, too, in childish sports with
His school-fellows, as well as in childish
lessons.— Vallings.


The Boyhood of Jesus.—This is the
one only passage that speaks of the
boyhood of Jesus, and I think all lovers
of the graphic and picturesque touches
of Holy Scripture will rejoice to find
in the Revised Version the plain and
very human expression “the boy Jesus” .
(ver. 43). What a text that will fur-
nish for the school-chapels of England,
what a storehouse of exhortation and
doctrine for the struggling and weary
and heavy-laden (and there are many)
among the young soldiers of Jesus
Christ—that large part of the human
family which has all life before it,
with its boundless capacities of use
and abuse, of happiness and misery, of
good and evil !-_Vaughan.


“ Jesus tarried behind 2 ssalem.”


75


CHAP. II.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


—————$—<—$<—


—His tarrying behind in Jerusalem
was an act which was only to be
justified by the higher relationship
of which He afterwards spoke to
His parents (ver. 49). His whole
course of procedure on this occasion
is an illustration of that wisdom which
He possessed in ever-increasing mea-
sure, under the guidance of which He
diverged from the course of conduct
towards His parents to which He had
hitherto adhered.


Ver. 44. “ Supposing Himto-hawve-been
tn the company.”—It is an indication
of the confidence which His parents
had in His discretion that they did
not immediately seek Him when they
discovered that He was absent. He
evidently had been allowed a more
than usual amount of liberty of action
as a child by parents who had never
known Him to transgress their com-
mandments or be guilty of a sinful or
foolish deed.


Vers. 45, 46. The Lor
Learner.—The only record of the in-
terval between the Lord’s infancy and
ripe manhood. No warrant for the
gossiping stories of the early life and
miracles of Jesus. An instructive in-
cident, as showing how early the Lord
began to display the inquiring and
critical spirit which afterwards bore
such precious fruits of knowledge and
wisdom. The astonishment of the
rabbis shows how different a student
they found Him from such as were
wont to sit at their feet. He asked
. no stock questions, and was to be put
off with no stock answers. Not that
He put Himself forward as a teacher
under the guise of a learner. He
questioned the doctors with a genuine
desire to learn. Some of them were,
as older men, in one sense wiser than
Himself. It was possibly the acute-
ness with which He chose out and
addressed Himself to such that chiefly
raised the astonishment of the by-
standers.— Markby.


“In the midst of the doctors.” —The
76


picture powerfully affects the imagina-
tion and stimulates the heart, of the
sweet, serious Boy, with His fresh child-
face, touched: with awe and eagerness,
sitting at the feet of the grey-bearded
rabbis, and bringing their so-called
wisdom to the sharp test which so
much learned lumber can ill endure
—the questioning of a child’s heart.
How sharp the contrast between the
cumbrous doctrines of the teachers
and the way of thinking of such a
Child! His purpose was not to put
the doctors to confusion; but no doubt
these questions of the Boy would be
the germ of those later questions of
the Man which so often silenced the
Pharisee and the Sadducee, and made
their elaborate wisdom look like folly
by the side of His deep and simple
words.—WMaclaren.


Ver. 46. “ After _ihree days.” —J ust


as afterwards His friends and disciples
lost Him for three days, and mourned
for Him as for one dead, though their
knowledge of Him should have pre-
pared them to expect to see Him again.
Even now a certain blame in like
manner attaches to His parents for
not knowing where at once to find
Him. When He was left alone in
Jerusalem, what other asylum could
He seek but His Father’s house 2


és puhieaas tag He who would
teach must himself be a learner—must
have the docile spirit. Those who
have made it their object to study and
expound the word of God are sure, what-
ever may be their faults and failings,
to have something worth imparting.
The example of Jesus on this occasion
teaches that due honour is to be paid
to those who in the name of the Church
teach sacred truth.


“ Sitting in the midst.”—This seems
to implya place of honour—as though
these doctors willingly received Him
into their order, though He professed
Himself but a learner, because of the
wisdom He manifested. It is, as noted
(see critical remarks), quite evident that


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,


CHAP. II.





He did not do more than put questions
and answer questions; but none the
less even the teacher of most authority
there must have instinctively felt that
this was no common pupil. The idea
of a child lecturing or teaching in
a formal or authoritative way is a
repellent one, and utterly contrary to
the Divine order according to which
all things are ruled.


Ver. 47. “ Astonished.”—He brought
with Him a*ttear knowledge of God’s
word, in which no doubt He had been
versed from earliest -years, and a mind
and spirit undisturbed and unclouded
by the errors and fantastical interpre-
tations that prevailed in rabbinical
schools. He might say with the
psalmist: “I have more understand-
ing than my teachers; for Thy testi-
monies are my study” (Ps. cxix. 99).
“The Rabbins themselves said that
the word of God out of the mouth of
childhood is to be received as from
the mouth of the Sanhedrim, of Moses,
yea, of the blessed God Himself”
(Stier). Cf. Ps. viii. 2.


Ver. 48. “ Why hast_thou thus dealt
with us?”—The first reproof which


Jesus had ever received from His
mother; yet in it there is quite as
much of astonishment at His conduct
as of implied blame. The way is
still left open for Him to justify His
action and approve Himself free from
fault.


“ Sorrowing.”—No doubt often dur-
ing those three days the ominous
words of Simeon, spoken nearly twelve
years before, had recurred to the
Virgin’s mind (ver. 35): ‘Yea, a
sword shall pierce through thine own
soul also.”


A Parent's Complaint.—The Lord’s
mother was seriously disappointed with
Him. We might indeed say she was
vexed. But He defends Himself with


warmth, as if injustice has been done
Him. The incident is full of interest


and importance, displaying Jesus as
the type and ideal for opening youth.

I. There are stages, epochs, crises of
growth in the spirit to be expected,
appreciated, recognised.-—The laws of
our moral as well as of our physical
nature are jnexorable_and—benignant.
We must neither lament, resent, ignore,
nor resist them; but face, accept, and
use them as they manifest themselves
in opening years.

Il. Occasionally there will be ap-
parent suddenness in their manifesta-
tion.— Ripeness will seem to come all
at once. The will has been maturing
while the parent knew it not. It
seems as if a mine had been sprung
on him, and a sense of unfairness goes
with it. This is natural, but un-
reasonable. Nature cannot wait for
us till we are ready. When the
blossom sets the fruit appears. There
is no sin in this. It cannot be other-
wise.

Ill. That surprise, disappointment,
or pain results is no fauit of the child.
—Mary probably soon regretted her
momentary heat. On the part of
sons and daughters there is oftenl ,
abruptuess, wilfulness, and eae
towards parents. jj This is the accident
of the case, resulting from human
infirmity. That the parent feels pain
is inevitable. But love, good sense,
and an instinct of justice soon heal
the wound.

IV. For with patience and tolerance
on the part of parents will come
gratitude on the part of youth, and
appreciation of our large-heartedness.
Youth, with all its disdains, and
caprices, and conceits, is still the world’s
leverage, and the most lovable thing
in it.

V. A real love of knowledge is a
noble thing.—We are not to frown
at it in the young, or be frightened,
but encourage it, and judiciously direct
it. The pursuit of knowledge has
risks, but these are less dangerous
than those which are concerned with
the indulgence of the senses. Reason
is a Divine gift, and is te be trained
and cultivated for God.


77


CHAP. II.


HIMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE





VI. In the end our self-restraint
and kindness, and faith in God’s holy
will shall have their reward.—“ Jesus
went dow s
subject.” So it will be in the end
between us and our children. We
shall lose nothing by granting what
belongs to them, but we shall gain


.more. They must be helped, not
hindered, at this difficult stage in life’s





journey. We, too, have been as they
are. Let us not forget our own youth.


Let us try to make friends with our
children, and encourage them to confide
in us.—Thorold.


Ver. Y e (for
boys~ and girls)—The Boy in the
Temple hallows the lessons of youth.
The story that Luke tells should be
full of interest and help to lads and
maidens. Though only twelve, we
should think of Him as we should
among ourselves think of a youth of
sixteen or seventeen. He was no
longer a child. Those entering on the
untried future of manhood or woman-
hood are standing just where Jesus
stood. Learn then of Him. Follow in
His footsteps. Find in His words—

I. His trust.—‘ Wist ye not?” It


is a sad surprise to find that His


niother had been in doubt as to where
He was or what He was doing. He
fully trusted in His mother’s under-
standing of the thoughts of her child.
You who are beginning to live a life
of your own must often be mis-
understood. Do you show the same
trust in the knowledge and sympathy
of your parents? You, too, may be
feeling, like our Lord, that there is an
inner life into which even the nearest
and dearest cannot enter. Do not,
as He did not, on that account, by
suspicion and discontent strain the
bond of unity of thought and feeling
until it snaps.

II. His taski—Even now He _ has
an_overmastering sense of duty. “I
must_be.” He began life with no
thought of solf-plesang-butcwith-the
single “aim to please His Father_in
heaven. He knew nothing of a divided
. 78












heart or of a wavering will. As
child, youth, man, there was whoie-
hearted, steadfast surrender to God.
Have you the single aim? Or is
your desire only to be free—to do as


you like? Do you wish to please
yourself or God? Own His claim
over you.


III. His Dn te coer
house.” ‘My Father’s business.” He
knew and felt God to be near in the
place where He was_in- the task that
He did.” He was doing God’s will in
learning about the law. In the Temple-
worship and teaching God was making
Himself known to Him. He lived
with and for God. Of Him He
thought, Him He served as Father.
Have you thus known God as near to
you? Have you acknowledged Him
in your humblest duty? When you
pray to and praise Him you are in
His house. In your lowly daily work,
if you do it because you know it is
God’s will for you, you are about His
business.——Garvie. (Lr WA IAN


“My Father's a
recordel words of Jesus. is calm
repose is in strong contrast to Mary’s
not unnatural excitement. In one
sentence, like a sudden beam of
light shooting into some profound
gulf, He shows the depths of His
hild-heart. ere
I. The consciousness,of sonship-—
There is an evident referdte fo Mary’s
words, “Thy father and I.” She had
carefully guarded from Him, hitherto, -
the mystery of His birth. His question
is an appeal to her secret. There is
no material given for deciding whether
this consciousness was now felt or ex-
pressed for the first time. The words
point to a distinct and unique con-
sciousness of sonship, apprehended in
childish fashion. This is the first note


to which the after-life is so treé:-—>
_IT- The. consciousness ot Lt
ocation.— Herejs—the first_expression
of that-Solefan_“must”~of which we
‘hear the echoes all through His subse-
\quent life.“ Sotiship-implies obedience ;
the sense of sonship implies filial sub-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. II.





mission) His childish recognition of rather girding Himself for what is
this necessity grew in _depth and trying and irksome to human nature;
solemnity with His growing years; but bringing His young soul to face it,
here we _have it_clearly discerned as like one breasting a hill or buffeting
the guiding star of the Child’s life. the waves. The lesson is obvious.
The parallel in youthful lines is when Nothing is more salutary or more
the sense of duty and responsibility promising than this early grappling
becomes more active. It is a solemn with labour: no flinching, but the
time when young shoulders first begin stern, steady “I must.”—Blaihie.
to feel the burden of personal responsi-

_ bility. Happy they who feel not only “ My Father’ mess.” — 'The
the pressure of a law, but the hand of “ Father’s business” on which He
a Lawgiver—who say not reluctantly entered at twelve was not preaching,
but gladly, “I must”! a and working miracles, and going about

Til. The Fibordinationéfall-kenian doing good in a public manner, but for
ties to this solemn necessity.—The the time remaining at home, a dutiful
incident itself illustrates this. The child, a glad, helpful youth, and an
jcall to the Father's business was more industrious, growing man.—Miller. —

‘imperative than the call to Mary’s ig ea


side.” It was the first breaking away. The First Words of Jesus.—These are
from the seclusion and peace of Naza- the first recorded words of Jesus, and
reth, the first time that H HS “conduct are instinct with the Spirit that_guided


/ more sacred, than a mot vo
_ than a mother’s sorrow. (‘The dawning “The quiet repose, and serenity, and
/on the soul of that consciousness of  self-possession of this reply are highly
| supreme duty does not extinguish the — characteristic of Him.

light of filial duty to parents, nor/

_ darken the brightness of any of the Christ's Testimony—te—Himself —It
‘sweet charities of family and kindred./ is distinctly noticeable that to the
‘But it decisively puts them Sécond{ ‘‘thy—father” of Mary He opposes
/and opens the possibility, so dreadful ‘ My Father,” and that by His artless
to exacting human love, of apparent wonder that they sought for Him any-
conflict between two duties, in which where but in the Temple He claimed
4 the lower may have to give place to ‘that special relationship with God


had shown that anything was to Him and animated _His whole—life—that of
bar's Tove or (devotion. to His--Father. in. heaven.


sate eines gra


the higher. It is a great moment in which had been announced to Mary

every life when the young soul discerns and Joseph before His birth @. 35;

a law more imperative, because he has Matt. i. 20). ‘ Hitherto pious Jews

become aware of a love more tender and lowly shepherds, waiting for the

than the commandment of a father or salvation of Israel, have borne testi-
_ the law of a mother. The recognition mony to the infant Messiah : .He now...
' of the will of a Father in heaven, to bears testimony.-to~ Himself” (Lange).
whose “business” all earthly ties


i


must yield, lies at the foundation of Jesus Lost and Found.—The loss and
' every holy and noble life.— Maclaren. recovery of Jesus may be taken to


symbolise experiences in our own
_ “T must.”—It is interesting to ob- spiritual life. ‘(Certain it is that we
' serve that it is the stermer view of duty also, if we would find Christ, must
“that seems_to_influence the child —t- seek Him where He is ever to be
must. In other parts of Scripture we found, in His holy Temple ” (Burgon).
have indications that this was not His
only view—that_doing God’s will was a Vers. 49 50 The Idea of our Life-
joy to Him, But, strange to say, at work.
he early age of twelve, we find Him 1. We have to pass through the


79


Va L “un


CHAP. II.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





period of necessary unconsciousness>—
There. .was.a period. inour. Lord’s. life
of pure_sensation. So it is with our-
selves, with even the most intellectual
and most spiritual—a time when there
is scarcely any thought of God or
knowledge of duty.

II. Then comes a time when the


Tight of life dawns upon the soul.—


Before Jesus was “twelve years old”

He had pondered fife great ~ though ts
Wun ahah tha Sonne deal. The
loftiest truths ask early admission to
the soul. The little child has ideas
immeasurably above the reach of the
cleverest and best-trained animal.


IIL hour arrives when the idea
of of life-work is recognised by the
soul,—hrour Lord’s case this life-work


was_exceptional, unique. Hven now
He did not understand all that it





meant. As He “ increasedinwisdom ”
He became more fully conscious of His
mission, and the shadow of the cross
deepened. Still, in the Temple ile had
a very definite idea that His Father
had chosen Him to do some great
work. In our case the life-work of
following Christ is binding upon all—
the particular career varies, in which
this following is to be carried out. It
may not be a distinctively religious


calling. a
is we | voice He rendered implicit obedience.


IV. At this momentous
have to decide alone.—Hi


- fhave thought Hi ‘other would have.
{ een sympathetic and-inteligent. So
)\\Jesus was alone in all the critical hours
of His career. We may be thankful
for perentalencouragement and human
sympathy in every crisis; but with or
without these, aided, unaccompanied,
or opposed, we must for ourselves be


about “the Father’s iness ” when


His summons falls on our ear.—








r. 50) The Idea of Divine Son-
i, therefore, evident that the
special relationship with God of which
He spoke had not been a fact com-
municated to Him by His parents;
nor was the idea of Messiah’s being


80






Son of God as well as Son of man
taught by the doctors amongst whom
He had been sitting. It was a truth
which had just dawned upon Him and
led Him to act as He did.









S$ IDCLAORE-1S e recorded in
the life of Jesus between His presenta-
tion in the Temple when forty days old,
a TE DAME Ot-E


A Flower from an Enclosed Garde


h 1s aex5









rec
solitary floweret out of the wonderful
enclosed garden of the thirty years,
plucked precisely there where the
swollen bud, at a distinctive crisis,
bursts into flower” (Stier).


.)% Went down with neem
as_to—His-o ce to


18. His<obedienc

His énts is almost necessary to cor-
rect SEED rahausea we igh have
formed from the above incident. He
did not henceforth act habitually in a


manner they would be forced to con-
sider wayward, on impulses which they
could not understand. He did not
allow His feelings to prevail over His
duties as a son and as a member of a
household; if His affections attracted
Him to the Temple, the voice of duty
called Him back to Galilee, and to that





The veil that concealed His higher
nature, after being for a moment
lifted, was allowed to fall again, and
His normal human life passed back
into, its former course. ;


Mae unto them.” — There is
something wonderiu eyon ASULe


in the thought of Him unto whom
all things are _sttbject_submitting to
earthly parents? No suc rene
ever done to men or to angels as was
now done to Joseph and Mary. The
calm of home-life, the healthy occupa-
tion of manual labour, and the seclusion
of Nazareth were a better preparation
for Christ’s public ministry than the
Temple with its ritualism and the
schools of the Rabbis would have
been,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


‘The Lesson of _Patience.—What_a
lesson of patient waiting for the wider
sphere is here! Young people, con-


scious of power, or often only stung by
restlessness, are apt to think home a
very contracted field, and to despise
its quiet monotony, and chafe at its
imposition of petty obedience.
Christ lived till He was thirty in a

oor little village buried among the
hills, worked_as.a_carpenter, did what
His mother bade Him, and was content
till His““hour ” came. Vanity, selfish
ambition, proud independence, are


always in a hurry to get away from.


the modest shelter-ofa_mother’s house
and make a mark in the world. The
“prodigal, who wants riotous living, is
in a hurry too, But the true Son is
the more a Son of Mary because He
feels Himself the Son of God, and
nourishes His pure spirit in sweet
seclusion, which yet is not solitude,
till the time comes for larger service
in a wider sphere. The wider work
is quietly postponed for the narrower
tasks.


“ Thy soul was like a star, and dwelt apart,
* * * *
thy heart
The lowliest duties on herself did Tay.”
SSSR NASNISPST 1777


—WMaclaren.


Willing Dependence.—You do_ not
ator ay cnbeon ta Jesus Christ to
be independent ; you do not find Him
remonstrating. or avurmuring: against
the-restraintssof home, and_beginning
to remind Himself or others that the
time had_come fot— of_-self-management
and‘self-concern. Shall not the son,
the daughter, in a Christian home
deem that good enough and great
enough which a Saviour, who was also
the Creator, thought happy enough
and honourable enough for Him ?—
Vaughan.





of meek submission are condensed,


as a thin film of imperishable stone
age of a


represent t


forest that waved green through geo-


Jesus,





CHAP. IL


logical cycles. For eighteen uneventful
years the story of His life lies in these
few words that_we.may learn how the
spirit of a son makes every place the
Father’s house and every meanest task


the Father's busingss.— Maclaren. >


“« Kept all these ying eaten”
—The_Wirginy didnot merely kee
these sayings in her_memory ; she Eat
them in her heat-This is thé true
way in Dench Sore nb spiniiua now
ledge. CThat which is committed to the
tablets of the memory may fade away,
and may not, of necessity, be much
of an influence upon our feelings, and
thoughts, and lives. But the things
that are kept in the heart Tose none of


I ne brad








life and


sraeenigmermrr mar






action. Th
in the heart a
and in them we have a motive to
service of God, which yields to none in


strength—a ground of assurance that








—a means for understanding God’s
dealings with us more perfectly, and
for recognising things that are hidden


from natural vision and from intel-
lectual research.


Ver. tothe Gasca Woith God and
ah


marg—Innocence grew into holiness,
and did-se-in-such an artless, natural


manner that it won the approval of
men as well as the favour of God.” The
world did not as yet hate Him, for He
did not, except by unconscious example,
testify against it that its deeds are evil
(cf. John vii. 7).


Th Growth in Wisdom of the Divine
Boy.

I. His growth was real.—His human
nature must have had the inexperience
and ignorance of childhood, and must
have passed, in a normal manner, to
wider knowledge and clearer self-


consciousness. There is nothing to
startle in this. Growth does not imply
imperfection. It only implies finite-


ness, and therefore development in
time. The capacity of His human


81


their freshness with the lapse of time,
and_are a perpetual stimulus to holy
he things we stere


ae


¢


OHAP. III.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.








spirit increased, and therefore His
wisdom inereasec

IT. ie(s o hwas uninterrupted,
unstained, symmetrical, universal.
He alone fulfilled His own law of
growth—“ first the blade,” ete.
best of us grow by fits and_starts, and
in the wrong direction. In His growth
there were no pauses, no sinful elements
mingled, no powers unduly developed
or deformed. His childhood had no









The.


His own heart taught Him. But the


result of all those, and whatsoever
other forces shaped His human growth,


an character. which had so





no trace of any particular influence
appears.in_it. So, in lower fashion,
genius uses all the outward means
available, but is their master, not
their servant, and is not made by


them, but only finds in them stimulus


and an occasion for development of its


failings, and all in it that could be
inborn power. Jesus is not the product


retained abode with Him in His man-





hood. of any or all of these outward means.
III. His growth iL wisc wisdomwas by He grew by-their helps but_w: < but was not
the use of means.—Life taught Him shaped _ by them. A ratact man must


be more than man. A sinless Jesus
cannot be the son of Joseph and Mary.
—WMaclaren.


Scripture taught Him. Coombs
with His Father taught Him. The
heavens and the earth taught Him.








CHAPTER III.
CRITICAL NOTES.


Ver. 1—This may be regarded as the formal opening of St. Luke’s history. Tiberius
Cesar.—Anegus us died A.U.C. 767, and fifteen years added to this would make the time here
noted, A.U.c. 782, when Jesus would be thirty-two years of age, having been born before the
death of Herod the Great (4.U.c. 750). As this would be inconsistent with ver. 23, we must
assume that Luke is reckoning from the time when Tiberius was associated with Augustus
in the imperial dignity, ze. in A.U.c. 765. ‘his would make the date of Christ’s baptism
A.U.C. 780 or A.D. 26. Pontius Pilate—Procurator of Juda, under the Proconsul of Syria,
from A.D, 26—86. Herod.—Herod Antipas, son of Herod the Great and Malthace ; he was full
brother of Archelaus, and was tetrarch from B.c. 4 to A.D. 39. He had the title of “ king ”
by courtesy (Mark vi. 14, etc.). It was by him that John the Baptist was imprisoned and put
to death. Tetrarch.—Means originally, the ruler of a fourth part of a country; afterwards
used for any tributary prince. Philip.—Half-brother of Herod Antipas; son of Herod the
Great and Cleopatra. Reigned from B.C. 4 to A.D. 32. The town of Caesarea Philippi namea
after him. He was not the Philip spoken of in Mark vi. 17, who was another son of Herod
the Great (by Mariamne, daugliter of Simon), This last-named Philip was disinherited by
his father, and lived in Rome as a private citizen. The districts named in this verse are
those within which our Lord’s ministry was confined.

Ver. 2. Annas and Caiaphas being the high priests.—In theory there could be but one
high priest. A better reading is followed by the R.V. “in the high-priesthood of Annas
and Caiaphas.” Annas had been deprived of office by Valerius Gratus, Pilate’s predecessor,
He was probably regarded by the people as the legitimate high priest, while Joseph
Caiaphas, his son-in-law, was accepted as high priest de facto. This would account for the
singular expression here used. He had certainly great influence during the priesthood of
Caiaphas (v. John xviii. 13, 24). The word of God came.—The usual Old Testament formula
for prophetic inspiration. The wilderness.—As indicated in ver. 3, the desert country about
the mouth of the Jordan on the north of the Dead Sea.

Ver. 3. Baptism of repentance, etc.—‘ A baptism requiring and representing an inward,
spiritual change; the pledge of remission of sins to tuose who were truly penitent”
(Speaker's Commentary).

Ver. 4.—The passage quoted from Isaiah is understood to refer primarily to the return of
the Jews from captivity, and to have only a secondary fulfilment in the preaching of John,
But the glowing words find their only adequate fulfilment in the mission of the Baptist.

Ver. 5. Every valley, etc.—“The metaphor is dezived trom pioneers who go before the


82


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. III.
eS


march of aking. The general meaning of the prophecy is that no obstacles, whether they

arose from depression, or power, or pride, or cunning perversity, or menacing difficulties

iets a able to resist the labours of the pioneers and heralds of the kingdom of God*
arrar).

_Ver. 7. The multitude.—Rather, “the multitudes” (R.V.)—different classes of men from
different quarters. O generation of vipers.—Rather, “ ye offspring of vipers” (R.V.). These
stern words are addressed specially to Pharisees and Sadducees (Matt. iii. 7). Our Lord
Himself uses the same figure (Matt. xxiii. 83). Notice that the Baptist employs figures
suggested by the desert—vipers, stones, barren trees.

Ver. 9.—“The notion is that of a woodman touching a tree with the edge of his axe
to measure his blow before he lifts his arm for the sweep which fells it” (Yarrar).

Vers. 10-14 are peculiar to St. Luke.

Ver. 11.—John says nothing of faith and love, but like Christ lays down self-denial as
a first condition of admission into the kingdom of God (Matt. v. 40-42). Meat.—TZ.e. food:
the word now usually means “ flesh ”; but this use of the word is unknown in our A.V.

Ver. 12. Publicans.—J.e. tax-gatherers; owing to the system of farming taxes which
prevailed at this time, the office gave many facilities for dishonesty and extortion, and those
who filled it were both despised and hated. A special stigma attached to them among the
Jews as agents of a heathen and oppressive power. Master.—J.e. teacher.

Ver. 14. Soldiers.—The Greek word used means literally, “soldiers on the march.” Do
violence to no man.—The word implies, “Do not extort money by threats of violence.”
Neither accuse any falsely.—J.e. “do not extort money by false accusation, or the threatening
of it.” Be content, ete.—Mutinies on account of pay were frequent.

Ver. 15. Mused.—Rather, “ reasoned, debated.” The absence of outward splendour occa-
sioned doubts as to whether John could be the promised Messiah; the holiness of his life
and the authority with which he spoke suggested to some that he might be the Sent of God.
This verse is peculiar to St. Luke but is equivalent to what is said in John i. 19-25.

Ver. 16. Latehet.—JZ.e. thong or lace. Shoes.—Rather, “ sandals.”

Ver. 17. Fan.—* The Latin vannus, a great shovel with which corn was thrown up against
the wind to separate it from the chaff” (Farrar). Floor,—J.e. “ threshing-floor” (R.V.).

Ver. 18. Preached.—Lit. “evangelised the people”—proclaimed good tidings to them.
“With many other exhortations, therefore, preached he good tidings unto the people ” (R.V.).
The allusion seems to be to the announcement of Christ’s coming or to references of Him,
which underlay the Baptist’s teaching.

Ver. 19.—The imprisonment of John is mentioned by anticipation. Cf. -this passage
with the fuller notices in Matt. xiv. 3-5 ; Mark vi. 17-20. Philip’s.—Omit Philip (R.V.), “ his
brother’s wife.” The first husband of Herodias was named Herod, and was a private citizen
living in Rome. He was probably called Philip to distinguish him from Herod Antipas (cf.
Mark vi. 17).

Ver. 20.—It is interesting to find the same estimate of Herod’s conduct towards John
in the history of Josephus (Antt., XVIII. v. 1-4). Prison.—The Jewish historian tells us
that the scene of John’s imprisonment was the fortress of Macherus, on the north of
the Dead Sea.

Ver. 21.—This verse seems to imply that the baptism of Jesus was in a measure private—
that He was the last to receive the rite on the particular day when He came to John. The
reason why He submitted to the rite is given by Himself in Matt. iii. 15, viz. that He judged
it fitting for Him to conform to all the requirements of the law of Moses. Praying.—This
circumstance is mentioned by St. Luke only. It is an illustration of the necessity of prayer
to make any external rites effectual.

Ver. 22. Ina bodily shape.—Added by St. Luke. The dove was from early times a symbol
of the Holy Spirit. “The Talmudic comment on (Gen. i. 2 is that the ‘the Spirit of God
moved on the face of the waters like a dove. We are probably to understand a dovelike,
hovering, lambent flame descending on the head of Jesus ; and this may account for the
unanimous early legend that a fire or light was kindled in the Jordan” (Harrar). A voice,—
This voice out of heaven was heard also on the Mount of Transfiguration (ix. 35), and
shortly before the Passion (John xii. 28-30). This appearance of the Holy Spirit, and voice
of the Father, seen and heard on the occasion of the baptism of Jesus, distinctly imply the
doctrine of the Trinity of the Godhead.

Ver. 23.—The phraseology of the beginning of this verse is very rugged ; and commentators
have been much perplexed by it. The R.V. is, “And Jesus Himself, when He began to
teach, was about thirty years of age.” The substitution of the words in italics—“ to teach”
—seems somewhat arbitrary. The evident intention of the Evangelist is to give the age
of Jesus at His baptism. Perhaps the simplest and most natural rendering of the passage
would be, ‘“‘ And Jesus was beginning to be [a man] of about thirty years of age ”—7.e. had
nearly completed his thirtieth year.

Vers. 23-38.—The genealogy of Jesus. For a full discussion of the many interesting and


83


i


CHAP. ILI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





complicated questions connected with the genealogies given in the first and third Gospels,
we must refer the reader to works specially dealing with that subject. Lord A. C. Hervey,
Bishop of Bath and Wells, has written a very able monograph entitled The Genealogies of
our’ Lord Jesus Christ, and is also the author of the article on the subject in Smith’s
Dictionary of the Bible. From the latter we make the following extracts: 1. They are
both the genealogies of Joseph—i.e. of Jesus Christ, as the reputed and legal son of Joseph
and Mary. 2. The genealogy of St. Matthew is Joseph’s genealogy as legal. successor to the
throne of David—z.e. it exhibits the successive heirs of the kingdom, ending with Christ,
as Joseph’s reputed son. St. Luke’s is Joseph’s private genealogy, exhibiting his real birth,
as David’s son, and thus showing why he was heir to Solomon’s crown. 3. There can
be no doubt that Mary also was of David’s descent (i. 32; Acts ii. 30, xiii. 23 ; Rom. i.3, etc.).
It is probable that she was the daughter of Jacob, and first cousin to Joseph, her husband ;
80 that in point of fact, though not of form, both the genealogies are as much hers as her
husband’s. In St. Matthew’s Gospel Joseph is said to have been the son of Jacob, the son
of Matthan; in St. Luke’s, the son of Heli, the son of Matthat. There seems to be no
reason to doubt that Matthan and Matthat are one and the same person. The state of
matters then would be that Matthan had two sons, Jacob and Heli; that Jacob had no son
(but according to the above conjecture, a daughter Mary), and that consequently Joseph,
the son of the younger brother Heli, became heir to his uncle and to the throne of David.
It is quite evident that, in spite of all difficulties which may now be connected with these
genealogies, they are trustworthy ; not a doubt was thrown out by the bitterest of the early
enemies of Christianity as to our Lord’s real descent from David.

Ver. 27.Probably the original text had“ the son of the Hhesa Zerubbabel.” Rhesa is not
a proper name, but a Chaldean word signifying “ prince.”

Ver. 36.—The Cainan mentioned in this verse is perhaps introduced by mistake. The name
is to be found in the LXX. Version of Gen. xi. 12, but not in any Hebrew MBS. of the Old
Testament.

Ver. 38. Adam, which was the Son of God.—“ The Evangelist here asserts at once the
community of nature which subsists between all mankind (cf. Acts xvii. 26-28), and the
filial relation in which all men stand to God, not merely as being the creatures of His hand,
‘but also as being made in His image ” (Speaker's Commentary).


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—14.


A Call to Repentance.—St. Luke here makes a fresh beginning. What he has
hitherto related has been of a more or less private character—incidents affecting
the lives and thoughts of individuals and the narrow cireles in which they
moved. But now he has to tell of the revelation of God in Christ to mankind.
He has shown us the source of the stream, and now he points out with special
emphasis where it begins to gather strength and flow in a broader, deeper
channel. First the forerunner of the Messiah, and then the Messiah Himself,
come forth from the seclusion in which they had been buried, and the foundation
of the kingdom of heaven is laid in the spiritual movement begun by the
preaching of repentance and of baptism for the remission of sins. St. Luke
marks the importance of the crisis by his mention of the date at which it
occurred, and of the men who bore rule at the time in the world at large, in
the land of God’s chosen people, and in the Jewish Church. The great work
intrusted to John the Baptist was to prepare the way for Christ, and this he
did by summoning the nation to whom He was to be specially revealed to
repentance, and by giving assurance that true repentance would be accepted of
God. With regard to this call to repentance we notice—

I. That it comes from God.—In as literal a sense as in times of old prophets
received messages from God to deliver in His name to men, did “the word
of God come to John in the wilderness.” Nor is this Divine interposition
exceptional. In every case it is a Divine voice, speaking either through the
written word, or through conscience, or through the workings of Providence,
that summons the sinner to repentance. It is always God who takes the
initiative. He reveals the law that has heen transerossed and the penalties
that wait upon transgression, awakens godly surrow tor sin, and gives strength


84


- to amend the life.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE. CHAP. III.





He is not an austere man, reaping where He has not sown;


_ but in summoning us to repentance He gives us strength to obey. He asks for


nothing which He does not give.
II. It was addressed to all.—Israel is not treated as already in such relations
with God as to render repentance unnecessary. The fact of descent from


_ Abraham, on which many prided themselves, is spoken of as being of no value


where a faith and a holiness like Abraham’s are not found. Pharisees and
Sadducees, rabbis and priests, publicans and soldiers and common people, both
those who prided themselves upon their holiness and those who were almost in
despair because of their sinfulness, were called to repentance. A purer and
more spiritual form of righteousness than any had yet attained to must
distinguish those who belong to the kingdom of heaven.

III. This repentance was to be manifested in confession of sins, in submission
to the rite which symbolised spiritual cleansing, in amendment of life, and in
faith in the Messiah who was shortly to be revealed.—Both sorrow for the past
and a change of life in the future were required from those who received the rite
of baptism ; and it is to be specially noticed that while John the Baptist was able
to arouse the consciences of men and excite the feeling of regret for evil done,
he had no power to effect the change in conduct which he recommended to his
hearers. In this way he turned the attention of the people to One mightier
than himself, who would baptize with the Holy Ghost and with fire—who would
impart the power needed for true and complete service of God. He fastened
upon the characteristic sins of the various classes who came before him, and’
exhorted his hearers to break them off. The attempt to doso would awaken a
sense of helplessness that would lead them to seek fox a Divine Helper to aid them
in overcoming evil.

IV. Refusal to obey the call to repentance would be followed by chastisement.
—The wrath of God against evil-doers was imminent—already the fruitless tree
was marked for destruction, and the axe was in the avenger’s hand. But a
short delay in the execution of the sentence had been granted, and by the
immediate bringing forth of fruits meet for repentance the sentence itself might
be averted. In no obscure terms does John announce that the exceptional
position and privileges of the Jewish nation were in danger of being forfeited
by disobedience, and that a spiritual seed might be raised up to Abraham
among those who were not his by natural descent. This warning as to the
taking away of blessings and mercies which have been abused and neglected
is one we all need to lay to heart in the present day. The overthrow of
Christianity in the countries where it was first established is a striking parallel
to the rejection of the Jewish people.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 1—14.
Vers. 1, 2. Four Names.—Could


any irony be keener or any sarcasm


Flies in amber.—What a contrast
between the exalted rank and the


more withering than that which
writes these four names— Pontius
Pilate, Herod, Annas, and Caiaphas
—on the frontispiece of the Gospel,
and then adds—“ While these were
reigning and ruling, while these
were offering bullocks and goats in
propitiation, the word of God came,”
etc.— Vaughan.


notoriety of these princes and rulers
and the obscurity of the men who
were so soon to appear on the stage
of the world and to inaugurate a
movement destined to affect and
change the whole of human society!
Yet, if we except the name of the
Roman emperor, we should probably
never have heard of any of these per-


£5


CHAP, III.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





sonages but for their connection with
the gospel history. In it their names
are preserved like the flies and bits of
straw sometimes seen in amber.


“The word of God came unto John.”
—This expression, which is constantly
used of prophets, is never used of Christ.
The reason is that the word of God
came to them as something foreign to
them and from without, whereas Christ
was Himself the Word incarnate.


Vers. 2, 3. The Weakness of Mere
Asceticism.—The wilderness in which
John lived was not altogether a solitary
place. There were many there living
an ascetic life, protesting against the
luxurious and vicious habits of the
society from which they had separated
themselves, and seeking to attain by
holy meditation, by self-denial, and by
prayer to a vision of God which the
Temple worship could not give them.
John the Baptist had much in common
with these ascetics, so far as the out-
ward conditions of his life were con-
cerned. But great differences existed
between him and them.

I. They had no mission to help and
save the world.—They were bent upon
the salvation of their own souls, and
attempted no reformation of the evils
of society. They feared to endanger
their own purity by mixing with other
men, and so the world at large was
little the better for their self-denial
and uprightness. John, on the con-
trary, came forth from the wilderness
to do battle with the sins that were
ruining men, and to announce the
coming of a new era for Israel and for
mankind.

IT. The ascetics were hopeless of the
salvation of those from whom they had
separated themselves.—A1ll that they
thought possible was their own escape
from degradation andruin. But John
did not despair even of those who were
sunk in vice, and apparently indifferent
to the claims of holiness. His words
were full of hope. To all who would
listen he spoke of repentance as possible
—a fresh start might be made, new


86


habits of righteousness might be cul-
tivated, even by those who were in
the lowest depth of degradation. The
almighty power of God, which was able
to give a heart of flesh in place of the
stony heart of unbelief, was a fact on
which he laid great stress in all his
preaching.

III. Joha did not substitute one set
of outward religious forms for another.
—Ascetics think the only remedy for
evils is in adopting a manner of life
like that which they themselves follow.
They attach great importance to mat-
ters of dress, and food, and outward
observance. But John did not call upon
his hearers to leave their homes and
occupations for a life of contemplation
and devotion in the wilderness, or to
copy himself in outward habits. He
sought to effect an inward, spiritual
change in the hearts of men; and
the outward acts to which he exhorted
them were not of a formal or ritualistic
kind, but such as indicated virtues of
kindliness, generosity, compassion, and
justice.


Ver. 2. The Desert Preacher.—A
great religious revival is stirring the
heart of the nation, and summoning
the people, high and low, from the
remotest regions of Galilee into the
wilderness of Juda and to the banks
of the Jordan. A baptism of repentance
is being preached by a young prophet
—suddenly, after four hundred years
of Divine silence, manifested to Israel
—avowedly in preparation for a higher
revelation which is to have for its
characteristic a baptism of the Holy
Ghost and of fire. For the moment
this mission of the Baptist has become
the Divine dispensation for Israel.—
Vaughan.


A Good Preacher.
I. His doctrine is good for us.
IT. His rules of life are good for us.
III. His warnings are good for us.
—Taylor.


The Characteristics of John’s Preach-
ing.—1, It was stern, like that of Elijah;


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


CHAP. IiI.





the wind, and earthquake, and fire that
receded the “still small voice.” 2. It
was absolutely dauntless. 3. It shows
remarkable jnsight into human nature
into the needs and temptations of
every class. 4. It was intensely
practical. 5. It prophesies of the
dawn of the kingdom of Christ.
(1) His first message was, “ Repent ” ;
(2) his second message was, “The
kingdom of heaven is at hand”;
(3) his final message was, ‘ Behold
the Lamb of God.” 6. It does not
claim the credentials of a single miracle.
7. It had only a partial and temporary
popularity : he was like the lamp which
burns but for a time, and for which
there is no need when the sun rises.—
Farrar.


“ Baptism of repentance.” —This bap-
tism differed from the ceremortial
washings prescribed in the Jewish law
in that it had direct reference to the
immediate coming of the Messiah, who
would grant the remission of sins.
Those who were baptized (1) acknow-
ledged their sorrow for past sins,
(2) promised to amend their lives in
time to come, and (3) declared their
faith in the Christ, whose forerunner
John was.


Ver. 4. “ The voice.” —The prophecy
draws attention to the work rather
than to the worker: the message, and
not the remarkable personality of John,
is that on which stress is laid. It is
a voice rather than a man. “ Are we
to content ourselves with a general ap-
plication of the details of John’s work
as a pioneer, or is it allowable to see in
the bringing low of mountains and hills
the humiliation of Pharisaic pride, in
the filling up of valleys the overcoming
of Sadducean indifference, in making
straight the crooked the correction of
the guile and falsehood of others (say
of the publicans), and in making
smooth the rough ways a removal of
the evil habits that are found even in
the best of men? However it may be,
the general intention of the quotation
is to represent repentance as the one


distinguishing feature of John’s bap»
tism ” (Godet).


Ver. 6. “ All flesh.”—In the preced-
ing verse stress is laid upon the obstacles
in the way of those who preach the
gospel—the difficulties arising from
human pride, indifference, unbelief, and
evil passions ; in this verse the univer-
sality of the salvation offered to man-
kind is plainly set forth.


Vers. 7-9. The Preacher of Repentance
and highteousness.

J. His first sledge-hammer blow
shatters one false trust—namely,
that in external ceremonial as cleans-
ing. What moved John’s anger was
the very fact that they had come to be
“baptized,” as if that was to do them
any good, and was sufficient for escap-
ing the coming wrath.

II. Another swing of his mace
crushes another--namely, that in
natural descent from the heir of pro-
mise. Messiah was to be their Messiah,
the people thought. John tells them
that God can admit “ these stones ”—
the water-worn rocks littering the
channel of the Jordan—to the privileges
in which they trusted. Surely this
points, however dimly, to the trans-
ference of the promises to the Gentiles.

III. The third turn in the hot
stream of indignant rebuke goes
deeper.—Still in opposition to his
hearers’ baseless confidences, he attacks
their whole conception of the mission
of the Messiah, and declares it to be
an immediately impending work of
judgment. The negative character of
not bearing good fruit is fatal.—
Maclaren.


The Baptist's Message.-—When Mes-
siah was near, John was appointed—

I. To give warning, and to tell them
that the Saviour whom they had long
looked for was at last nigh.

II. He had to tell them, further,
that they were not ready for His
coming. Their life, unreal and sinful,
must be thoroughly reformed before
they could meet the King with wel-


87


CHAP. III.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





come. ‘ Repent!” was the message
of this stern prophet—a message to
all—a message that urged a reform
that went much deeper than the out-
side, and involved an entire revolution
of the inner nature. But though he
could indicate the disease, and make it
felt—

III. He could not cure it.—He
could not reach down to the inmost
defilement and take it away. ‘The
water was a fit symbol of the cold,
unsatisfying, intellectual character of
his ministry, just as the fire with
which Jesus Christ baptized was an
emblem of the warming, searching
character of His ministry.—JWicoll.


Ver. 7. ‘ Vipers.” —J.e, both malicious
and cunning. The comparison is justi-
fied (1) by the corrupt condition of the
nation, which showed itself in form-
alism, hypocrisy, and unbelief; and
(2) by the desire to receive the baptism
of John as a precautionary measure
against coming wrath, without con-
forming to the spiritual requirements
which alone gave the rite its true
value. This cunning was evidence
that, though they were descended from
Abraham, they were not animated by
his faith and devotion. Cf. with this
passage John viii. 37-44, in which
Jesus speaks of “their father the
devil.”


“ Wrath to come.” —The connection of
John’s ministry with the prophecy con-
cerning Elias (Mal. ii. 1, iv. 5) would
naturally suggest to men’s mind “ the
wrath to come” there also foretold.
It was the general expectation of the
Jews that troublous times would
accompany the appearance of the
Messiah. John is now speaking in the
true character of a prophet, foretell-
ing the wrath soon to be poured out
on the Jewish nation. Mere fear of
the wrath of God is not an adequate
foundation for a religious life. It is
negative in its character, and like all
feelings it is liable to be transitory
and to vary in degree from time to
time. The true motive to a holy life


88


is “love of the Father” (cf. 1 John
ii. 15-17). The warnings in the word
of God do appeal to a sense of fear, but
they are rather calculated to deter the
impenitent than to inspire the holy
emotions which go to make up a
religious life and character.


The Wrath to Come.—A good many
people want to flee from the wrath,
but are not willing to give up that
which draws the wrath down upon
them. There is often terror without
penitence. If many were asked,
“Who warned you to flee?” the
answer could only be, ‘ Fear—the
terrors of death and eternity.” John’s
question is therefore a very proper
one.’ The only flight that saves from
coming wrath is away from sin to
Christ. No man is saved who carries
his sins with him in his flight. The
door of the refuge is wide enough to
admit the penitent, but not wide
enough to admit any cherished sin.—
Miller.


Righteous Anger.—The severity of
John’s language may shock us, but we
must keep in view (1) that his was
righteous anger against hypocrisy, such
as prophets in all times and Jesus
Himself manifested—that in it there
were no personal feelings of irritation
and malice; and (2) that his rebukes
were calculated to remove the evils
that excited his anger. The judgments
of which he spoke were not inevitable,
but might be averted by repentance
and sincere faith.


The Pertinacity of Hypocrites.—Those
whose habits of uttering falsehoods to
God, and of deceiving themselves, lead
them to hold out hypocrisy and pre-
tension, instead of the reality, ought
to be urged, with greater sharpness
than other men, to true repentance.
There is an astonishing pertinacity in
hypocrites; and until they have been
flayed by violence, they obstinately
keep their skin.—Calvin.


Who may rebuke with severity j—


BOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,


CHAP. IIT,





Severity in reproof of sin is only
becoming in the mouths of those of
inflexible integrity, and is detestable
when shown py those who are in heart
inclined to the very sins they condemn
with their lips. Frequently those who
are intemperate and unchaste are the
severest critics of those who give way
to these vices. Our objection to
severity of rebuke and denunciatory
language is, it is to be feared, in many
cases the result of indifference to
holiness and not of a charitable dis-
position.


Ver. 8. “ Bring forth fruits.”—In-
sincerity is the great charge brought
by John against his nation: neither
multiplied professions of devotion nor
submission to new religious rites could
work a cure. The only adequate
evidence of a radical change would be
a change of life. The preaching of
John illustrates the operation of the
law upon the heart and conscience.
_ He (1) demands holiness of character
and righteousness of life, but (2) im-
parts no power by which this great
change may be effected. And so the
law (1) awakens and stimulates the
conscience, and (2) by creating within
us a sense of our helplessness creates
a longing after that salvation which is
the gift of God through Jesus Christ.


“ Begin not.”—The natural impulse
of the unregenerate heart is to seek
out excuses and subterfuges when the
conscience is touched.


“ Abraham to our father.”—But
descent from Abraham was not (1) a
mere privilege, securing for all who
could claim it inalienable advantages ;
it was (2) a relationship that imposed
obligations: if it did not lead to a
cultivation of Abraham’s faith, it
would only draw down a heavier con-
demnation. Of. St. Paul’s reasoning in
Rom, iv. that the privileges and bless-
ings conferred upon Abraham belong
to all who manifest his faith. See
also Gal. iii. 7-9.


“God is able,” etc.—He is not de-


pendent upon us for the maintenance


of His honour or for the existence of
His Church in the world. If we are
faithless, tie will raise up those who
will serve Him with sincerity (cf.
Mal. i. 9-11). It is to be feared that
many regard the Church as an institu-
tion which they keep up, and which
would suffer perceptibly if they with-
drew their support.


“Of these stones.”.—As He formed
Adam of the dust of the earth.—
Lengel.


“ Of these stones.” —And so God did.
For, as Joshua, the type of Jesus, took
up twelve stones from the bed of the
same river Jordan (Josh.iv. 1-9), and set
them upon the western bank there for
a memorial, so Jesus, the true Joshua,
after His baptism in the same river,
began to choose His twelve apostles
from obscure and unlearned men, like
rude and unhewn stones of the wilder-
ness, and to make them to be the
foundation-stones of His Church (Rev.
xxi. 14), which is the true family of
Abraham, the Israel of God, the
heavenly Jerusalem, the city that
hath foundations, whose builder is God
(Heb. xi. 10).—Wordsworth.


Fruits Worthy of Repentance.—
There is only one way to prove that
we have truly repented—not saying
that we have, but showing the evidence
in our lives. Repentance is worthless
if it only produces a few tears, a spasm
of regret, a little fright, and then a
return to the old wicked ways. Leav-
ing the sins we repent of, and walking
in the clean new ways of holiness—
these are “works worthy of repent-
ance.’—Miller.


Ver. 9. “The axe is laid unto the
root.” —From a statement of what God
might possibly do, 7.e. raise up from
among the Gentiles spiritual chil-
dren of Abraham, John passes to a
statement of what God will certainly
do, i.e. execute judgment speedily
upon the hypocritical and unbeliev-


89


CHAP. III.


ing. There is mercy mingled even
with this Divine anger against sin:
(1) a warning is given beforehand by
this prophet of what may be expected ;
and (2) there is a delay in the execu-
tion of judgment. None, therefore,
on whom the judgment comes can
plead ignorance or not having had
an opportunity of amendment. The
figure of cutting down barren trees
is connected with the phrase already
used (ver. 8)—“ fruits worthy of re-
pentance”: it is a figure frequently
used in the New Testament.


The Divine Patience-—The picture
is a very suggestive one. Judgment
-is impending. The tree may be cut
down at any moment. The axe still
lying unused shows patience in the
husbandman : he is waiting to see if
the fruitless tree will yet bear fruit.
The meaning is very plain. God waits
long for impenitent sinners to return
to Him. He is slow to punish or
to close the day of opportunity. He
desires all to repent and be saved.
Yet we must not trifle with the Divine
patience and forbearance. Though not
yet lifted to strike, the axe is lying
close at hand, ready to be used. God
has two axes: 1. One for pruning, re-
moving fruitless branches from fruit-
ful trees. 2. One which He uses only
in judgment, cutting down fruitless
trees. The whole of life is very
eritical On any moment may hang
the destinies of eternity.— Miller.


Vers. 10-14. Our Every-day Life.—
From John’s several answers we see
that religion is not something entirely
apart from our every-day life. The
inquirers were to begin at once to do
their several every-day works reli-
giously. Not to give up their callings,
but to do their duty as good and true
men in their callings, to carry the
principles of true religion into all their
actions—this was the Baptist’s counsel.
It is well for all of us to seize and
apply the lesson. Religion is living
out the principles of Christianity in
one’s ordinary weekday life,—Jbid.

90


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


The Rudiments of Morality.—The
A B OC of morality—justice, charity,
abstinence from class vices—is all that
John requires. These homely pieces of
goodness would be the best “fruits”
of repentance. Not to do what every-
body in the same calling does, and I
used to do, is a great proof of a changed
man, though the thing itself may be
very lowly virtue. We need the lesson
quite as much as the multitudes, or
the publicans and soldiers.—Maclaren.


Ver. 10. “ What shall we do then?”
—Cf. Acts ii. 37, and notice the very
different reply given by St. Peter.
John the Baptist says nothing of
faith: “the fruits” were acts of kind-
liness, equity, and humanity, as de-
scribed in the following verses. These
were preparatory to faith (cf. Acts
x. 35); they are the “honest and
good heart” in which the seed of
the word of Christ takes root and
grows (chap. viii. 15). Three classes
of inquirers are spoken of: 1. The
multitudes (ver. 10); 2. Publicans
(ver. 12); 3. Soldiers (ver. 14). John
does not summon them to give up their
callings and adopt his mode of life, but
to remain in their callings, and there
to resist the special temptations that
might beset them and to serve God
with sincerity. It is interesting to
notice the special acquaintance with
human nature and with the peculiar
circumstances of different modes of
life which John displays. Though he
had lived a recluse, he had not divested
himself of interest in human society,
and his knowledge of his own heart
and of the word of God had taught
him the weaknesses and temptations
which beset human nature. It often
happens that shrewder and _ truer
judgments are formed by those who
live apart from society and are accus-
tomed to reading and meditation than
by those who are absorbed in the
business and active life of the world.


Ver. 11. “Impart to him that hath
none.” —Cf. Jas. ii. 15; 1 John iii. 17.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.
cg ES SCS oe ae Ane ee





How quickly would the inequalities
in society disappear if this spirit of
kindliness and generosity were gene-
rally manifested! And yet there is
nothing revglutionary in it: the rich
and prosperous are told to impart to
their less fortunate brethren ; the poor
are not told to demand a portion of
their neighbours’ property.


Vers. 12, 13. “ Then came also pub-
licans.—It is remarkable that John
does not tell the publicans to abandon
their profession, which was regarded
by the stricter Jews as an unholy
one. And in so far as he does not
condemn their calling, he seems to
pronounce the opinion afterwards ex-


CHAP. III.


pressed by Jesus that it was lawful to
pay tribute to Cesar (xx. 25).


Ver. 14. “The soldiers likewise.” —
“He did not say, Cast away your
arms, quit the camp; for he knew
that soldiers are not homicides, but
ministers of law—not avengers of per-
sonal injuries, but defenders of the
public safety” (Wordsworth). “The
desire of injury, the savageness of
revenge, the lust of power, etc.—these
are sins which are justly condemned
in wars, which are, however, sometimes
undertaken by good men for the sake
of punishing the violence of others,
either by command of God, or of some
lawful human authority” (Augustine).


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 15—20.


Acceptance and Rejection of the Divine Message.—The work of separating the
wheat from the chaff and of bringing to light the hidden thoughts of men is
done by every true messenger of God to men. Some receive the Divine word
gladly, others harden their hearts against it. This twofold result was very
marked in the case of John the Baptist.

I. The Divine message he brought awakened the attention of the nation and
excited eager questionings and expectations.—The people as a whole accepted
John as a prophet sent from God, received his rebukes of their sins without
resentment, and believed on his testimony that great events were near at hand.
Some thought that he must himself be the Christ ; nor was their idea altogether
ill-founded, for in the person of John, Christ was indeed standing and knocking
at the door of their hearts. But John with the humility which is characteristic
of true greatness shrank from accepting the honour paid him, and directed the
thoughts of the people again to One mightier than himself. He spoke of the
greater power, and majesty, and authority with which the Anointed of God
would be clothed, and to his previous warnings and threatenings added words
that were good tidings of salvation. And in this subordination of the Baptist
to the Saviour we have an illustration of the fact, which we ever need to
keep in mind, that mere repentance is not enough—that it is but a state of
preparation for that holy life which springs from faith in Christ and communion
with Christ. : i ;

II. The call to repentance and amendment of life was in some instances
rejected, and John, like so many other of the prophets, had to endure
persecution on account of the faithfulness with which he discharged his duty.
—The ruling classes of the nation were disposed to deny his Divine mission, and
were only kept from openly opposing him by the strong feeling in his favour on
the part of the nation at large. The deepest disgrace, however, attaches to
Herod for the part he played in laying violent hands upon the Baptist.
Ecclesiastical authorities might be divided upon the question whether John was
a prophet sent from God or not; but there could be no doubt that the conduct
of Herod which drew upon him the Baptist’s rebuke and exhortation, was
without excuse. Botb his own conscience and the plain teaching of the law of


91


CHAP. III. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


Moses, which he professed to reverence, must have convinced the Jewish prince
that John’s words of blame were amply deserved. In other parts of his conduct
Herod seems to have been disposed to obey the admonitions of the Baptist; but
this sin he would not renounce. A solemn warning for all of us lies in this fact,
The sin we will not give up must lead us into utter antagonism to God; and no
amendment we may effect in other departments of our conduct will atone for
the evil that we retain. The thought, too, is suggested by the case before us
that rejection of revelation is, in some instances at any rate, due to corruption
of heart ; and those who are under the impression that the barriers in their way
are intellectual difficulties would do well to consider whether the real explanation
is not to be found in a depraved nature and a perverse will. The “evil heart of
unbelief” may not in all cases be the cause why revelation is rejected; but few
who are acquainted with the word of God and with the facts of human nature
can doubt that in most cases it is.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 15—20.


Vers. 15-17. John as a Herald.

I. His clear conception of his own
limits.

II. The bowing down of the strong,
stern spirit before the Coming One.

III. The profound insight into
Christ’s work.— Maclaren.


Preacher and Witness.
I. A great preacher.
II. A plain teacher.
II. A faithful witness to Christ.
— Taylor.


Ver. 15. “‘ Whether he were the Christ.”
—The people had not as yet so carnal
a notion of the Messiah, for there was
nothing of outward splendour about
John; nevertheless they entertained
these thoughts about him.— Bengel.


Ver. 16. The Spirits Fire-—The
two mean but one, the fire being the
emblem of the Spirit. Selected to
express the work of the Spirit of God—

I. By reason of its leaping, tri-
umphant, and transforming energy.—
This fire of God, if it falls on you, will
burn up all your coldness, and will
make you glow with enthusiasm : (1)
working your intellectual convictions in
fire, not in frost ; (2) making your creed
a living power in your lives ; (3) kin-
dling you into a flame of earnest consecra-
tion in life-work. Christians are to be


92


set on fire of God. We have more
than enough of cold icebergs. The
metaphor of fire also suggests—

IT. Purifying.—“ The spirit of burn-
ing ” will burn the filth out of us. Foul
clay must be thrust into the fire
to have its blackness burned out of it.
This too is the way in which a soul is
cleansed. No washing will ever clear
sin. Get the love of God into your
hearts, and the fire of the Divine Spirit
into your spirits to melt you down, as it
were, and then the scum and the dross
will come to the top, and you can skim
them off.—Maclaren.


“ One mightier.”

I. Mightier than John, because
“mighty to save.”

II. Mightier than John, who could
impart no spiritual gift. Jesus has
sent “ the Comforter.”

III. Mightier than John, who could
only warn of judgment. “ Thow shalt
come to be our Judge.” —Taylor.


“ Fire.”

I. The Holy Spirit is fire.

II. Christ plunges us into this
Divine fire.

III. That fiery baptism quickens
and cleanses.— Maclaren.


Wherein consists the Superiority of
Jesus ?—1. John calls men to repent-
ance, Jesus remits sin. 2. John pro-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. ITI,





claims the kingdom of heaven, Jesus
bestows it. 3. John baptizes with water,
Jesus with the Spirit and with fire.


“ Not worthy to unloose.”—“It was
the token of a slave’s having become
his master’s property, to loose his shoe,
to #ie the same, or to carry the neces-
sary articles for him to the bath”
(Lightfoot). The varying forms of ex-
pression used in the Gospels all illus-
trate this relationship between master
and slave. It is to be noted that this
language would indicate utter abject-
ness and servility of mind if Jesus had
been a mere man, however exalted in
character and office; it can only be
explained and justified by the fact that
He was God incarnate. And it gives
us a vivid idea of the beauty of John’s
character to see that at the height of
his popularity he thus effaces himself
in favour of One who would only by
the eye of faith be recognised to be
more than a lowly Galilean peasant.


Baptism with Water, with Fire, and
with the Spirit.—Baptism with water
had in view the forgiveness of sins, and
baptism with the Spirit meant the re-
newal and sanctification of the nature :
the one was negative, and the other
positive. And it was baptism with the
Spirit that gave efficacy to the material
rite. Observe that in the original there
is no preposition before “ water,” and
that there is one before “ Spirit” ;
the reason is that ‘‘ water” is merely
a means employed, and “the Spirit”
more than that. Baptism of a three-
fold character : (1) with water; (2)
with the Holy Spirit ; and (3) with fire.
“In the triple element of baptism there
is contained or indicated a progressive
gradation of the spiritual development
of life, and of the element through
which it occurs. Whilst the lowest
degree, i.e. the baptism with water,
refers to the external purification of
sins and repentance, the baptism of
the Spirit, on the contrary, refers to
the internal purification by faith (the
Holy Spirit being considered as the
regenerating principle, John iii. 1 sqq. ;


Acts i. 5), and, finally, the baptism
of fire expresses the transformation, or
sanctification, of the new-born higher
life in its peculiar nature” (Olshausen).


“With fire.”—No reference is made
in the use of this phrase to “ fire” as
an emblem of Divine wrath against
the impenitent, as in the following
verse. The very idea of punishment
is utterly incongruous with the rite of
baptism, which has man’s salvation
always in view. It rather describes a
holy influence that (1) searches the
nature, (2) consumes the dross in it,
(3) refines the good elements of char-
acter, and (4) elevates and ennobles
the whole being. To purify, ilumine,
transform, inflame with holy fervour
and zeal, and carry upwards, as Elijah
was carried up to heaven in @ chariot
of fire. A prophecy specially fulfilled
at Pentecost, when the Holy Spirit
descended in tongues of fire (Acts ii. 3).


Ver. 17. “ Whose fan is in His hand.”
—The royal majesty of Christ is indi-
cated in the use of the word ‘“ His ”—
His hand,” .“ Gis floor? and) “" His
garner.” Observe it is not said “ His
chaff”; the wheat represents those
who are His, the chaff those who
reject Him, and are therefore them-
selves rejected, and are not counted by
Him as His own. In the figure of
the axe reference was made solely to
the fate of the impenitent: this de-
scribes the distinction being made be-
tween the sincere and the hypocritical
—between those who become holy and
those who remain in their sins. His
work of judgment is going forward
every day ; but the full accomplishment
of it will not be seen till the last day.
The same figure is used in Amos ix. 9 ;
Jer. xv. 7; chap. xxii. 31.


“« Wheat.” —But how is Christ said to
separate the chaff from the wheat, when
He can find nothing in men but mere
chaff? The answeriseasy. ‘The elect,
who by their nature are only chaff,
become wheat by the grace of God.
—Calvin.


93


CHAP. IIf.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





“ Chaff.” Empty, light, worthless
persons, who have nothing of religion
but the mere profession, who are devoid
of all solidity of principle and char-
acter (cf. Ps. i. 4).


“ Fire unquenchable.”—There seems
at first sight to be a contradiction
between ‘burning up” and “ fire un-
quenchable.” But the paradox is
explained by the spiritual facts of the
case: (1) there is an utter destruction
of all that constitutes true life and
happiness ; but (2) the persons them-
selves are not destroyed—in that dread
state they are ever conscious of an
unending doom. Such seem to be the
two ideas suggested by the.use of the
phrases “burn up” and “ unquench-
able.” That “fire” here is not the
material element, but a Divine anger
of which the material fire is an emblem,
is quite evident. If we are to inter-
pret “fire” as literal flame, what can
we make of ‘‘fan,” “ threshing-floor,”
‘“‘ wheat,” and “chaff”? “ Let us lay
aside the speculations by which foolish
men weary themselves to no purpose,
and satisfy ourselves with believing
that these forms of speech denote, in
a manner suited to our feeble capacity,
a dreadful torment, which no man can
now comprehend and no language can
express ” (Calvin).


Vers. 18-20. John’s Later Ministry.
—Why does Luke anticipate the order
of events to introduce the notice of
John’s imprisonment at this point?
Probably to mark more distinctly the
introductory character of his ministry.
Luke will finish up his summary of
John, and, as it were, get him out of
the way before he brings John’s Lord
on the scene. This Gospel has no
account of John’s martyrdom. The
morning star fades before sunrise.
The notice of his imprisonment—

I. Completes Luke’s outline of his
character and work.

II. Shows John as a fearless re-
buker of highly placed vice.—How he
got access to “ kings’ houses” we do
not know. Whether he rebuked Herod


94


publicly or privately we are not in-
formed. He had only reproof for the
royal profligate.

III. Shows that the climax of a bad
man’s guilt is his persecution of those
who would win him to goodness.—
The martyr’s imprisonment seals the
king’s condemnation, showing his con-
viction that the preacher spoke the
truth, and was only to be silenced by
force.—Maclaren.


Ver. 18. ‘‘ Preached good tidings”
(R.V.).—Preached, lit. ‘“ proclaimed
good tidings.” There is something
pathetic in the contrast between the
good tidings which he made known
to others and the tragic fate which
came upon himself. From a compari-
son of John ii. 13 with iii. 24, it
appears that John was not cast into
prison until after the first Passover
attended by Christ after His baptism.
It would seem as if St. Luke were
anxious to exhibit the history of John
at one view, and to connect his bold
preaching with the imprisonment in
which it issued. And probably this is
not without its teaching. By coupling
the remote cause with its ultimate con-
sequence—the course pursued with the
results it eventually led to (dropping
every intermediate fact and all irre-
levant cireumstances)—the inspired
writers forcibly remind us how He
must regard our lives, and actions, and
characters who seeth as well as “ de-
clareth the end from the beginning.”


Ver. 19. “ Herod ... . reproved by
him.”—Note that John the Baptist re-
proved Herod himself. He did neither
(1) inflame the minds of the people
against their ruler by describing and
denouncing the immoral character of
the life he was living, nor (2) as Chris-
tian prelates have been known to do,
condone the wickedness of the king and
live on good terms with his mistress.
He was different from many of the
“court preachers” known to history.
Neither the vicious private life of the
sovereign nor the evils of his public
administration of affairs escaped re-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. III.





buke. Cf. the relations between Elijah
and Ahab, Nathan and David.


Ver. 20. “Added yet this above all.”
—The worst of all the evil things that
Herod did was to murder the Baptist.
Other sins might plead some palliation
because of strong evil passions urging
Herod on; but this was evidence of
hatred of God and of holiness. For
it is to be distinctly noted that he
regarded John as a messenger and
minister of God at the very time that
he imprisoned him and at the later
time when he beheaded him. As a
Jew, Herod could not plead ignor-
ance of God’s nature and claims,
and of the inviolable majesty which
clothed those whom He inspired and
sent to speak to men in His name.
Very seldom do the sacred historians
manifest any expression of personal
feeling excited by the events they re-
cord; but here in the phrase ‘added
yet this above all” the indignation of
the writer is but slightly veiled. The
words are equivalent to the Hebrew
expression “filling up the measure of
iniquity.”


Vers, 19, 20. Fidelity to duty.—
There are three periods in the life of
John the Baptist. The first of these,
of which we know little, lasted for
thirty years, the greater part of which
he spent in the desert in preparation
for his life-work ; the second is that of
the few months of his public ministry ;
and the third, perhaps a still shorter
period, which he spent as a prisoner
in the castle of Macherus. In these
different circumstances his character
was subjected to severe tests. The
task laid upon him of rebuking the
sins of every class of the nation
required rare steadfastness of soul,
and fidelity to the God whose mes-
senger he was. But his success as a
prophet had its perils also. It re-
mained to be seen whether he would
come safely through them. The move-
ment he inaugurated spread far and
wide over the land, until it reached
and affected even the sceptical and


voluptuous Herod, who summoned him
to his palace and seemed disposed to
accept his teaching. Worldly wisdom
might have counselled John to exercise
caution in alluding to the flagrant sin
in which Herod lived, or, disguising
itself under the pretence of charity,
might have found many excuses for
it in the evil influences that had sur-
rounded him from his earliest life, in
the bad example of his father, and in
the licence which is so often allowed to
men in his position. John, however,
spoke out against the sin of the king
in as plain terms as ever he had used
in rebuking the sins of Pharisees, and
publicans, and soldiers. He addressed
himself to the offender, and did not, as
already remarked, court the popularity
which a demagogue sometimes wins by
inflaming the minds of the people with
denunciations of the crimes of their
rulers. Two things are noticeable in
John’s rebuke of Herod :—

I. It was unhesitating and direct.—
“Tt is not lawful for thee to have thy
brother’s wife.” It was the sinfulness
of the king’s conduct, and not its
imprudence, or the scandal it caused, or
the risks it provoked, that he laid stress
upon. He spoke as one who did not
dare to be silent, and not as one who
was conscious of the heroism of his
conduct.

II. It was unselfish._John’s was
not one of those hard, pitiless natures
that feel no compunction in adminis-
tering blame. In spite of the austerity
of his life, his soul was of the most
exquisite sensibility. No one can read
the touching words he spoke when his
disciples left him to attach themselves
to Jesus without perceiving this. ‘ He
that hath the bride is the bridegroom ;
but the friend of the bridegroom, which
standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth
greatly because of the bridegroom’s
voice : this my joy therefore is fulfilled :
He must increase, but I must decrease.”
The firmness in rebuking sin shown by
this man of such profound humility
and fine sensitiveness of feeling is all
the more wonderful. It must have
cost him keen pain to inflict pain, and

95


CHAP. III,


_—


to speak words of rebuke which he
could scarcely fail to know would be
fruitless, except in provoking against
himself a profound and unsleeping
hatred.

The third period of John’s life,
when he lay in the dungeon of the
palace, and heard rumours of the won-
derful works of Christ, who, however,
showed no signs of attempting his
release—when he had leisure to think
of the apparent defeat of his mission
and of the overthrow of the hopes and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





anticipations he had once cherished—
was also one when his faith was sub-
jected to new and severe tests, Nor
need we wonder if in the hour of dark-
ness he was afilicted by doubt as to the
Divine mission of Him whom he had
pointed out as the Messiah and the
Lamb of God. His doubts, never-
theless, were not those of a poor and
weak religious character. They were
misgivings caused by separation from
Christ, and they were solved by an
appeal to Christ.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 21—88.


The Divine Sonship of Christ and of Man.—Nowhere else in the Gospels is
the fact that Jesus Christ was in a unique sense the Son of God more plainly
stated than here. And yet His true humanity is no less emphatically asserted
in the genealogical table which traces His descent from the founder of our
race. Nor does it seem to the author of the Gospel that there is any insuperable
difficulty in believing that the Son of God became Son of man—as though the

‘ Divine and the human natures were alien to each other; on the contrary, he
speaks of man as being in a sense the son of God (ver. 38).

I. The Divine Sonship of Christ.—To all outward seeming Jesus was simply
a young man, now about the age of thirty, who had come like others to receive
baptism from John. But by supernatural signs-—-the opened heaven, the
descent of the Spirit, and the voice of God—His unique relationship with God
is declared. His absolute sinlessness is asserted in the words, “In Thee I am
well pleased” ; and consequently there is a difference between Him and every
other member of the race with which He is now connected. He is born of
woman, but not of human parentage (ver. 23); and though akin through His
mother with every member of the human race—for all are descended from a
common ancestor—He has not inherited a depraved nature. No sins of His
own are therefore to be thought of as having been washed away by the water
of baptism. Yet by His identification of Himself with His brethren He took
upon Himself their shame and guilt.

II. The Divine sonship of man.—The great distinction between man and the
other creatures is that he was made in the image of God. And therefore there
is a kinship between him and his Creator which the Evangelist expresses in
the words, ‘‘ Adam, which was the son of God.” Because of this relationship it
is possible for man to know God, and love Him, and serve Him, and have
communion with Him, as none of the other creatures can do. In consequence
of it, also, it was possible for Christ to assume our nature and be “found in
fashion as a man,” without any confusion of natures in His person. Those who
were sons of God, however, differed in one marked respect from Him who was
the Son of God: they had lost many of the privileges of sonship because of
disobedience, while the communion of Christ with God was perfect and unbroken.
And the one great purpose of the Saviour’s life was to restore fellowship between
heaven and earth, between the Father and His human children. To Christ the
heaven was opened that He might lead us into it, the Holy Spirit descended upon


Him to pass from Him to us, and with us in Christ the Father is well pleased.


96


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,


CHAP. II.





SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 21-—388.


Ver. 21. “ When all the people were
baptized.” —The peculiar phrase “ when
all the pepple were baptized” may
imply that the baptism of Jesus was
towards the close of John’s ministry ;
it may, however, be St. Juke’s method
of explaining the reason why Jesus sub-
mitted to baptism. ‘ All the people,”
the nation, by accepting John’s baptism,
were turning to God, and Jesus did
not hold aloof from the movement.
By His incarnation He had become a
member of our race, by His circum-
cision He had become a Jew, and He
fulfilled the obligations which rested
upon Him of obedience to the Divine
commandments. If we understand
why He received the rite of circum-
cision, we suall understand why He
received that of baptism, for the same
general ideas underlie both rites. So
far from separating Himself from
others, as One who was of a different
nature from ours, and free from the
necessity of seeking forgiveness, He
identified Himself with mankind so as
to bear the burden of condemnation
and be subject even unto death. His
own explanation (Matt. iii. 15), ‘‘ Thus
it becometh us to fulfil all righteous-
ness,” plainly declares that He sub-
mitted to every commandment that is
laid by God upon man. Hence St. Luke
speaks of His baptism as a matter of
course, since Israel as a nation was
accepting John’s ministry. It is
probable that this was the only occa-
sion when John and Jesus mot together,
although their careers were so closely
connected and intervolved. 1. The
birth of John preceded and heralded
that of Jesus. 2. In his ministry also
John acted as the forerunner of Jesus.
3. In his death by violonce he offered
a presage of the death of Jesus by
cruel hands two or three years later.


A Private Celebration.—The narra-
tive of St. Luke seems to imply that
the baptism of Jesus was not at a time
when there were others receiving the
rite. John was evidently either alone


or there were but few spectators. The
mere fact of Jesus standing and praying
after His baptism would lead us to infer
that it was a private rather than a
public celebration of the rite. Though
He received baptism, He was separate
from sinners; though He afterwards
received burial, He was laid in a tomb
““wherein was never yet man laid.”


Jesus baptized.—Jesus would identify
Himself with His people in their most
humbling experiences. So He went
down into the water (not, indeed, to
be cleansed by it; rather, as an old
writer says, to cleanse it), and the
Divine voice declared, ‘This is My
beloved Son!” He descended into the
water, just as He submitted in His
early years to the Jewish law. His
being baptized was part of His un-
utterable humiliation. Jesus pledged
Himself to the fulfilment of all right-
eousness on behalf of the race whom
He had come to save.—WVicoll.


Weighty Reasons for His receiving This
Rite.—There must have been weighty
reasons for this water ceremony, so
solemnly observed, or He never could
have found place for it among His
crowded days of teaching, healing, and
comforting His countrymen. Though
able to set all symbols and all forms
aside if He chose, He went down into
the water, at the beginning of His
life’s work, in order, we are told, to
“fulfil all righteousness.” He ‘ came
by water,” and takes peculiar pains in
His teaching that every Christian life


must begin in the same way. ‘“ Born
of water.” “ Baptize them.” Why is
this? Because one great part of our


Saviour’s work is to purify men’s lives.
—Huntington.


Fellowship with our Weakness and
Sinfulness.—In the baptism Christ took
upon Him the fellowship of man’s
weakness and sinfulness ; and because
His brethren needed cleansing and its
symbol, He, the Sinless, took part of
the same.— Maclaren.


97


cuar. um.  HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


Vers. 21, 22. The first recorded Prayer
of Christ and its Answer.—It was when
He was praying that the Spirit was
sent down upon Him, and in all pro-
bability it was this which at the moment
He was praying for. He was in im-
mediate need of the Holy Spirit to
equip Him for His great task. The
human nature of Jesus was dependent
from first to last on the Holy Ghost,
being thereby made a fit organ for the
Divine; and it was in the strength of
this that all His work was done. If
in any measure our life is to be an
imitation of His—if we are to help in
carrying on His work in the world, or
in filling up what is lacking in His
sufferings—we must be dependent on
the same influence. How are we to
get it? He has told us Himself. By
prayer. ‘“ Your heavenly Father shall
give the Holy Spirit to them that ask
Him.” Power, like character, comes
from the fountain of prayer.—WStalker.


Christ's Prayerfulness.—In one sense
Christ’s prayers formed the truest proof
of His manhood. His practice of
prayer and His exhortations to it are
chiefly recorded in the Gospel of Luke,
which is pre-eminently a gospel of the
Son of man. He prayed after His
baptism.—JVicoll.


Prayer at the Baptism and atthe Trans-
Jiguration.—In conformity with Luke’s
psychological purpose as an evangelist,
the effect of prayer upon two of the
sublimest external phenomena in the
Saviour’s life is mentioned by him.
Prayer on His part is the psychological
antecedent of the scene at the Baptism
(and of the glory at the Transfigura-
tion). To St. Luke alone we owe both
notices. ‘ While He was yet praying,
the heaven was opened.” There was
not a magic cleaving of the heavens,
a sudden and theatrical radiance steep-
ing face, andform, and vesture. There
was a human factor, a suitable ante-
cedent, in the perfect Man. The
inward glory grew outward, coalesced
with the opening sky, and melted into
the light of heaven. Among human


98


faces few, indeed, look like the face of
an angel, or are touched with heavenly
radiance. The only true light on any
face is sure to be a light of prayer.—
Alexander.


The Significance of that Prayer.—
Who would not penetrate, if he
were permitted, into the mystery of
that prayer—that prayer between the
thirty years’ seclusion and the three
years’ publicity—between the calm,
peaceful home of the past, and the
troubled, storm-stossed no-home of the
future? It was the calling in of
strength for the dread ordeal of the
Temptation. It was the “putting on
of the whole armour of God” for that
great “ withstanding in the evil day.”
The prayer had its answer on the instant.
To it the heaven was opened, the Holy
Ghost descended in visible form—
visible to two persons, the baptizer
and the Baptized; and a Voice was
heard, audible to two persons—ap-
pointed sign to the one, comforting
solace to the Other: “Thou art My
beloved Son; in Thee I am _ well
pleased.” That prolonged and _ pro-
tracted prayer has its lesson for us.
Much of the blessing of sermon, sacra-
ment, and service is lost by the want of
the after-prayer of which Christ’s is
the example. ‘Too soon does the world
come back upon us after the holiest
communion, after the most inspiring
converse with the Invisible. ‘“ Jesus
also being baptized and still praying,
praying still, still praying on, the
heaven was opened, and the Holy
Ghost descended.”—Vaughan.


The Burden of the Prayer and the
Answer of the Prayer.—The Gospel of
the Son of man specially notes Christ’s
prayers as the tokens of His true man-
hood. The signs following were—

I. The answer, and may help us
to understand—

II. The burden of the prayer. The
connection between the petition and
the opened heavens may bring us the
sweet confidence that for us, too, un-
worthy as we are, the same blessed


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. III.


a et


gift and voice will fall on our hearts
and ears if we, in His name, pray as
He did.— Maclaren.


Our Lords first recorded Prayer.—
We are first introduced to our Lord
in prayer by Luke, who relates how
He came to John to be baptized. The
narrative, though it does not say so
in so many words, plainly implies that
as soon as the Lord had come up out
of the water, He set Himself to
beseech His Father’s blessing on the
act. The answer, more, doubtless, for
our sakes than His own, was forthwith
visibly and audibly given by the Holy
Ghost descending upon Him, and a
Voice declaring, ‘“ This is My beloved
Son ! ”—Markby.


Various Occasions on which Jesus
Prayed.—St. Luke on eight other
occasions calls attention to the prayers
of Jesus—after severe labours (v. 16);
before the choosing of the apostles (vi.
12); before Peter’s great confession
(ix. 18); at His transfiguration (ix. 28,
29); for Peter (xxii. 32); in Geth-
semane (xxii. 41); for His murderers
(xxiii. 34); and at the moment of
death (xxiii. 46).—Farrar.


The Threefold Sign.

I. The opened heavens.—Opened
not only for the descending Dove, but
for the ascending aspiration and gaze,
symbolising the access thither which
that Son had who “is in heaven”
even while He has come forth from
heaven and remains on earth. United
to Him by faith, we too may walk
beneath an ever-open heaven, and look
up through the lower blue to the very
throne, His home and ours.

IJ. The descending Dove.—This
symbol recalls the brooding Spirit
hovering over chaos, and symbolises
the gentle Spirit of God dwelling in
Him who was “meek and lowly of
heart.” The whole fulness of that
Spirit falls and abides on Him. It
dwelt in Him that He might impart
it to us, and the Dove of God might
rest in our hearts.


III. The solemn Voice.—Thus was
brought to Jesus Himself, in His man-
hood, the assurance of His Sonship,
of the perfect love and satisfaction of
the Father in Him. It was meant for
Him, but not for Him alone. If we
accept its witness, we too become sons ;
and if we find God in Him, we shall
find Him well pleased even with us,
and be “ accepted in the Beloved.”—
Maclaren.


Consecration to Office of Redeemer.—
Three outward signs were given of
the consecration of Jesus to the office
of Redeemer of the world. 1. The
heavens were opened—henceforth He
has perfect knowledge of God’s plan in
the work of salvation—the treasures
of Divine wisdom are open to Him.
2. The descent of the Spirit, the source
of life, endowing Him with all needed
gifts and powers; given in fulness to
Him and abiding permanently upon
Him. 3. The voice from heaven giving
Him in clearest form assurance of His
Divine Sonship, and of the love of the
Father to Him, of which He was to
make His brethren partakers. The
first two evangelists tell us that this
series of Divine manifestations was
seen by Jesus; John the Baptist tells
us that he also saw it (John i. 32).
As there were more than one witness
it could not have been a mere figment
of the imagination, and_ therefore
St. Luke relates it as a plain objective
fact. ‘‘The heaven was opened,” etc.


The Triune Nature of the Godhead.—
Jesus prays to God, the Spirit de-
scends upon Him, and the voice of the
Father is heard. The triune nature of
the Godhead is thus declared. ‘‘ When
the Son is baptized, the Father testifies
that He is present ; present also is the
Holy Spirit; never can the Trinity
be broken up (a se separari)”
(Augustine). By Christ’s appointment
the doctrine of the Trinity which was
first distinctly unfolded at His baptism
is set forth in the formula to be used
on occasions when believers are baptized
(Matt. xxviii. 19).


99


i


CHAP. III.


“ Heaven was opened.”—Heaven,
which was closed by the first Adam,
is opened again over the second.


“ Like a dove.”—On account of the
mildness of Christ (cf. Isa, xlii. 2, 3),
by which He kindly and gently called
and every day invites sinners to the
hope of salvation, the Holy Spirit
descended upon Him in the appearance
of a dove. And in this symbol has
been held out to us an eminent token
of the sweetest consolation, that we
may not fear to approach to Christ,
who meets us, not in the formidable
power of the Spirit, but clothed with
gentle and lovely grace.—Calvin.


The Significance of the Symbol.—
The dove is used in other parts of
Scripture as a symbol of (1) purity
(Cant. vi. 9); (2) harmlessness (Matt. x.
16) ; (3) modesty and gentleness (Cant.
ii. 14); and (4) of beauty (Ps. lxviii.
13). And in the history of the Deluge
it is the dove with the olive leaf that
tells that the peace is restored between
heaven and earth (Gen. viii 11).


The Holy Dove.-—The living symbol
identified with this Pentecost which
inaugurated Christ’s official life was
seen by Jesus and John, possibly
also by a number of those of the
spiritually fit who were present in the
crowd. This Prophet and Deliverer
who had come down from heaven
‘could not be left to His own reviving
recollections of the life passed in His
Father’s bosom, nor to the unconscious
momentum of pre-existent experiences
which might come to put a high stamp
on His moods and habits of thought
and act. The God-man could not
meet the duties and ordeals of His
incarnate life in the strength of that
majestic retrospect only. The dove-
like form signifying an inward visita-
tion from the presence of the Father,
implied peace, tenderness, fidelity, holy
and gentle fellowship. The messenger
did not need to come to this obedient
and undefiled Son as scorching fire,


100


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


although it became fire when He in
due time ministered the Spirit to
sinful men. The Spirit came to bring
new anointings, and discernments, and
prerogatives to the humanity of Jesus
Christ, to be a vehicle of fresh visions,
fresh powers, fresh aptitudes, fresh
vocations, which mighty things were
by-and-by to pass from Christ to His
disciples.—Selby.


The Harbinger of Peace and of the
Spring.—There is rich suggestion in
the form in which the Spirit descended.
A great many tender thoughts cluster
around the dove. The dove was the
offering of the very poor. The ap-
pearance of the dove was a harbinger
of spring. Remembered in connection
with the Deluge, it was regarded as
an emblem of peace, and a symbol
of gentleness and harmlessness. All
these associations made the dove a
most fitting emblematic form for the
Holy Ghost to assume when descend-
ing upon Jesus. Jesus came to be a
peace-bringer for all, even the poorest.
He came like the spring, to bring
life to a dead world. He is like the
dove in gentleness and harmlessness.
— Miller.


“Thou art My beloved Son.” —From
the time of His baptism dates the unique
consciousness which Jesus had of God
as His Father; it is the rising of that
glorious sun which from that moment
illumined His life, and which since
the Day of Pentecost has risen upon
humanity.—Godet.


Sonship implies Messiahship. —In the
fact of His Divine Sonship was involved
His Messiahship ; the consciousness of
His official rank was preceded by that
of His special relationship with God.


The Voice from Heaven.—When He
heard this Voice, “ This is My beloved
Son,” those thoughts and impressions
which had probably long been stirring
in the human consciousness of Christ
were shaped into definite conviction


. x ead, 1).


a
'


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


and assurance, and He recognised the
Divine nature in mysterious union
with the Manhood which was to be
made perfect through His sufferings.
Long before this He must have learved
the mysterious circumstances which
attended His nativity. Now he ap-
prehended their significance, and very
naturally in the amazement, if we
may not say the agitation, which was
consequent on this discovery, He went
under the leading of the Spirit into the
wilderness.— Drew.


“ My beloved Son.”—To Jesus it
was the seal of Divine authentication.
It was the fatherly recognition. It
was the first break in the silence and
loneliness of thirty years. It was, so
to speak, a breath from home. If the
occasion was marked by the first
audible Divine intervention, it must
have been one which called for it. It
was a second birth to a new life; in
the language of the Church of old,
“ His second nativity.” It was the
meeting-point of the private and public
life Divine.—Vallings.


Ver. 23. “ About thirty years of age.”
—The period of life when physical and
mental powers have attained their
highest point of development; the
age when the Levites entered upon
office (Num. iv. 3, 23).


Vers. 24-38. The Difference Be-
tween the Two Genealogies.—While St.
Matthew, in the genealogy he gives,
descends from Abraham to Jesus, St.
Luke ascends from Jesus to God. ‘St.
Luke’s purpose is to show that Jesus
is the promised Seed of the woman
(Gen. iii. 15; Gal. iv. 4), that He is
that second Adam—the Father of the
new race of regenerate humanity—in
whom all nations of the earth are
blessed ” (Wordsworth).


The Hopes connected with the House
of David.—The possibility of construct-
ing such a table, comprising a period
of thousands of years, in an uninter-


CHAP, II,


rupted line from father to son, of a
family that dwelt for a long time in
the utmost retirement, would be in-
explicable, had not the members of
this line possessed a thread by which
they could extricate themselves from
the many families into which every
tribe and branch was again subdivided,
and thus hold fast and know the
member that was destined to continue
the lineage. This thread was the hope
that Messiah would be born of the
race of Abraham and David. The
ardent desire to behold Him and be
partakers of His mercy and glory
suffered not the attention to be ex-
hausted through a period embracing
thousands of years. Thus the member
destinel to continue the lineage,
whenever doubtful, became easily
distinguishable, awakening the hope
of a final fulfilment, and keeping it
alive until it was consummated.—
Olshausen.


Ver. 38. “Adam, the son of God.”
—The last word of the pedigree is
connected with its starting-point.
Unless the image of God had been
stamped on man, the Incarnation
would have been impossible. God
could not have said to a man, ‘Thou
art My beloved Son,’ if humanity
had not issued from Him” (@odet).
“All things are of God through
Christ; and all things are brought
back through Christ to God”
(Bengel).


The Divine Root of the Human
Pedigree. —There is no bolder word in
Scripture, none that strikes us with
a deeper surprise and awe than
this—‘ Adam, who was the son of
God.” Some may wonder why such a
long and “barren list of names” is
given here ; but in reality the pedigree
is of immense value. It connects the
second Adam with the first Adam, and
places a son of God at either ead of
the list of names; it makes us out
to be the children of God both by
nature and by grace. There is a Divine
element in our nature as well as a


101


OHAP. IV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





human element, a capacity for life and
holiness as well as a liability to sin
and death. This is the secret of that
double or divided nature of which we
are conscious. It is this which ex-
plains how it comes to pass that even
in the worst of men we find something
good, and something bad even in the
best. That which is good in us we
derive from God, that which is evil
from all our earthly parents. It is
because every man is a child of God,
because the Divine name stands at the
top of the human pedigree, that even the
worst of men feels a Divine constraint
laid upon him at times, yields to a
Divine impulse, and so does that which
is just, pure, lovely, and kind. It is be-
cause even the best of men is but a
man at the best, and forgets that he
is a son of God, and refuses to yield to
the Divine influence, that he falls into
sins, which, as he himself is the first to
confess, render him guilty before God,
and even move him to account him-
self the chief of sinners. If we keep
the fact in mind that Christ is the


eternal Word, by whom all things
were created and made, and by whom,
therefore, Adam or man was created
and made, the teaching of the New
Testament as to the salvation of the
race is made much clearer. Because
we all spring from Christ, whatever
He has done or does as surely affects
us as what Adam was and did affects
our nature and _ position. The
second Adam, He was nevertheless
before the first Adam, and called Him
into being. Hence He could die for
all. Hence He lives for all, and we
all live in and by Him. Hence if by
the offence of one death came on all,
much more did life come to all by the
obedience of One. Our text makes it
clear that we have not to persuade God
to enter into a fatherly relation to us
and to love as. He zs our Father.
The change to be wrought is a change
in ourselves. We need to realise and
believe the fact that we are children
of God, and to be true to the responsi-
bilities it brings with it.—Coz.





CHAPTER IV.
CRITICAL NOTES.


Ver. 1. Full of the Holy Ghost.—Which had descended upon Him in full measure at
His baptism. Led by the Spirit.—Or, “in the Spirit” (cf. ii. 27) ; abiding in the Spirit as
the element of His life. Into the wilderness.—A better reading is “in the wilderness”
(R.V.), and to connect the next clause with it: the leading of the Spirit continued there
during forty days. The scene of the Temptation according to a not very ancient tradition
is the mountainous region near Jericho—called from this identification Quarantania. There
is some probability that the legend is true.

Ver, 2. Tempted.—The present participle implies that the temptations lasted during the
forty days, though they culminated in the three specific attempts recorded in this and in
the first Gospel.

Ver. 3. And the devil said.—It is impossible to say whether the narrative before us,
which Christ Himself must have communicated to His disciples, is literal history, or a
symbolical description of an inward struggle. The phrase in the fifth verse, “in a moment
of time,” would seem to indicate that the prospect was presented to the spiritual sense
and not to the bodily eye ; and this would favour the second of the two modes of inter-
pretation above suggested. The phrase used in the Epistle to the Hebrews, “ in all points
tempted like as we are” (iv. 15), inclines the same way. If Thou be the Son of God. —
An allusion doubtless to the words spoken from heaven at the time of His baptism. This
stone.—Notice the graphic touch. Bread.—Or, “a loaf” (R.V. margin).

Ver, 4, It is written.—It is somewhat remarkable that the three quotations from the Old
Testament which Christ here makes are all from the Book of Deuteronomy (viii. 3,
vi. 13, 16). But by every word of God.—Omit these words; omitted in R.V.; probably
taken from Matt. iv. 4.


102


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. IV.


e





Ver. 5. And the devil.—St. Matthew describes the temptation in Jerusalem as coming before
that on the mountain ; he evidently follows the order of time, as he indicates in the use of
the word “then” (Matt. iv. 5,11). St. Luke may have had the idea in his mind of recording
the temptations in the order of their varying degrees of intensity, as addressed respectively
to natural aphetite, ambition, and spiritual pride. It may be, however, that he simply
narrates the two temptations, the scene of which was laid in the wilderness, before passing
on to that which took place on the summit of the Temple. The words “the devil” and
*into an high mountain” are possibly added from St, Matthew’s Gospel; they are omitted
in the R.V. See note on ver. 3.

Ver. 7. Worship.—/.c. do homage. All shall be Thine.—Rather, “it [the world] shall all
be thine” (R.V.).

Ver. 8. Get thee, etc.—The first sentence in this verse is omitted in the R.V.; it was
probably taken from St. Matthew’s Gospel.

Ver. 9. A pinnacle.—Rather, “the pinnacle”; some well-known part of the building.
Josephus tells of one called the Royal Porch which overlooked the valley of Hinnom at
a dizzy height. There is nothing to indicate that Satan desired Jesus to perform a miracle
in the sight of the people by casting Himself down and being preserved from injury.

Ver. 10. For it is written, etc.—The quotation is from Ps. xci. 11, but the words “in
all Thy ways” are omitted ; these words give the condition on which protection is promised
—a, condition which Satan would have Christ ignore.

Ver. 11. In their hands.—Rather, “on their hands ” (R.V.).

Ver. 13. All the temptation.—Rather, “every temptation” (R.V.), é.e. every kind of
temptation. For a season.—Or, “until a season” (R.V. margin); though the two render-
ings are virtually identical in meaning. Temptation was now abandoned, but was to be
resumed again on a fitting opportunity. The reference is probably to the closing scenes
of our Lord’s life, when the devil would assail Jesus through the treachery of Judas
(xxii. 3, 53; John xiv. 30), and through the malignant opposition of the Jews (John viii. 44).

Ver. 14. Returned.—/.e, from Judea. Galilee.—The main centre of our Lord’s ministry
(cf. Acts x. 37; Luke xxiii. 5). In the power of the Spirit.—Fresh strength gained from
His victory in the wilderness. A fame.—The ground of this is given in ver. 15.

Ver. 16. And He came to Nazareth.—It is almost certain that this is the visit recorded in
Matt. xiii. 53-58 and Mark vi. 1-6. These latter inform us that disciples accompanied Him
and that He healed a few sick persons. As His custom was.—J/.e. the custom of attending
the service, not necessarily of reading the lessons.

Ver. 17. The book.—Z.e. the roll. Opened.—Lit. “unrolled.” Found the place.—This
seems to imply either that He accidentally lighted upon the passage or specially selected
it, and not that it was part of the stated lesson for the day. The present order of lessons
in the synagogue service is of a very much later date than this; so that we cannot discover
by reference to it what particular Sabbath this was.

Vers. 18, 19.—The words are from Isa. lxi. 1, 2, freely quoted from the LXX., supplemented
by a passage from Isa. lviii. 6. To heal the brokenhearted.—These words are not found in
the best MSS. of the Gospel; omitted in R.V. The acceptable year of the Lord.i—/.e. the
definite time in which the Lord is gracious.

Ver. 20. The minister.— Ze. the attendant [chazzan], who brought the sacred volume to
the reader and restored it to its place. Sat down.—‘‘They read the Holy Scriptures
standing [an attitude of respect], and taught sitting [an attitude of authority]” (Speaker's

Commentary).

Ver. 21. And He began to say, etc.—This was the theme of His discourse: that He was
the Messiah [anointed One] of whom the prophet spoke. It is evident from ver. 22 that He
expatiated at some length on this topic.

Ver. 22. Bare Him witness.—By expressing wonder and admiration. Gracious words, —
Reference is to the persuasive beauty and not to the ethical character of His words,
Is not this Joseph’s son ?—This marks a change of feeling—contempt and envy beginning to
overcome admiration.

Ver. 23. Physician, heal Thyself,—The best modern equivalent of this proverb is, “‘ Charity
begins at home”: Do something for Thine own countrymen. It may, however, mean,
“ Do something for Yourself, work a miracle here, and save Yourself from being rejected
by us.” Whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum.—tThere is no record in the Gospels
of the miracles wrought at Capernaum to which reference is here made, They must belong
to the period indicated in John ii. 12. ;

Ver, 24.—“ No prophet is received in his own country, as he is elsewhere; and it is God’s
way to send His messengers to strangers, as in the case of Elijah and Elisha, who were
sent to be the ministers of God’s mercy to Gentiles” (Speaker's Commentary).

Ver. 25. Three years and six months.—So in Jas. v. 17; in 1 King xviii. 1 three years
are spoken of, but we do not know the terminus a quo from which they are reckoned ; if
from the flight of Elijah to Zarephath, the time would correspond with that here specified.


103


CHAP. IV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





Ver. 26. Sarepta,— Ze, Zarephath (1 Kings xvii. 9): a village half-way between Tyre and
Sidon.

Ver. 29. Dean Stanley points out the accuracy of the description given of Nazareth in
this place, though at first sight there seems to be inaccuracy. ‘“ Most readers probably
from these words imagine a town built on the summit of a mountain, from which summit
the intended precipitation was to take place. This is not the situation of Nazareth. Yet
its position is still in accordance with the narrative. It is built ‘upon,’ that is, on the side
of, ‘a mountain’; but the ‘ brow’ is not beneath but over the town, and such a cliff as is here
implied is to be found in the abrupt face of the limestone rock, about thirty or forty feet
high, at the south-west corner of the town, and another at a little farther distance”
(Sinai and Palestine, x.). é f

Ver. 30.—A miraculous occurrence is evidently implied. The Nazarenes had Him in their
grasp; so that the awe with which a dignified demeanour might impress a furious crowd
and keep them within bounds would not account for His deliverance on this occasion,

Ver. 31. Came down,.—Capernaum being situated on the shore of the Sea of Tiberias, -
Nazareth being higher on the hills, Taught them on the Sabbath days.—Rather, “ He was
teaching them on the Sabbath day ” (R.V.).

Ver. 32. Doctrine.—Rather, teaching: both the manner an’ substance of His words
(cf. Matt. vii. 28, 29). With power.—Rather, “with authority” (R.V.).

Vers. 33-41 contain a narrative of the events of one particular Sabbath day, from morn-
ing to night: see also Matt. viii. 14-17 ; Mark i. 21-31.

Ver. 383. Unclean devil.—The word “unclean” is inserted, either because in Greek
“demon” might be good or bad, or because in this special case the effect upon the possessed
person made the epithet peculiarly appropriate. ¢

Ver. 34. Let us alone.—Or, “ Ah!” (R.V.), the Greek word éa being either the imperative
of éa6, to “let alone,” or an interjection.

Ver. 35, Hold thy peace.—Lit. “ be muzzled.”

Ver. 37. The fame of Him.—Rather, “a rumour concerning Him” (R.Y.).

Ver, 38. A great fever.—This is a technical term used by contemporary Greek physicians.
For other examples of minute medical or physiological details given by this Evangelist, see
ver. 35 (“and hurt him not”), v, 12, vi. 6, xxii. 50, 51; Acts iii. 7, 8, iv. 22, ix. 33, xxviii. 8.

Ver. 39. He stood over her.—Notice the grapuic description; also in ver. 40, “‘ He laid
His hands on every one of them ”

Ver. 40. When the sun was setting.— With sunset the Sabbath ended, and the friends of
the sick would feel at liberty to carry them into Christ’s presence.

Ver. 41.—The best MSS. omit “Christ”: omitted in R.V. It is probably a gloss
explanatory of ‘‘ The Son of God.”

Ver. 43. Preach the kingdom of God.—Rather, “ preach the good tidings [gospel] of the
kingdom of God” (R.V.).

Ver. 44, Galilee.— MS. evidence is very strong in favour of Judea rather than Galilee in
this passage. It may be an error of transcription; but the striking fact remains that
there was an early Judzan ministry, which is recorded in St. John’s Gospel, but is not
directly referred to by the Synoptists, unless it be here.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.— Verses 1—13.


Temptation and Victory over it.—At first sight one might be inclined to think
that He who was Son of God as well as Son of man could not be an example
to us in the matter of resistance to evil. We find it hard to believe that He
could really feel the pressure of temptation, and we take it almost for granted
that He won the victory over evil in virtue of a Divine strength specially His own.
Hence this episode in the life of the Saviour is usually regarded as mysterious
and inexplicable, and is probably but seldom chosen by Christian preachers for
purposes of exhortation. The writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews, however,
speaks of the temptation of Christ in terms which bring it near to our
experiences: he says, “‘We have an High Priest, who was in all points tempted
like as we are, yet without sin.” A reverent study, therefore, of this incident
in the history of our Lord should teach us many lessons of great value, both as
to the nature of temptation and as to the way in which to overcome it. From
it we learn, e.g.—


I. That the holiness which God approves is that which can stand the test
104


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. IV.


which temptation applies—It was the will of God that Jesus should be
subjected to temptation. He was led by the Spirit into the wilderness to be
tempted of bee devil (cf. Matt. iv. 1). It was in accordance with what the
word of God tells us of the Divine procedure that He who took upon Him our
nature should be put to the test. And the process, painful as it is, is one
through which all intelligent, moral beings must pass. Innocence, which is so
attractive to us, may be largely ignorance of evil, and therefore be devoid of moral
value; and accordingly we can see the wisdom of subjecting it to the process
by which alone it can rise into holiness. The angels were put to the test, and
some of them fell from their first estate. Our first parents, in like manner,
were called to make the choice between obedience and disobedience to a Divine
commandment ; and every one of their descendants has had to suffer from the
consequences of their evil choice. And in the Scriptures we read of the trial to
which the faith of some of God’s most eminent servants was specially subjected
in the cases of Abraham, Job, David, and Peter. It is of course highly
dangerous and presumptuous for us to cast ourselves in the way of temptation,
and Christ has taught us to pray to be spared temptation. But that virtue or
holiness is alone worthy of the name which has eudured and can endure trial ;
and God is able and willing to impart special grace to us, when in His provi-
dence we are placed in circumstances of special danger.

If. That we have to contend against a vigilant and wily spiritual foe.—The
doctrine of an evil spirit is unwelcome to many; but both the word of God and
the facts of human life attest the existence of a personal tempter. ‘‘ Assuredly,”
says Trench, ‘this doctrine of an evil spirit, tempting, seducing, deceiving,
prompting to rebellion and revolt, so far from casting a deeper gloom on the
mysterious destinies of our fallen humanity, is full of consolation, and lights
up with a gleam and glimpse of hope regions which would seem utterly dark
without it. How should one not despair of oneself, having no choice but to
believe that all the strange suggestions of evil which have risen up before one’s
own heart had been born there! One might well despair of one’s kind, having no
choice but to believe that all its hideous sins and all its monstrous crimes
had been self-conceived, bred within its own bosom with no suggester from
without. But there is hope, if ‘an enemy have done this’; if, however, the
soil in which all these wicked thoughts and wicked works have sprung up has
been the heart of man, yet the seed from which they sprang had been there
sown by the hand of another.” It lay in the necessity of things that he should
come into direct and immediate collision with Him who had one mission in the
world, that is to destroy the works of the devil. ee!

IIT. That temptations are manifold in form.—Some, as this history reveals to
us, spring from bodily necessities and weaknesses, others from a love of those
things that are earthly and transitory, others from spiritual pride ; for under
these three heads may the temptations which assailed Christ be classified. They
appeal to every side of the being, and no one is in circumstances which place
him above the reach of some one or other of them. The poor are tempted by
their poverty to distrust God, the rich and successful are tempted to use unlawful
means for securing greater wealth and power or to apply what they possess to
selfish ends, while those who enjoy God’s favour are tempted to presume upon it.
The weakness of the weak, the strength of the strong, and attainments in
holiness are made by the tempter the occasion for suggesting evil counsels.

IV. All the forms of sin suggested are found to spring from one root—self-
will. At His incarnation Christ had merged His lot with the lot of His race.
The first temptation is that He should separate Himself from them and use
the power which had been intrusted to Him for providing a way of escape
from the hardship in which He found Himself. The second temptation was


105


CHAP. IV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





that He should refuse to accept the humiliation and suffering by which it was
God’s will that He should win His kingdom, and that He should found a kingdom
like those of this world—founded on force and policy and surrounded by the
pomp and display which the world loves. The third temptation was that He
should put the love of His Father to the proof in a way of His own choosing
and not of God’s appointing. In all of them the attempt was made to excite
self-will, and to urge Christ to depart from what He knew to be the course His
Father would have Him follow. This was an attempt of the kind only too
successfully employed against our first parents. They, too, were urged to
distrust God’s love, and to seize upon that which was attractive in their eyes,
even although, in order to do so, they had to transgress a Divine commandment.

V. Victory over temptation is won by steadfast trust in God and obedience
to His will.—Christ’s hunger and isolation at this time did not shake His belief
in God’s power and willingness to sustain Him. Worldly wealth, and power,
and honour which could only be secured by disloyalty to holiness and truth had
no charms for Him; and He did not shrink from the toil, and pain, and suffering
by which He knew it had been appointed that He should gain His throne.
Nor would He abandon that life of faith which He intended to live by tempting
God, or putting His loving-kindness and fidelity to the proof. All through He
subordinated every feeling and desire to the will of God. In this, then, He
affords us the great example of resistance to evil. No temptation can prevail
against us if we calmly and fairly consider what God would have us to do, or
what commandment He has given us for our guidance in the special circum-
stances in which we find ourselves, and if we resolutely determine to subject our
wills to His will. Wecan never be ata loss to discover what God’s will is.
If we are in the habit of consulting conscience, and if we, like Christ, have our
winds stored with the holy precepts of God’s word, we can in an instant decide
what is the path of duty, and no tempter can force us against our will tq depart
from that path. Our danger lies in a. conspiracy between our wavering wills,
our strong passions, and the counsels of the evil one.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 1—13.


Vers. 1-13. The Temptation in Rela-
tion to the Baptism.—The temptation
followed, and must be viewed in con-
nection with, Christ’s baptism. When
God gives armour, He soon puts it to
the proof, and so the strength given
at the baptism was soon tested in the
wilderness. —/V2coll.


A Strange Passage in the Life of
Christ—Jesus had been baptized of
John. One would have thought that
without further delay He would now
have begun His public work. But we
are mistaken. The thirty years must
have a parallel in the forty days. The
Spirit leads not to the battle-field, but
to the wilderness. He leads Him out
not to attack the enemy, but to sustain
the enemy’s attacks on Him. What


106


mythical theory could find a motive
for so strange a passage in the life
of Christ? The temptations of the
devil were all skilfully directed to try
the question whether Jesus was so
thoroughly one with the Father as He
professed to be and as it was necessary
He should be—whether His Father's
business was really the one interest
of His heart and the great business
of His life—whether His delight in
doing God’s will was so strong that it
could not be overcome by any intenser
feeling —whether, under high pressure,
some discord might not be revealed
between Him and His father.— Blackie,


The Account of the Temptation given
by Christ Himself.—The account of the
Temptation can only have come from


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. IV.


rr"


our Lord Himself. This is the only
instance in which our Lord breaks
through His reticence as to His personal
history on eatth. Here, and here only,
does He give us a glimpse of what had
befallen Him, or of what had passed
within His breast.— Latham.


A Solemn Pause——He who is ever
the God, not of haste, but of order,
prescribes a solemn pause, memorable
in itself, monitory in its doctrine, be-
tween the Baptism and the Ministry.—
Vaughan.


The Temptations in the Wilderness.—
Of this mysterious conflict we see but
little, and that dimly. The agony in
the wilderness, like the final agony
in the garden, is shrouded in darkness.
But we see an absolute victory, and a
Deliverer proved at the outset ‘ mighty
to save.”

I. The preparation, the process,
and the issues of our Lord’s tempta-
tion exhibit it to us as a necessary
element in His redeeming work.

II. In His temptation our Lord is
to be regarded as a type and pattern
to ourselves.— Pope.


The Purpose of the Temptation in
Relation to Christ.

I. That He might bid defiance to
Satan, and in His person conquer at
the outset the power of sin.

II. That He might approve, in
uttermost trial, the spotlessness and
perfection of the sacrifice He carried
forward to the cross.

III. That He might acquire, by a
mystery of experience which we can-
not fathom, a perfect sympathy with
the infirmities of the nature He came
to sanctify and save.—J/did.


Ver. 1. “Led by the Spirit.”-—It
was necessary that Christ who had
assumed our nature should be put
to the proof—should be subjected to
the trial of having to choose between
using His gifts and faculties for grati-
fication of self or using them in the
service of God. This probation is re-


quired in the case of all free and
intelligent beings ; some angels passed
through it successfully, man fell before
it. It is noticeable that Jesus did not
seek temptation, but was led towards
it by a higher will than His own. The
fact that temptation came immediately
after the baptism in the Jordan, with
all its wonderful and supernatural cir-
cumstances, is very significant. The
time of spiritual exaltation is the time
of spiritual danger. “Thus shalt thou
be sure to be assaulted, when thou hast
received the greatest enlargements from
Heaven, either at the sacrament, or
in prayer, or in any other way. Then
look for an onset. This arch-pirate
lets the empty ships pass, but lays wait
for them when they return richest
laden” (Leighton). Satan knows how
to take advantage of the peculiarities
of our situation.


“ Wilderness.” —The contrast between
the temptation of Adam and that of
Jesus, the second Adam, both in the
scenes in which they were laid and the
results which followed from them, has
often been drawn. 1. Adam was
tempted in a garden, Jesus in the


wilderness. 2. Adam fell, Jesus was
victorious. 3. Adam’s disobedience
brought death, the obedience of


Jesus brought life. “Adam fell in
paradise, and made it a wilderness ;
Christ conquered in the wilderness, and
made it a paradise, where the beasts
lost their savageness (Mark i. 13) and
the angels abode ” (Olshausen).


Ver. 2. “Did eat nothing.” —The forty
days’ fast seems rather an indication
of deep absorption in reverie, during
which not even the stings of hunger
were felt, than as a religious exercise
of the kind the Jews were accustomed
to observe in connection with prayer.
It scarcely seems to afford ground for
the custom of observing an ecclesiastical
fast of like duration. For (1) Christ
literally abstained from every kind of
food ; (2) He did not deliberately inflict
the pain of hunger upon Himself—in-
deed, He did not feel hunger until the

107


CHAP. IV.





forty days were past; and (3) He did
not periodically observe a like abstin-
ence—this was a unique expeiience in
His life, and His state of ecstasy (like
that of Moses and Elijah) is not one
into which we can bring ourselves.


“ Hungered.”—Christ hungered as
man, and fed the hungry as God. He
was hungry as man, and yet te is the
Bread of Life. He was athirst as man,
and yet He says, Let him that is
athirst come to Me and drink (Rev.
xxii. 17), He was weary, and is our rest,
He pays tribute, and is a King; Heis
called a devil, and casts out devils;
prays, and hears prayer; weeps, and
dries our tears; is sold for thirty pieces
of silver, and redeems the world ; is led
as a sheep to the slaughter, and is the
Good Shepherd; is mute like a sheep,
and is the everlasting Word ; is the Man
of sorrows, and heals our pains; is nailed
to a tree and dies upon it, and by the
tree restores us to life; has vinegar to
drink, and changes water to wine ; lays
down His life, and takes it again ; dies
and gives life, and by dying destroys
death.—Greg. Naz.


Vers. 3, 4. The First Temptation.—
During the forty days Jesus had been
sustained, not by the power of His
Divine nature, but by the great rapture
of spiritual gladness which upbore Him.
When these had passed, He was torn
with the pangs of hunger, and here the
temptation of Satan comes in.

T. After the manner of the tempter,
he makes the truth problenatical—
“Tf Thou be.” The stones to the sick
eyes of a hungry man had the shape of
loaves, and one word from Him would
have turned them to food. Why was the
word not spoken? Because, if He had
spoken it, He would have undone His in-
carnation, by drawing back from the lot
of the race with which He had identified
Himself. He would also have shown—

II. A want of trust in the Divine
providence that was able to feed Him
without using any miraculous energy.
“© Man shall not live,” ete. He did not
care to assert His Godship then. If


108


. by hunger.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,


God pleased, He might make the bare
wind of the desert a banquet. Jesus
has meat to eat that the tempter
knows not of. This first temptation—

III. Is presented to us by the
tempter in our own lives.—‘‘I must
live.” The answer is—There is no need
that a man should, live, but there is
need that he should be righteous.
He will not die if he trusts in God.
Man lives by everything that proceeds
from God’s mouth.—Wicoll.


The Danger of Starving the Soul.—
Man wauts no reminding that he lives
by bread. There is no fear of his
not giving care enough to the needs of
his body ; but there is danger lest he
should think of nothing but these needs,
and starve his soul, and become such
that eternal life, without a body to
care for, would only be a condition
of aimless weariness. Jesus resolved
therefore to keep His powers apart for
spiritual ends. He will not use this
power to provide what others win by
toil, or to preserve Himself or His
followers from the common ills of
human life.—Latham.


Ver. 3. “If Thou be the Son of God.”
—Satan contrasts the Divine great-
ness of Jesus as the Son of God, of
which He had been assured at His
baptism, with His present condition of
destitution and hunger, and urges
Him to depart from the condition of
humiliation which He had accepted on
becoming incarnate.  Self-sufficiency
and independence of God is the state
of spirit Satan would fain excite in
Christ. The temptation is a subtle
one; for he does not suggest a
miraculous provision of luxurious food,
but of mere bread to stave off death
But Christ did not work
a miracle for the sake of delivering
Himself from that state of dependence
upon God which all men should oceupy.


“Command this stone.”—This gift of
miracles in Christ was in many re-
spects @ talent; and it was necessary
that He should employ this talent


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. IV.


EE


wholly for the purposes for which it was
intrusted to Him, viz. to confirm His
mission and doctrine, to honour the
Father, and to do good to men, and
not at all to accommodate and relieve
Himself.—Scott.


Ver. 4. “ Written.”—It is not by
inward illumination, but by the written
word of God, that Christ as man
professes to find guidance. His words
are a rebuke to those who claim
greater honour for what they imagine
is inward illumination than they are
willing to pay to God’s word.


‘* Not live by bread alone.” —The pass-
age quoted is a strikingly appropriate
answer: “Jehovah suffered thee to
hunger, and fed thee with manna,
which thou knewest not, neither did
thy fathers know; that He might
make thee to know that man doth not
live,” ete. (Deut. viii. 3). The whole
nation of Israel was fed for forty years
in the wilderness: with what confi-
dence may Christ therefore look to God
for sustenance during the few days of
His sojourn in the desert! God by the
ordinary operation of His providence
brings forth food for man out of the
earth; but He is able to give suste-
nance in other ways, if He sees fit so to
do. Manna and quails were miracu-
lously provided for the Israelites in
the wilderness ; Elijah was fed by the
ravens and by an angel; the multipli-
cation of the loaves of bread and of
the fishes by Christ’s power (cf. also
the miracle wrought by Elisha, 2 Kings
iv. 42-44) illustrates this principle. It
is right to look to God for extraordi-
nary help in extraordinary circum-
stance. The fact that we are dependent
upon God for food is also implied in the
Lord’s Prayer: ‘‘ Give us this day our
daily bread.”


Christ's Use of Scripture.

I. For defence.—This is the very
first use we find Him making of the
word. He answered every suggestion
of Satan with, “It is written.” The
word was in His hands the sword of


the Spirit, and He turned with its
edge the onsets of the enemy.

JI. For this use of Scripture the
practice of committing it to memory
is essential.—Often, when temptation
comes, there is no time to search for
the word to meet it; everything de-
pends on being armed, with sword in
hand. This shows how necessary it is
to fill the memory while it is plastic
with stores of texts.— Stalker.


Christ is our Example in all Things.
—hHere we .see how He met the
tempter so as to conquer him. He
used His Bible as a quiver, and He
drew from it the sharp arrows which
He hurled so successfully against His
opponent. He drew’ them from
memory. He had used the quiet days
at Nazareth to store His mind with
the precious words. The lesson lies for
us on the surface.— Willer.


“ Not by bread alone.”—It was the
Saviour’s purpose to give a signal proof,
at the very outset of His public career,
both of the weakness of His body as
man and the perfect control exercised
over it by the joint action of His human
and Divine will. The appetite for
bread was lawful; not so the abuse of
His high powers to satisfy His own
personal need. Therefore His answer
was ready. His heart overflowing with
love and confidence in His heavenly
Father, and pure from all unclean
desires, prompted the reply He clothed
in the words of Scripture. There lay
the force of His word, strong to baftie
the tempter and drive him to another
ground of attack. The Lord’s rebuff
was no mere quotation got by heart
and ready; the thought rose sponta-
neously out of the pure springs within,
and found its readiest expression in the
well-studied language of Holy Writ.—
Markby.


Our First Duty.—It is never right for
us to starve our spiritual nature to get
bread for our bodies. It is our first duty
to keep God’s commandments, and in
obedience is the highest good that we


10?


CHAP. IV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





can attain in this world. Sometimes
the best thing we can do for our life is to
lose it ; we had better any day starve to
death than commit the smallest sin to
get bread. Getting bread should not
be our first object in life, and is really
not our business at all.—Miller.


Higher Aims than Gratification of
Appetite.—It is one of the grandest
texts I know. Man has appetite, but
appetite is not man. ‘The gratification
of appetite is not the main object of
man’s existence. ‘Too many live as if
they thought it was so. To make bread
is the one object for which many live.
Jesus Christ protests against this
degradation of our nature, and says,

‘A man has higher aims than to
gratify his appetite. He has a soul.
Bread-making is not a sufficient object
for a redeemed soul.”— Meyer.


Vers. 5-8. The Second Temptation.

I. The tempter tried Jesus through
the mind.—Human nature is ambi-
tious, loves power, thirsts for greatness.
To such dispositions did Satan now
address himself in Christ. He offered
Him universal empire; without delay
and without a struggle He proposes,
as it were, a short road to redemption.
On one condition. He must do homage
for His throne to Satan; He must
hold His crown, as it were, from him.
In short, it was the offer of a great
good through a little evil—to save
Himself and to save mankind a deluge
of blood and tears, by one brief
acknowledgment of an enemy’s right,
and by one passing homage to a
usurper’s crown.

II. Christ discerned the snare and
foiled the stratagem.—The gospel so
brought in would have been a curse
and not a blessing. Never for one
moment did His will waver. He seized
upon the compromise, and crushed it
to atoms in the right hand of obedience.
Henceforth there must be war, war
to the knife, between the Tempted and
the tempter. In that decision lay ten
thousand others. Christ will not have


‘110


Satan lulled. He will have him bound.
The lesson, the edict, the declaration
of war are for all time.

III. It has a voice for Christian
men.— Whenever’ we do evil that good
may come we bend the knee to Satan.—
Vaughan.


Ver. 5. “All the kingdoms of the
world.”—Hunger had not terrified,
neither does plenty allure, the Saviour
from the path of duty. The scourge
of poverty is followed by the vision of
plenty; but the one is as powerless as
the other to overcome His holy will.
This teaches us the great lesson that
our liability to sin does not depend
upon the circumstances in which we
are placed so much as upon the dis-
position or frame of spirit which
characterises us. We are apt to think
that if the cross were removed or the
burden lightened we should find it
easier to be holy—that the sin that
besets us would lose its power to ensnare
us if we were placed in happier cir-
cumstances. Yet circumstances only
afford us an opportunity of manifesting
what is in us. Jesus was superior to
all circumstances simply because He
was superior to all sin. The sinful
heart will betray itself even if the
outward conditions on which it lays
the blame were all changed ; it will be
as faithless in prosperity as it was in
adversity. The sinless heart is free
from danger everywhere; it is not
depressed by humiliation, it is not
seduced from its allegiance to God by
exaltation.


“In a moment of time.”—Perhaps
in this phrase we have the clue to the
solution of the question as to whether
the history of the Temptation is a nar-
rative of external facts or a parabolical
description of mental and spiritual ex-
periences. Apart from the considera-
tion that from no mountain on earth
could “all the kingdoms of the world
be seen,” the phrase “in a moment of
time ” seems to describe something pre-
sented to the mind’s eye rather than
to the bodily sense. And if this is the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. IV.


eee


case with one of the temptations, why
may it not be so in the case of all of
them? In Heb. iv. 15 we read that
Christ was * tempted in all points like
as we are.” Does not this imply man-
ner of temptation as well as actual
fact of temptation? The momentary
glimpse of the world’s kingdoms and
their glory suggests temptation of a
very intense kind. For those tempta-
tions are most acute which are pre-
sented to us suddenly and unexpectedly.
Another thought is suggested by an
ancient writer : ‘It is fitting that all
the kingdoms of the world, and the
glory of them, should be displayed ‘in
a moment of time.’ For here it is not
so much the rapid glance of sight which
is signified as the frailty of mortal
power which is declared. For in a
moment all this passes away; and
oftentimes the glory of this world
has vanished before it has arrived.”


Ver. 6. A Great Bribe offered to
Christ.—The greatness of Christ is im-
plied in the greatness of the bribe here
offered to Him. Satan is not accus-
tomed to offer all to those whom he
tempts, but gives by little and little.
“There be some that will say—They
were never tempted with kingdoms.
It may well be; for it needs not, when
less will serve. It was Christ only
who was thus tempted; in Him lay a
heroical mind that could not be allured
with small matters. But with us it is
nothing so, for we esteem far more
basely of ourselves. We set our wares
at a very easy price; he may buy us
even dagger-cheap, as we say. He
need never carry us so high as the
mount. The pinnacle is high enough;
yea, the lowest steeple in all the town
would serve the turn. Or let him but
carry us to the leads and gutters of
our own houses, nay, let us but stand
in our windows or our doors, if he will
give us but so much as we can there
see, he will tempt us throughly; we
will accept it, and thank him too. He
shall not need to come to us with
kingdoms. ... A matter of half a
crown, or ten groats, a pair of shoes,


or some such trifle will bring us on our
knees to the devil” (Andrewes).


“ Delivered unto me.”—We cannot
say this statement is absolutely false.
Satan has a certain limited power
assigned to him ; the world is under his
power, not absolutely or permanently,
but actually. Hence he is called ‘the
prince of this world” by Christ Him-
self (John xii. 31). Worldly glory is
within his power, since he may use it
for tempting and ensnaring men. The
description of a delegated power pos-
sessed by the evil one was calculated
to correct the erroneous ideas of many
of St. Luke’s Gentile readers. They
were accustomed to the dualistic idea
of a kingdom of evil, not simply per-
mitted to exist, but independent of the
Divine will.


The Tempter’s Promise——High on
the desert mountain, full descried,
sits throned the tempter with his old
promise—the kingdoms of this world
and the glory of them. He still
calls you to your labour, as Christ
to your rest,—labour and sorrow,
base desire and cruel hope. So far
as you desire to possess rather than
to give; so far as you look for power
to command instead of to bless; so
far as your own prosperity seems to
you to issue ont of contest or rivalry
of any kind with other men, or other
nations; so long as the hope before
you is for supremacy instead of love,
and your desire is to be greatest instead
of least—first instead of last—so long
you are serving the lord of all that is
last and least—Death—and you shall
have death’s crown with the worm
coiled in it, and death’s wages with the
worm feeding on them ; kindred of the
earth shall you yourself become; saying
to the grave, ‘Thou art my father,”
and to the worm, ‘‘ Thou art my mother
and sister.” I leave you to judge and
to choose between this labour and the
bequeathed peace; these wages and
the gift of the Morning Star; this
obedience and the doing of the will
which shall enable you to claim another


lll


CHAP. IV.


kindred than that of earth, and to
hear another voice than that of the
grave, saying, ‘‘ My brother, and sister,
and mother.”— Ruskin.


Ver. 7. “If Thow therefore wilt wor-
ship me.”—Worship of Satan means
that Christ should’ acknowledge his
delegated power, and make the Mes-
sianic kingdom like those of the
kingdoms of this world, in accordance
with the general expectation and desire
of the Jewish people. The word “ there-
fore” shows that this is the sense in
which the passage is to Le understood.
Not by material means or by physical
force did Christ intend to found His
kingdom, but by spiritual operations.
His kingdom was not to be in con-
tinuation of anything previously exist-
ing, but a new beginning.


Ver. 8. “ Him only shalt thow serve.”
—Satan has recourse to that passion
whereof men in stricken folly are prone
to be proud, and to make silly boast
of their own weakness—to ambition,
“the last infirmity of noble minds.”
But the allegiance of the Son of man
was not to be so shaken. Sinless,
therefore, was the soul of the Lord
as well as His body.—Warkby.


Worship due to God alone.—Christ
here asserts that worship is due to
God and to Him alone. Yet in Heb.
i. 6 we read that worship is to be
paid to Christ Himself. What way is
there by which to reconcile these two
assertions, except by recognition of the
Divine nature of Christ? How can
Arians and Socinians reconcile them 2?


Vers. 9-12. The Third Temptation.

I. Satan prompts Jesus to display
His supremacy and confound His
adversary by challenging the celestial
powers to do Him the homage of their
protection.

II. The sublime reliance of Christ’s
answer is in His profound submission
of obedient humility.—These simple
words confounded the assailant, and
go to the root of the temptation.


112


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


Where is the child of God upon earth
who is not daily thus tempted to tempt
his God? This temptation finds its
best and worst comment in the sins
which dishonour God in His people ;
in the spiritual pride which tempts
the Lord to withdraw His gifts; in
the presumption that trifles with
danger, trusting in an unpledged pro-
tection; in the spirit, conduct, and
lives of those who forget that the
privileges of grace belong to the lowly
in heart, and are to be maintained only
by humble walking with God.—Pope.


Ver. 9. How to distinguish Faith from -
Presumption—The moment trust in
God presumes to break any one, even
the least of the laws of God, and then
expects God to save it from the con-
sequences of its disobedience, it is not
trust, but untelief; it is not faith,
but presumption ; it is not honouring,
it is tempting God.— Barrett.


“ Cast Thyself down.” —Experiments
upon the Lord our God, whether upon
His forbearance, His protection, or His
power, are forbidden once and for ever
in the sure word of revelation. Thou
shalt not put to wilful trial the pre-
serving and protecting Hand. God
will keep His servants in lawful paths ;
but thou shalt veither triflewith danger,
and say, ‘“‘God will preserve,” nor with
sin, and say, “God will protect !”—
Vaughan.


Use of Supernatural Power.—Though
Christ did not intend to have recourse
to material means and to the methods
and resources of worldly power in found-
ing His kingdom, He yet purposed to
make use of the gift of working miracles
in accordance with the will of God.
He is now urged to use this power
capriciously, or in other words to in-
fringe the relationship that existed
between Him and the Father.


“ Cast Thyselfdown.” —Observe, Satan
may tempt us to fall, but he cannot
make us fall. He may persuade us to
cast ourselves down, but he cannot cast
us down.— Wordsworth.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. IV.





Vers. 10, 11. “He shall give His
angels charge.’—The quotation from
Scripture gives additional keenness to
this temptation ; and it is valuable to
notice the nature of the error which
underlies the use made of the sacred
text. The error consists in ignoring
or in keeping out of sight the fact
that God’s promises are conditional,
while His precepts are absolute. By
voluntarily creating a danger for our-
selves, we deprive ourselves of the
promises of help and deliverance which
God will fulfil to those who are in
danger while they are pursuing the
path of duty. There is nothing in the
narrative to imply that Christ was
tempted to make an impression upon
priests and worshippers in the Temple
by miraculously appearing among
them, and thus to induce them to
accept Him as the Messiah. This idea
of theatrical display and wonder-work-
ing power would be more in harmony
with the second temptation of ver. 6,
ie. to use carnal and not spiritual
means for founding His kingdom.


Ver. 12. Temptution to Spiritual
Pride.—Finding Jesus to be a man of
God, and His body proof against His
weapons, Satan turns to a more for-
midable mode of attack. He tries
Him on the quarter of spiritual pride.
Doubtless he knew well that this was
the most vulnerable point in the armour
of the servants of God. Perhaps he
had never met with one before who
had escaped being wounded there;
even Elijah hardly came off scatheless
from that assault. Here, however, he
was foiled again, and driven off by a
like impulse of the pure human heart
of Christ, quenching Scripture ill used
with Scripture well usel.-—Marhly.


“Thou shalt not tempt.”—In Deut.
vi. 16 the words are, “ Ye shall not
tempt.” Perhaps by the change to
“thow” Christ implies His own Divine
majesty, and forbids Satan to assail
Him further. ‘ Zhow shalt not tempt
Me who am the Lord thy God.” To
tempt God is to seek to put Him in


=


the dilemma of either violating His
own word, or of doing what we wish
Him to do, even though we are conscious
that our wish is not in accordance
with His will. It is a kind of sin
which is often prompted by religious
fanaticism.


“ Tt is said.” —Christ does not refute
the use made by Satan of Scripture,
but, as said above, sets the absolute
precept over against the conditional
promise. This is more emphatically
indicated by St. Matthew (iv. 7).


“Tt is written again.”—The addi-
tion of a second scripture qualifies
and interprets the first, but does not
contradict it.—A lford.


Clear Guidance in Scripture.—So
though thou canst not clear the sense
of an obscure scripture, thou shalt al-
ways find a sufficient guard in another
that is clearer.—Leighton.


Ver. 13. ‘Al the temptation.” —J.e.
every kind of temptation. The Chris-
tian may recognise temptations and
learn the proper mode of resisting
them by studying this narrative of
Christ’s experience in tne wilderness.
On every occasion of danger we may
draw help from His example, for few
forms of temptation will be found
which may not be referred (1) to
distrust of God, or (2) the desire of
perishing things, or (3) vain ostenta-
tion.


“ For a season.” —What is the force
of these words? It is in accordance
with the facts of His life to read them
as referring to the continual battle
of His life. “My temptations.” ‘That
is His own description of His life.
There was not a temptation at the be-
ginning (in the wilderness) and at the
end (in the garden) with a clear space
between, but the battle was fought all
through His life. If proof, or rather
record, of it be awanting, that does not
make it less terrible, for mortal struggles
are often waged in grim  silence.—
Nicoll.


113


CHAP. IV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





A Short Lull.—It is a mistake to
suppose that He was only tempted
during the forty days in the wilderness.
Those forty days were a fierce and
typical outbreak of new temptations
such as He had been incapable of
before His baptism; but we are signi-
ficantly told that, at the close of them,
the devil departed from Him “for a
season.” It was a short lull, and the
storm was but gathering strength to


Enticements and Threats—As, in
the wilderness, by every allurement
of pleasure, so in the garden and on
the cross, by every avenue of pain,
did the devil seek to shake the second
Adam from His steadfastness. And
this also may teach us what we have
to expect; at one time the seductions,
at another the threats, of an evil world.
“And who is sufficient for these
things ?”—Burgon.


burst on Him again.—WMason.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 14—380.


The Acceptable Year of the Lord.—St. Luke’s Gospel, which represents Christ
as the Son of man, keeps up the note struck in its accounts of the birth and
youth by giving as His first reported discourse this one, in the place “ where
He had been brought up,” and in the synagogue into which it had been ‘“ His
custom” from childhood to enter on the Sabbath. It was a natural feeling
which drew Him thither, that He might win disciples among the companions
of His boyhood. The rumour of His miracles in Capernaum heightened His
reputation among His fellow-villagers. One can fancy the curious looks of
the congregation, and the busy remembrances filling His heart on that Sabbath.
In the discourse He delivered, Christ described the nature of the work He
had to do as Messiah, and intimated that the Gentile world would welcome
the blessings which the Jews valued so lightly. St. Luke gives a brief outline
of both topics of discourse, and describes the effect produced upon the hearers
by each.

at Christ's conception of His work.—Whether the passage He read was
from the usual lesson for the day or not we cannot tell. Bat it is significant
that He stopped in the middle of a verse, and said nothing about “the day
of vengeance of our God,” as if He would keep the sweet and radiant side
of His mission unshaded by any terror. After reading the words of the prophet
He declared at length His claims to be the Messiah. Note 1. How definite
and complete His conception of His work is from the first. He knew what
He had come to be and do. His aims neither cleared nor grew, but were
sun-clear and world-wide from the begmning. That is not the experience of
God’s other servants. They are led by undreamed-of ways to an end which
they never foresaw. But Jesus had no mist on His future, nor any unconscious-
ness of His significance. Note 2. Christ’s great theme was always Himself.
His demand is not, Believe this or that which I tell, but, Believe in Me; and
there in the synagogue, among those who had seen Him as a child, and played
with Him in the streets, and known Him as the carpenter, He begins His
ministry by proclaiming that the great prophecy is fulfilled in Him. If this
is not the speech of incarnate Divinity, it is the boasting of arrogant egotism.
He is conscious of possessing the Divine Spirit. It is the permanent effect of
the sign at His baptism. Note 3. The view of men’s condition implied. They
are poor, captives, blind, bruised. The loving, sad eye is already looking on
humanity with clear insight and yearning pity. Mark the calm consciousness
of power to grapple with and overcome all these miseries. There stands a
humble Galilean peasant, and singly fronts a world full of wretchedness,
blindness, bondage, and bruises, and asserts that power to remedy them all


114


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. IV.





is ie Him. Was He right or wrong? If He was right, what and who
is He?

Il. The effect produced on the hearers.—They “ bare Him witness.” Some-
thing in their hearts was stirred by the gracious manner as well as substance
of His wonds, and endorsed His claims and drew the hearers towards Him.
That inward witness speaks still, Will the testimony within be listened to
or stitied? Life and death hang on the answer. The balance wavers for
a moment, and then goes the wrong way. A cold jet of criticism is turned
on; and when the hearers got to saying, “Is not this Joseph’s son?” (which
He was not), all was over. Let us take heed how we deal with the witness
of our own hearts to Jesus; for we too are in danger of drowning its voice
by noisy prejudices and inclinations.

III. Christ passes to the thought of His world-wide mission.—The handful
of Nazarenes becomes representative of the nation, and their rejection of Him
the occasion of the blessings passing to the heathen. If Jesus had not long
been familiar with this thought, it could not have come to Him now so quickly
nor so clearly, nor been announced so decisively and calmly. Obviously He
entered on His ministry with the consciousness that His kingdom was as wide
as humanity, and His blessings meant for all the lonely and diseased everywhere.
Note, too, how His mind is saturated with Scripture: it was His weapon in
His desert conflict, and it is His unanswerable demonstration that Israel’s
prophets carry blessings to Gentiles. He selects His examples from the
hereditary enemies of Israel, and not only hints at the inclusion of the alien,
but He plainly tells of the exclusion of the Jew. In this lay the sting of
the examples.

IV. The anger of the Nazarenes.—Their interest had quickly cooled. The
carping question, and the craving for miracle, had effectually damped the
incipient admiration. No doubt the words of prophecy had stirred some hopes
of mere political freedom ; and if He had preached revolt, He might have beat
up a following. But this declaration that the outside heathen were to have
a share in the healing, sight, and liberty which He proclaimed extinguished
all the dreams of a political Messiah ; and that helped to make the Nazarenes
the angrier. They “rose up,” interrupting the synagogue service, and, in
the whirlwind of their fury, drag Him to some cliff high enough to kill any one
thrown over it.

Let us learn how little the mere familiarity with Christ in the flesh availed
to open men’s eyes to His beauty, and let us beware lest a similar familiarity
with the letter of the record of His life may equally blind us to our need of
Him, and His Divine authority over us, and Divine power to help and heal
us. Let us take heed that we yield to and follow out the stirrings of conviction
in our inmost hearts; and remember, for warning against dealing lightly
with these, that the same people who one half-hour bare witness to Jesus,
and wondered at His gracious words, were ready to fling Him over the rock
the next, and, so far as we know, lost Him for ever when He passed through
their midst and went His way. That way led Him unto the wide world. It
leads Him to each heart that is sad and sore, and brings Him to our doors
with hands pierced and laden with blessings. —WMaclaren.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 14—30.


Ver. 14. “Power of the Spirit..— assured ally and Satan as His open
Strengthened by His victory over temp- foe, Jesus moves forward to the field
tation. ‘And now, the way being of battle” (Godet).
clear before Him, with God as His


115


CHAP. IV.


oS e277 DN ee ae


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





“ Fame.” —L.e. on account of (1) His
teaching, and (2) of His miracles
(cf. ver. 23).


The Return with Power.—The power
was the power of the Spirit in which
He returned to His own land. Who
would not desire to be such a power in
the world? Whence comes this ability ¢
Where shall we win the subtle secret
of such a power? The best gifts can
neither be bought nor commanded.
This power is of the very essence of a
man’s nature: it must radiate from his
spirit.

I. The power which Jesus wielded
was drawn forth in the experience of
the wilderness.—The wilderness and
the temptation preceded the gracious
words. No man gets power except in
conflict ; conflict is the schoolroom where
power and courage are learned. This
principle is true in the material world
and in the world of mind. Pain and
isolation discipline the spirit. No man
is strong who has not learned to live
alone. But-—

II. Loneliness is not enough.—It is
not because Jesus spent forty days in
solitude that He was strong. It was
because of the power which He matured
in the wilderness—the power of living
not by the earthly but by the heavenly
law.

III. Our Lord shows that there is
a heavenly light in ordinary human
life.—Our Lord had gone into the
wilderness to bring hopeto men. There
was no lot in which God was not.
“ This day,” He cried, “the hindering
ills and the oppressive sorrows of life
may disappear.” —Carpenter.


Ver. 15. “ Synagogues.” —In spite of
the religious degeneracy of the Jewish
people of this time, the word of God
was still read publicly and endeavours
made to elucidate its teaching and
apply it to the hearts and lives of those
who heard it.


Vers. 16-30. An Epitome of the His-
tory of Jesus.—The whole scene in the
synagogue at Nazareth from beginning


116


to end is full of typical significance.
Commencing with evangelic discourse,
and closing with death-perils, it may
be said to be an epitome of the history of
Jesus. And for that very reason it is
introduced here by the Evangelist at so
early a place in his narrative. Luke
selects it for the frontispiece of his
Gospel, showing by sample the salient
features of its “contents, — Bruce.


Christ an Example to Teachers—

I. In His spirit of devotedness.

II. In His being filled with the
Spirit.

III. In His custom of frequenting
the synagogue.

IV. In His knowledge of and apt-
ness to teach the word.

V. In His utterance of words of
grace. —Hone.


“ Where He had been brought wp.”—
It was a trying visit, for few tasks
are harder than to give God’s message
to one’s own relatives and intimate
friends, especially when they are in
no mood to receive it.—Blaikie.


Ver. 16. Church Attendance. “As
His custom was.”’—There are many
evidences that Jesus had fixed religious
habits. Attending the weekly syna-
gogue worship had been His custom
from childhood; and although He was
the Son of God, and had been mani-
fested as the Messiah, He still con-
tinued to observe the custom. He
went there to worship God, not to find
an intellectual entertainment. The
inconsistencies of His fellow-worship-
pers did not keep Him from the
services. If He needed the means of
grace, surely we need them far more,
-—Miller.


Jesus a Lover of the House of God.—
It is strange to think of Jesus being
preached to Sabbath after Sabbath
during these silent years at Nazareth.
What was the man like to whom
Jesus listened? When He began His
public work, He still regularly fre-
quented the synagogue. This was in


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. IV


a ea


fact the centre from which His work
developed itself. It is thus evident
that Jesus was a passionate lover of
the house of God. As the Scripture
was read, the great and good of former
ages thronged around Him; nay,
heaven itself was in that narrow place
for Him.—WStalker.


Christ an Example as a Worshipper.
—There is a strong argument to be
drawn from the example of Christ for
attendance upon public worship on the
day of rest. If He made a point of
being present at the reading and
exposition of Scripture, and of joining
with others in worship of God, how
much more should we attend to this
duty. It was “His custom ”—not
mere obedience to a rule imposed by
ecclesiastical authority—but a way of
employing the Sabbath which He
found to be for edification. The
narrative seems to imply that this was
the first time He had addressed the
people of Nazareth: we are there-
fore to conceive of this as an occa-
sion of special solemnity in the life
of Jesus.


“ Stood wup.”—Attitude of respect
adopted by the Jews in reading the
Scriptures: the attitude of sitting
while engaged in teaching (ver. 20)
imphes authority (cf. Matt. xxiii. 2).


Ver. 18. ‘ The Spirit of the Lord is
upon Me.”—This, it has been often
noticed, contains a statement of the
doctrine of the Trinity, Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit, operating distinctly
but harmoniously in effecting man’s
salvation.


“ He hath anointed Me.”—The mean-
ing of this prophetic citation may be
better seen when we remember that it
stands in the middle of the third great
division of the Book of Isaiah (xlix.-
Ixvi.), that, viz., which comprises the
prophecies of the person, office, suffer-
ings, triumph, and Church of the
Messiah ; and thus by implication an-


nounces the fulfilment of all that went
before, in Him who then addressed
them.— Alford


“The poor,” etc.—The troubles that
afflict humanity and that are to be
abolished by Christ are figuratively
described as (1) poverty, (2) eaptivity,
(3) blindness, and (4) oppression.


The Sermon at Nazareth.—The open-
ing of a ministry that has changed the
world. A fourfold scheme of Chris-
tianity.

I. A social gospel. To the poor.”

II. A healing gospel.—To the
brokenhearted.”

Tit. An emancipating gospel.—
“ Deliverance.”

IV. An enlightening gospel.—Daw-


son.


The New Teacher.—Three points
make Him pre-eminent and unique.

I. The relation between His person
and His word.

II. The consciousness He had of
Himself and His truth.

III. His knowledge of Himself and
His truth were throughout perfect and
self-consistent. Fairbairn.


The Text of His First Sermon.—
There was nothing fortuitous in Christ’s
choice of His first text in Nazareth.
The occasion was a marked one. None
could forget it. He turned in calm
self-possession to the first three verses
of Isaiah’s sixty-first chapter, describ-
ing what should be the work and
office of the destined Redeemer and
Saviour of man. It scarcely needed
that He should say what the applica-
tion was. The audience felt, as He
read, that the text said so.— Vaughan.


““ Closed the book.” —When He had
read the text from the Old Testament,
He closed the book and gave it back
to the attendant. As soon as the book
had delivered its message, He pre-
sented Himself to the congregation as
the fulfilment of the prophecy. His
sermon consisted in permitting the pro-


117


CHAP. IV.


phet to pronounce the promise and then
exhibiting Himself as its fulfilment.
No other preacher, either false or true,
ever acted thus.—Arnot.


The Gospel to the Poor.—The evange-
lisation of the poor was really the
divinest thing in Christ’s ministry, the
most original phase thereof, and the
phenomenon which most convincingly
showed that a new thing, destined to
make all things new, had appeared in
the world—the religion of humanity,
the universal religion. Such a religion
is surely Divine ; but when first it made
its appearance, it could not but seem a
very strange and startling phenomenon.
-—Bruce.


Vers. 18, 19. Five Portraits of our
Blessed Lord.
I. Christ the Evangelist.
II. Christ the Good Physician.
III. Christ the Liberator.
IV. Christ the Revealer,
V. Christ the Jubilee of His
Church.— Vaughan.


Ver. 19. “ Acceptable year.” —The
allusion is to the year of jubilee
(Lev. xxv.). The benefits conferred
upon Jewish society by this institution
were the following: 1. The Israelite
who had sold himself into slavery
received his freedom. 2. Families which
had alienated their patrimony received
it back again. 3. A generous amnesty
was granted to those who were in debt.
All these are most appropriate figures
of the spiritual blessings which Christ
was to confer upon men.


“ The acceptable year of the Lord.”—
Our Lord laid emphasis on this last
clause of His text.

I. What was in His mind when He
said He was anointed to preach “ the
acceptable year.”—The year of jubilee.
In its remarkable position it was a
type of gospel times. The jubilee year
of the Lord was introduced by Christ
and is in process now.

II. The genuine jubilee year goes
beyond the Old Testament picture—


118


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


We extend both time and place. Our
“year” rolls out into centuries, our
“land” into the whole earth. The
liberty proclaimed is soul liberty. But
a man cannot live on liberty. The
slave was to return to land and family.
So in the gospel. The home and the
birthright are waiting for us.

III. The great delight God has in
bestowing liberty.—It is a great joy
to Him. Jesus wished His first words
to be all mercy. Judgment is in the
background. He puts the acceptable
year first, and so should it be with
us. For those who despise His love
and sacrifice there remains only
judgment, the day of vengeance.—
Gibson.


Vengeance left out.—If Christ left out
“vengeance,” well may I. It belongs
neither to my province nor to this dis-
pensation. His jist advent had no-
thing todo with “‘ vengeance.” He did
not come then to judge the world, but to
save the world, and He could not, there-
fore, have said of this awful word, ‘This
day is this Scripture fulfilled in your
ears.” — Vaughan.


Ver. 20. “ Hyes of all fastened on
Him.”—Many things contributed to
arrest their attention: 1. The report
of His teaching and mighty works
which had preceded Him. 2. The fact
that it was the first time He whom
they knew so well was to address them.
3. The remarkable character of the
words He had read. 4. His manner
and bearing, which convinced them
that He was about to make some
important statement of His claims
and purposes.


Ver. 21. “ Fulfilled in your ears,”—
The theme of Christ’s discourse was
that the preaching which now re-
sounded in the synagogue of Nazareth
was a fulfilment of the prophecy He
had just read.


Ver. 22. “ Wondered at the gracious
words.” —This passage and John vii. 46
give us some idea of the majesty and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP, IV.


eS


sweetness which characterised our
_ Lord’s utterances. It is the attractive
manner of His speech rather than the
substance that is here referred to;
perhaps “ g?aceful utterances” would
be the best paraphrase of the expression
“gracious words” (cf. Ps. xlv. 2). It
is a poor result of preaching when the
attention of the hearers is principally
fastened upon the speaker’s oratorical
gifts, and what he has to say is over-
looked. Frivolous curiosity gives place
to contempt and indignation. The
inhabitants of Nazareth could not
brook the lofty claims put forth by
their fellow-townsman, whom they had
known from His infancy.


Gracious Words.—We can well be-
lieve that there was a peculiar charm in
the Speaker’s manner, but it sprang
from His heart being filled with enthu-
siasm for the mission on which He had
been sent. The grace of manner had
its source in the grace that lay in the
message. He had come to preach the
gospel to the poor, and proclaim the
acceptable year of the Lord. There
can be no doubt how the Evangelist
regarded the prophet’s words, which
Christ made His own, and in what
sense He calls them “ words of grace.”
— Bruce.


Ver. 23. “ Heal Thyself.” —This was
a taunt which was used again when
He hung upon the cross (xxiii. 35).
As great a need existed in Nazareth
for the healing labours of the Saviour
as in Capernaum, but the unbelief of
its inhabitants hindered the exercise of
His powers (cf. Matt. xiii. 58; Mark
vi. 5). -He was like a skilful musician
or able orator whose powers are chilled
and almost nullified by an unsym-
pathetic audience.


Ver. 24. “ No prophet,” etc.—Christ
here gives the reason why, in His own
town, He fails to make the impression
He had made in Capernaum. So far
from compelling His fellow-citizens to
accept His claims by performing
astounding prodigies, He is willing to


accept the fate ordinarily encountered
by Divine messengers.


Physician and Prophet.—The Saviour
at Nazareth reveals at once His double
character as (1) Physician, and (2) Pro-
phet—as a Physician who is treated
with scorn when He wishes to prepare
help for others, and is at once bidden
to heal Himself; and as a Prophet
who deserves the highest honour and
does not receive the least.—Lange.


“In his own country.” —Two causes
may be assigned for the vulgar pre-
judice to which Christ here alludes.
1. In the case of one well known the
charm of novelty is absent. 2. People
are apt to think that circumstances of
life so like their own, are wanting in
that romance and mystery, which their
imaginations lead them to associate
with remarkable persons of whom they
know but little.


Vers. 25-27. Elijah and Elisha.—The
cases of the mercy shown to the widow
of Zarephath and to Naaman find a
close parallel with those of the Syro-
pheenician woman (Mark vii. 26) and
the centurion’s servant (chap. vii. 1-10).
The points of resemblance are (1) the
unbelief with which these prophets and
Jesus were confronted at home, and
(2) the faith which they encountered
in persons outside the pale of Judaism.
The deeds of mercy shown to the
destitute and to the leper by these
earlier prophets were apt figures of
the benefits which Christ was able and
desired to confer.


God blesses whom He will.—The
general teaching of the incidents quoted
from Old Testament history and of
Christ’s own course of procedure on
this occasion may be stated as follows :
1, That God is free to confer His bless-
ings on whom He will. 2. That it is
the fault of men if they do not receive
these blessings. Widows and lepers in
Israel had not the faith shown by
those who actually received benefits
from the prophets; the mood of the


119


CHAP. IV.





people of Nazareth was different from
that of those who had been healed in
Capernaum. 3. That in every nation
those who fear God and work righteous-
ness are accepted of Hiin.


Ver. 28. “ Filled with wrath.”—The
angry and murderous feelings mani-
fested by the people of Nazareth justify
the severity of tone which Christ had
adopted in addressing them, and the ill
opinion which seems at that time to
have been generally formed of them
(cf. John i. 46). The same anger was
excited whenever the possibility of the
Divine merey being withdrawn from
‘the Jews, because of their unbelief, and
manifested to the Gentiles, was hinted
at: (cf. Acts xxi. 21,. 22).  ‘“* The
word of God is a sword, is a war, is a
poison, is a scandal, is a stumbling-
block, is a ruin to those who resist it ”


(Luther).


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





the city.”—This was the first open
insult that was offered to Jesus, and
it is sad to think that it proceeded
from those who had for nearly thirty
years been witnesses of His innocent
and holy life. “He came unto His
own, and they that were His own
received Him not” (John i, 11).


Ver. 30. “ Passing through the midst
of them.”—There is a tragic irony in
the fact that the people of Nazareth
desired to see some miracle wrought
by Him to accredit His claims to be
the Messiah; a miracle was granted to
them, but it was in the supernatural
way in which He escaped from their
hands. In Christ’s escape from this
great danger we may see a genuine
fulfilment of the promise in Ps. xci. 11,
12, which Satan had urged Him to
put to the test in another way: ‘“ He
shall give His angels charge concern-


ing Thee, to guard Thee, lest haply


Ver. 29. “Thrust Him out of Thou dash Thy foot against a stone.”


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 31-44.


A Sabbath in Capernaum.—We here pass from the synagogue at Nazareth,
among its hills, to that at Capernaum, on the lake-side, where Jesus was already
known as a worker of miracles. The two Sabbaths are in sharp contrast. The
issue of the one is a tumult of fury and hate; that of the other, a crowd of
suppliants and an eager desire to keep Him with them. ‘The story is in four
paragraphs, each showing a new phase of Christ’s power and pity.

I. Christ as the Lord of that dark-world of evil (vers. 33-37).—The silence
of the synagogue was suddenly broken by shrieks of rage and fear coming
from a man who had been sitting quietly among the others. Possibly his
condition had not been suspected until Christ’s presence roused his dreadful
tyrant. Note the rage and terror of the demon. The presence of purity is
a sharp pain to impurity, and an evil spirit is stirred to its depths when
in contact with Jesus. Observe, too, the unclean spirit’s knowledge of the
character and Divine relationship of Jesus. It gives a glimpse into a dim
region, and suggests that the counsels of heaven, as effected on earth, are
keenly watched and understood by eyes whose gleam is unsoftened by any
touch of pity or submission. Observe Christ’s tone of authority and sternness.
He had pity for men who were capable of redemption; but His words and
demeanour to the evil spirits are always severe. He accepts the most imperfect
recognition from men, and often seems as if labouring to evoke it; but He
silences the evil spirits’ clear recognition. The confession which is ‘“ unto salva-
tion” comes from a heart that loves, not merely from a head that perceives ; and
Jesus accepts nothing else. He will not have His name soiled by such lips.
Note, still further, Christ’s absolute control of the demon. His bare word is


120


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. IV.





sovereign and secures outward obedience, though from an unsubdued and dis-
obedient will. He cannot make the foul creature love, but can make him act.
Surely omnipotence speaks, if demons hear and obey. The existence of such
spirits suggests the possibility of undying and responsible beings reaching, by con-
tinued alienktion of heart and will from God, a stage in which they are beyond
the capacity of improvement and outside the sweep of Christ’s pity.

Il. The gentleness of Christ’s healing power and the immediate service of
gratitude to Him (vers. 38, 39).—Now the Lord’s tenderness shines unmingled
with sternness. His pity, that pity which wielded omnipotence, was kindled by
the beseeching of sorrowful hearts. And He who moves the forces of Deity still
from His throne lets us move His heart by our ery. St. Luke is specially
struck with one feature in the case—the immediate return of ordinary strength.
The woman is lying, the one minute, pinned down and helpless with “a great
fever,” and the next is engaged in her domestic duties. When Christ heals
He heals thoroughly, and gives strength as well as healing. What could a
woman, who was probably a poor dependant on her son-in-law, do for her Healer ?
Not much. But she did what she could, and that without delay. The natural
impulse of gratitude is to give its best, and the proper use of healing and new
strength is to minister to Him. Such a guest made humble household cares
worship ; and all our poor powers and tasks, consecrated to His praise and
become the offerings of grateful hearts, are lifted into greatness and dignity.
He did not despise the modest fare hastily dressed for Him ; and He still delights
in our gifts, though the cattle on a thousand hills are His.

III. The all-sufficiency of Christ's pity and power (vers. 40, 41).—As soon as
the sinking sun relaxed the sabbatical restrictions, a motley crowd came flocking
round the house carrying all the sick that could be lifted, all eager to share in
His healing. It did not argue realfaith in Him, but it was genuive sense of need,
and expectation of blessing from His hand; and the measure of faith was the
measure of blessing. They got what they believed He could give. If their faith
had been larger, its answers would have been greater. St. Luke makes prominent
the inexhaustible fulness of pity and power, which met and satisfied all the
petitioners, The misery spoke to Christ’s heart, and He moved among the sad
groups, and with gentle touch healed them all. To-day as then, the fountain of
His pity and healing power is full, after thousands have drawn from it, and no
crowd of suppliants bars our way to His heart or His hands. He has “ eaough
for all, enough for each, enough for evermore.”

IV. Jesus seeking seclusion, but willingly sacrificing it at men’s call
(vers. 42-44).—He withdraws in early morning, not because His store of power
was exhausted, or His pity had tired, but to renew His communion with the
Father. He needed solitude and silence, and we need it still more. No work
worth doing will ever be done for Him unless we are familiar with some quiet
place, where we and God alone together can hold converse, and new strength be
poured into our hearts. Our Lord is here our pattern also, of willingly leaving
the place of communion when duty calls and men implore. A great solemn
“ must” ruled His life, as it should do ours, and the fulfilment of that for which
He “ was sent ” ever was His aim, rather than even the blessedness of solitary
communion or the repose of the silent hour of prayer.— Maclaren.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 3\1—44.


Vers. 31-44. A Vivid Glimpse of He goes to the synagogue, teaches with
Christ's Actual and Active Ministry. great impression, and deepens this still
We are enabled to follow His footsteps further by the first instance of His
for nearly twenty-four hours. power over “the possessed.”


I. In the earlier part of the day, II. In the after-part of the day,
121





CHAP. IV.


He raises Simon’s mother-in-law from
her fevered bed to perfect health.

III. Later on the same evening,
the afflicted people of the whole town
are gathered round the door, and He
heals them all.

IV. The night’s rest which followed
must have been of the briefest, for He
rose the next morning long before day
broke, and retired into a solitary place
for prayer.— Laidlaw.


The Record of a Single Sabbath’s Work.

I. A strange scene in a church.

II. A wonderful transformation in
a private house.

III. The house turned into a public
hospital from which all the diseased
people go away cured.— Hastings.


Christ's Daily Life.
I. His work of preaching.
II. His work of healing.
III. His hours of retirement.—
W. Taylor.

Ver. 31. “‘ Came down to Capernaum.”
—Jesus had before this visited Caper-
naum and wrought miracles of heal-
ing the fame of which had reached
Nazareth (ver. 23); but now He
makes it the headquarters of His
work in Galilee. Probably the ani-
mosity towards Him manifested by
His fellow-townsmen in Nazareth had
something to do with His making this
change. From John ii. 12 we should
understand that His mother and
brethren also removed to Capernaum
at the same time. Perhaps the hatred
He had incurred was to some extent
visited upon them. So intimately was
He associated henceforth with Caper-
naum that it is called “ His own city”
(Matt. ix. 1). It is strange that this
city which is so much spoken of in the
Gospels has completely disappeared ;
there are three or four theories as to
which particular heap of ruins near
the Sea of Galilee is to be identified
with it. We can scarcely make any
mistake in connecting this utter de-
struction with Christ’s own prophecy
concerning the city (Matt. xi. 23).


122


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


“ Taught them.”—The substance of
His teaching is given in Mark i. 15:
“ The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom
of God is at hand: repent ye, and
believe the gospel.”


Ver. 32. “ His word was with author-
ity” (R.V.).—The teaching of Jesus was
different from that to which the people
were accustomed : (1) He spoke as one
sent and commissioned by God; (2) He
laid stress upon His own person and
claims as “the Word of God made
flesh”; and (3) love for the souls of
men shone out in all He said. The
general characteristics of Rabbinical
teaching have been described as follows:
‘“‘The scribes varied greatly, like other.
men, in ability, character, and qualifi-
cations; but 1t would appear that in
the time of our Lord the great bulk
of them were pedantic in things that
were obvious enough, and frivolous and
jejune in all things that lay beyond.
They were admirable guessers, and
mighty in platitudes. They were in-
genious in raising microscopic doubts,
and perfect adepts in conjuring up
conceit to do battle with conceit. They
were skilful in splitting hairs to infinity,
and proud of their ability to lead their
hearers through the endless mazes of
the imaginations of preceding rabbis—
imaginations that ended in nothing, or
in something that was actually worse
than nothing. But they had no
power, or almost none, to move the
conscience toward true goodness, or to
stir the heart toward God and toward
man. They might speak, indeed, with
positiveness enough; but it would not
be with moral power. They might
assert with dictatorial self-sufficiency ;
but it would not be with ‘ demonstra-
tion of the Spirit ’—demonstration
flashing in conviction even upon
reluctant souls” (Morison).


Vers. 33-36. The Demoniac in the
Synagogue.

I, The unhappy worshipper.—We
can only conjecture the special mean-
ing of the phrase here employed, “a
spirit of an unclean devil.” He had


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. IV.


oS


not as yet been excluded from the
synagogue worship. Or perhaps he
rushed, spirit-driven, into the midst of
the worshippers.

II. The sacred Presence provokes a
crisis.—There is an unbelief which can
never be silent. The demons could
never confront Jesus calmly. They
resent His interference. They are
indignant at His saving work. They
make weird, unearthly complaint.

III. Jesus is stern and cold.—He
is gentle with sinful men. Not so here.
As to a wild beast, He says, “ Be
muzzled. Come out of him.” Where-
upon the evil spirit exhibits at once
his ferocity and his defeat.

IV. The spectators draw the proper
inference.—A new power implied a
new revelation. Something far-reach-
ing and profound might be expected
from Him who commanded the unclean
spirits with authority and was obeyed.
Yet no one was converted by this
miracle. All were amazed ; but wonder
is not self-surrender.—Chadwich.


Ver. 33. “In the synagogue.” —It
is strange to find a man _ possessed
by an unclean spirit among the
worshippers in the synagogue, but
perhaps he had not before this given
any open indication of the spiritual
malady from which he was suffering.
The excitement connected with the
teaching of Christ, and the holiness of
His person, may have disturbed the
man’s mind and stirred up the rage of
the evil spirit.


Ver. 34. “What have we to do with
Thee?” —The unclean spirit is the
real speaker; but the utterance is
that of the man, who, being in, ie.
possessed by, the evil spirit, becomes its
mere instrument. In this respect a
specific distinction may be observed in
the mode of spiritual action in the
case of true prophets: in them in-
spiration does not supersede personal
consciousness ; they either speak their
own words, or they deliver a message
in the name and in the words of the
Lord.—Speaker’s Commentary.


“Art Thou come to destroy us ?”—
The Saviour had not, so far as
appears, been formally interfering by
a specific action. But His very
presence on the scene was felt to be
interference. There emanated from
Him, round about, an influence that
went in upon men blissfully, counter-
acting all evilinfluences. The unclean
spirit felt the power, and resented it
as an interference—an interference not
with itself in particular, but with the
entire circle of kindred spirits. “ Art
Thou come to destroy us ?”—WMorison.


“TI know Thee . . . the Holy One of
God.” —Karth has not recognised her
King, disguised as He is like one of
her own children; but heaven has
borne witness to Him (ii. 11, iii. 22),
and now hell must bear its witness
too—* the devils believe and tremble.”
—Trench.


The Outery of the Evil Spirit.—
Jerome speaks of the outcry of the
evil spirit as being like the exclama-
tions of a fugitive slave when he comes
face to face with his master and seeks
to deprecate his wrath. But it is
more probable that on the part of the
evil spirit there was a malignant in-
tention to compromise Jesus by bear-
ing testimony in favour of His high
claims. The acknowledgment of the
supreme power of the Saviour together
with a refusal to submit to His rule
is an illogical course of procedure we
are only too familiar with in our own
experience. To many of His professed
disciples Jesus may say, “ Why call
ye Me Lord, Lord, and do not the
things which I say ?”


Ver. 35. “Thrown him in the
midst.’—The final deliverance of the
sufferer from the evil spirit was ac-
companied by such a sharp paroxysm
that evidently those in the synagogue
thought that the man was dead. This
is vividly indicated by the phrase
“came out of him and hurt him not.”
‘Something similar to this violence of
the evil spirit in the hour of its eject-


123


CHAP. IV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE. |





ment is evermore finding place; and
Satan vexes with temptations and
with buffetings none so much as those
who are in the act of being delivered
from his dominion for ever.” In the
man possessed by the evil spirit we
have a living picture of our own souls
under the dominion of sin; just as in
the power of Christ to heal the
sufferer we have a proof of His ability
to control the powers of darkness and
to deliver us from subjection to them.


Vers. 36, 37. “They were all
amazed.” —‘‘ We can imagine to our-
selves the emotion of those assem-
bled in the synagogue who, while
they were listening in silence to the
teaching of Jesus, saw in an instant
such a storm break forth in their
midst—an almost visible .contest be-
tween: the two spiritual powers which
were disputing with each other for
rule over mankind” (Godet). In their
presence the prophecy of Isaiah was
fulfilled : ‘“‘Even the captives of the
mighty shall be taken away, and the
prey of the terrible shall be delivered :
for I will contend with him that con-
tendeth with thee, and I will save thy
children” (xlix. 25).
manifested by those who witnessed
this miracle and the fame with which
the performance of such a work in-
vested the Saviour no doubt indicate
that His claim to have been sent from
God was pretty widely accepted in the
district. Yet after all it was but the
springing up of the seed in the rocky
ground where there was not sufficient
deepness of earth. The words they
heard and the mighty works they
saw involved all the heavier punish-
ment for their unbelief (Matt. xi. 23).


Vers. 38-41. Healing of the Body a
Pledge of the healing of the Soul.

I. The fever rebuked.—1. At the
request of those around. 2. Accom-
panied by a specific action. 3. Fol-
lowed by a complete recovery.

II. The evening’s work.—He be-
gan afresh and carried on probably
late into the night His toilsome work.


124


The admiration °


“Disease being the cold shadow of sin,
its removal was a kind of sacrament,
an outward and visible sign that the
Healer of souls was nigh.” —Laidlaw.


Ver. 38. “ Simon’s house.” —Perhaps
in the statement that Jesus on leay-
ing the synagogue went to the house
of a disciple rather than to that
in which His mother and brethren
were, we have an indication of an
estrangement between Jesus and some
of His own family who believed not
on Him (cf. John vii. 5). The fact
that Peter was married is, one would
think, calculated to disturb those
who attach great importance to the
doctrine of the celibacy to the clergy.
We read of his wife as accompanying
him in missionary journeys (1 Cor.
ix. 5). Clement of Alexandria, in his
Miscellanies, tells of her martyrdom
in words that are very beautiful and
free from exaggerated sentiment.
“They say that the blessed Peter,
when he saw his wife led away to
death, rejoiced that she was graciously
called, and was returning to her home,
and that, calling her by name, he
addressed her in words of encourage-
ment and consolation, ‘Remember
thou the Lord.’ Such was the mar-
riage of the saints, and such their
perfect state of mind towards their
dearest.”


“A great fever.” —I.e. typhoid fever.


“They besought Him for her.’—I.e.
evidently Peter and his wife.


Ver. 39. “Rebuked the fever.”—It
is not necessary to understand the
word ‘rebuke ” as implying a personi-
fication of the fever: it evidently
means speaking in a firm, authorita-
tive manner, and tolerating no resist-
ance to His command.


“ Rose up and nvinistered unto them.”
—The instantaneousness and com-
pleteness of the cure is indicated in the
fact that she immediately, on leaving
the bed on which sickness had laié


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. IV.





her, ministered to the Saviour and
the others, z7.e. waited upon them at
the table. We may apply this circum-
stance to our spiritual duties. ‘The
first use she made of her recovered
strength was to employ it in her
Master’s service. And does she not
become a pattern therein to Christians,
who on their restoration to spiritual
health should employ their powers in
ministering to Christ in the person of
the poorest members of His mystical
body ¢”—Burgon.


Consecration of Renewed Powers.—
There is a whole cluster of suggestions
here.

I. Every sick person who is
restored should hasten to consecrate
to God the life that is given back.
—Surely it was spared for a purpose.

II. Opportunitics to minister to
Christ in the persons of His people are
at hand and innumerable.—No need
to wait for fine and splendid service.
True ministry to Christ is doing first
and well one’s daily duties.—Miller.


Ver. 40. “ All they that had any
sick.’—Observe His Divine power
and goodness shining forth in the
miraculous cure of all diseases. And
whatsoever be thy spiritual maladies,
though never so many and so desper-
ate, yet come. Never any came to
Him and went away uncured.—
Leighton.


“ Laid His hands on every one.” —
Jesus could certainly have cured by
a word (vii. 6-10), or even by a simple
exercise of will (John iv. 50). But
there is first of all something pro-
foundly human in this act cf laying
His hand on the head of each one
whom He wished to benefit. It was
an indication of kindly feeling. Then,
too, it was morally significant. Hach
time that Jesus made use of material
means for working a cure, whether it
were by the sound of His voice or by
the use of clay made with His spittle,
His purpose was to establish a personal

tie between the sufferer and Himself ;


for He wished not only to cure, but to
lead to God, and to do that by pre-
senting Himself as the organ of Divine
grace among mankind. It is this
moral purpose which explains the
diversity in the means which He
employed. If they had been in them-
selves curative—if, for example, they
had been of the nature of magnetic
passes—they would not have varied so
much. But as they were directed to
the heart of the sufferer, they were
chosen with special reference to his
character or condition. In the case of
a deaf-mute, Jesus put His fingers in
his ears; He anointed the eyes of a
blind man with His spittle, ete. The
cure, therefore, was presented to the
heart of those healed as an emanation
from His person, and attached them to
Him by an indissoluble tie. —Godet.


The Miracles of Healing Prophetic.
—In the healing of all manner of
diseases, Jesus not only gave a proof
of His power to cope with all the evils
bodily and spiritual that afflict man-
kind, but gave a prophetic representa-
tion of the state of blessedness in the
new heavens and earth, from which all
that mars our happiness will be for ever
excluded. In the miracles of healing
we have the first-fruits of that Divine
beneficence which will overcome and
banish all our sorrows (cf. Rev.
xxi. 3, 4).


Ver. 42. Christ in Solitude.—He
was continually withdrawing Himself
from human sight and contact in
those deserts of Palestine and pray-
ing. With teaching and_ healing,
prayer divided His life. Have we
too no need of like withdrawings
after Him and with Him into the
wilderness? Are we so intensely
spiritual that we need none of that
desecularising, decarnalising process of
which the desert seclusions of Jesus
were the perpetual parable? It is
not safe to have the world always
with us. The ground “lacks moisture”
which has only the glare of day upon
it.— Vaughan.


125


CHAP. IV.


Solitude often Dreaded.—What is it
that makes solitude dreadful to some
and oppressive to many? Partly
(I) the sense of physical danger,
born of helplessness and uncertainty.
This Jesus never felt, who knew
that He must walk to-day and
to-morrow, and on the third day
be perfected. And partly (2) the
weight of unwelcome reflection, the
rebukes of memory, the fears that
come of guilt. Jesus was agitated
by no inward discords, upbraided by
no remorse. He had probably no
reveries; He is never recorded to
soliloquise ; solitude to Him was but
another name for communion with God
His Father ; He was never alone, for
God was with Him.—Chadwick.


Jesus makes Time for Prayer.—Jesus
would always find time for prayer,
or make time for it. If His days
were full of excitement and toil, He
would take time out of His nights
for communion with God. At least,
He never allowed Himself to be
robbed of His hours of devotion. Is
not His example a solemn rebuke ?—
Miller.


The Order of these Events.——From.
St. Mark’s Gospel we get several
additional particulars which enable us
to understand more clearly the nar-
rative in this place. In the morn-
ing, long before the darkness of the
night was past, Jesus rose up and left
the house of Simon Peter and went
into a desert place to pray. When
His absence was discovered, Simon
Peter and others went in search of
Him, and entreated Him not to leave
them. The early morning, the silent
departure from the house, the purpose
for which He sought the solitude of
the desert, and the search for Him,
form a very striking picture. The
active labours of the preceding day
caused Jesus to feel the necessity of
recruiting His spiritual strength by
withdrawing Himself for a time from
the turmoil of the world and by hold-
ing communion with His heavenly


126


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,


Father. How much more do we need
to seek from time to time to collect
together our thoughts which are so
easily dissipated by our every-day
occupations, and to seek from God
that spiritual refreshment that will
make us strong to serve Him and our
fellow-men! For we cannot give out
unless we receive from Him.


The Search for Jesus.—Jesus had
doubtless enjoyed some uninterrupted
hours of such communings with His
heavenly Father ere His friends from
Capernaum arrived in search of Him.
When morning came, Peter, loath to
break in upon the repose of his glorious
Guest, would await His appearance
beyond the usual hour; but at length,
wondering at the stillness, and gently
coming to see where the Lord lay, he
finds it—like the sepulchre afterwards
—empty! Speedily a party is made up
to go in search of Him, Peter natur-
ally leading the way.— Brown.


Ver. 43. “I must preach the king-
dom of God.” —No doubt those who had
witnessed the miracles in Capernaum
expected to see a repetition of marvels
of the same kind; but in the words
in which Jesus replied to their request
to remain among them, He lays stress
upon preaching “the good tidings of
the kingdom of God” as the great
work He was sent to do. As the
Saviour of Israel, and not merely of
Capernaum, a moral obligation lay
upon Him to go from city to city. It
would no doubt have been pleasanter
to remain among those who showed a
disposition to pay Him reverence. But
“even Christ pleased not Himself.”
“The Saviour of the world might,
indeed, by abiding in the same place,
have drawn all men unto Himself;
but He did not do so, because He
would give ws an example to go about,
and seek those who are perishing, as
the shepherd his lost sheep.”


“Other cities."—Jesus went about
doing good. He did not confine
His blessings to single localities. He


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





sought to reach as many souls as
possible. He did not wait for people
to come to Him, but carried the good
news to their own doors. He thus
taught that—

I. His gospel is for all men, and
not for any particular place. He
taught us also—

Il. To make the most of our lives
and opportunities, scattering the
blessings of grace as widely as pos-
sible. He wants His Church to keep
on preaching the gospel to “other
cities also,” till there is not one left
in which it has not been heard.—


Miller.


CHAP. V.





Ver. 44. “ The synagogues of Galilee.”
—Our Lord’s procedure in this first
missionary journey was therefore to
visit various towns, and to preach in
Synagogues on successive Sabbaths.
It has been calculated that the time
occupied must have been some four or
five months. Galilee at this period
was a very populous district. Josephus
says that it contained two hundred
and four towns, with not less than
fifteen thousand inhabitants in each,
ze. more than three million of a
population. Even if he has exagge-
rated the number, it must still have
been considerable.





CHAPTER V.
CRITICAL NOTES.


Ver. 1. To hear the word of God.—“ His preaching in the synagogues had excited so much
attention that the people followed Him to the shore of the lake to hear Him” (Speaker's
Commentary). Lake of Gennesaret.—St. Luke alone uses the name.

Ver. 2. Standing.—The technical word used for vessels at anchor or fastened to the shore.
Washing their nets.—As if their work for the day were over.

Ver. 4. Launch out.—The verb is in the singular ; addressed to Peter, who was stee:sman
of his boat : “let down” is in the plural; addressed to all the fishermen in the boat.

Ver. 5. Master.—Not “teacher”: a title of respect. All the night.—The usual time for
fishing (cf. John xxi. 3).

Ver. 6. Their net brake.—Rather, “was breaking” (R.V.), was on the point of breaking.

Ver. 8. Depart from me.—Lit. ‘Go forth away from me,” i.e. ‘Go out of the boat and
leave me.” The presence of one possessed of Divine power or knowledge overawed him: he
felt, too, that in Jesus there was also a Divine holiness; and he was overwhelmed with the
thought of his own unworthiness. Yet he addresses Jesus as “Lord,” a term of greater
reverence than “ Master” (ver. 5). His request that Jesus should leave him is the
expression of a very different feeling from that of the sordid Gadarenes, who desired Him
to depart from their coasts (viii. 87). A sinful man,—It is his own individual guiltiness
that he confesses, and not simply the depravity of human nature: the word he uses implies
this—it is dvjp, and not d&vOpwros.

Ver. 9. Astonished.—Lit. “ amazement possessed him.”

Ver. 10. Thou shalt cateh.—Or, “thou shalt be catching ”—as a permanent occupation.
“It must be remembered that this was the second call of Peter and the three apostles—the call
to apostleship: they had already received a call to faith. They had received their first
call on the banks of the Jordan, and had heard the witness of John, and had witnessed the
miracle of Cana. They had only returned to their ordinary avocations until the time came
for Christ’s full and active ministry ” (Warrar).

Ver. 12.—St. Matthew gives a distinct note of time and place when and where this miracle
was wrought: it was after the Sermon on the Mount, and as Jesus came down from the
mount, that the leper met him. Full of leprosy.—A term of medical accuracy describing the
severity of the disease. The leprosy had spread over his whole body, but not in the manner
described in Lev. xiii. 13, for he was still unclean (ver. 14). It is to be specially noticed
that when the disease had attained a certain stage the man was pronounced ceremonially
clean, and was allowed to mingle with others. Thou canst make me clean.—His faith
was wonderfully strong, as there was only one case of a leper being cleansed by miracle—
that of Naaman.

Ver. 13. Touched him.—A violation of the letter of the Mosaic law, but an action prompte?
by the higher law of compassion (Mark i, 41).

127


CHAP. V. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





’ Ver. 14. He charged him to tell no man.—The reason of the prohibition probably was our
Lord’s unwillingness to allow the attention of the people to be diverted from His teaching
to His miracles, and an excitement to be aroused which would interfere with His work.
The mischievous effect of disobedience to His commands on this occasion is noted in
Mark i. 45. Shew thyself to the priest, ete.—See Lev. xiv. 1-32. For a testimony unto
them.—J.e. to the priests that a miracle had taken place.

Ver. 17.—The scene of tl.is miracle was a house in Capernaum, either in a house belonging
to his family (John ii. 12) or in 8t. Peter’s house. Pharisees and doctors of the law.—They
had probably come to see and hear the prophet whose fame was now becoming widespread.
There is no reason to ascribe to them any malignant purpose at this stage of their relations
with Jesus. The power of the Lord.—J.e. not of the Lord Jesus, but of the Lord God
working through Jesus. Present to heal them.—R.V. “the power of the Lord was with
Him to heal.”

Ver, 18, Men.—Four men (Mark ii. 3).

Ver. 19.—St. Mark says that the crowd was so great that they could not get near the door.
By an outside stair they reached the flat roof of the house, and by removing some of the tiles
were able to lower the mat or mattress on which the sick man lay into the presence of
Jesus, who was evidently in the upper room of the house.

Ver, 20.—Though Jesus repudiated the principle that suffering is in every case the proof
of previous sin (John ix. 3), He did at times draw attention to the fact that suffering often
follows from sin, as in John v. 14, and apparently here.

Ver. 21. Blasphemies.—‘“ In classical Greek the word means abuse and injurious talk, but
the Jews used it specially of curses against God, or claiming His attributes” (Matt. xxvi. 65;
John x. 36)” (farrar).

Ver. 22. Their thoughts.—Rather, “ their reasonings” (R.V.).

Ver. 23. Whether is easier, etc.—‘‘ He does not ask, ‘ Which is easier, to forgive sins or to
raise a sick man?’ for it could not be affirmed that the act of forgiving was easier than that
of healing; but, ‘ Which is easier, to claim this power or to claim that ?’—%o say, ‘ Thy sins
be forgiven thee,’ or to say, ‘Arise and walk’? And He then proceeds, ‘ That is easier, and
I will now prove My right to say it by saying with effect, and with an outward consequence.
setting its seal to My truth, the harder word, Rise up and walk’” (Trench).

Ver. 25. Took up that whereon he lay.—An indication of the reality of the cure. He had
been carried by others to the presence of Jesus, but now is seen to depart carrying with him
the mat or mattress on which he had lain.

Ver. 26. Fear.—A feeling akin to that described in ver. 8.

Ver, 27. Saw. —Rather, “observed,” “‘ beheld” (R.V.). Levi.—The apostle and evangelist,
St. Matthew (v. Matt. ix. 9). Probably his original name was Levi, and the name Matthew
or Matthias was given to him or assumed by him after he became an apostle. Matthew
means “The gift of God.” The receipt of custom.—‘ The place of toll” (R.V.). The dues
or taxes were probably connected with the traffic on the Sea of Galilee.

Ver. 29. A great feast.—This is an indication of wealth, and implies that the act of

‘renunciation (ver. 28) was in his case all the more remarkable. A great company of
publicans.—As a class they would be deeply moved by the kindness of Jesus to one of their
number. They were accustomed to be despised and spoken against by those of their country-
men who laid special claims to holiness. Sat down.—Je. reclined at table according to tue
custom of the time.

Ver. 30, Their scribes, ete.—/J.e. the scribes and Pharisees of that place. As from the
character of the objection we cannot suppose that these scribes and Pharisees were them-
selves present at the feast, the conversation may have taken place some time after it. They
may, indeed, have seen Jesus leaving the house with the other guests.

Ver, 32. The righteous—There does not seem to be any satirical reflection upon the
Pharisees in this reply, as persons who considered themselves righteous, but were not really
so. “The argument is, the greater a man’s sin, the more need he has of the call to repentance,
as, if he were perfectly righteous, he would need no repentance. These words do not, of
course, imply that any man is perfectly righteous, nor is such a supposition necessary to the
reasoning ” (Speaker's Commentary).

Ver. 33.—St. Luke here omits the remarkable fact, noted by St. Matthew and St. Mark,
that disciples of John the Baptist joined with disciples of the Pharisees in putting this
question. Fast often, ete.—J.e. follow the ascetical example of their master, Make prayers.
—Rather, “ make supplications ” (R.V.).

Ver. 34. Children of the bride-chamber.—The groomsmen or friends of the bridegroom:
they accompanied him to the house of the bride, and escorted the newly married pair to
their new home. This was followed by a feast: hence fasting and mourning would be out
of place. The figure is a singularly appropriate one, as the Baptist himself had spoken of
Jesus as the Bridegroom (John iii. 29).

Ver. 35. Taken away.—A violent death is here hinted at, as in the earlier conversation
with Nicodemus (John iii. 14). Then shall they fast.—Ze. have reason for fasting and


128


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. omar. V.


ey


mourning: outward expressions of grief will be appropriate. Neither here nor in any other
part of the New Testament is fasting prescribed.

Ver. 36.—The R.V. is much clearer: “No man rendeth a piece from a new garment and
putteth it upan an old garment ; else he will rend the new, and also the piece from the new
will not agree with the old.” In the parallel passages in St. Matthew and St. Mark tha
figure is slightly varied: in them stress is laid upon the idea of patcling the old garment
with a piece of new, unfulled cloth, which in course of time will shrink and do harm to the
hitherto uninjured part of the old. Here a new garment is spoiled in order to get a patch
for the old, which does not agree with it. The idea of this and of the following verses is
that the new life of Christianity is not adapted to the old forms of Judaism: it will have
its own fasts and festivals, but these will correspond to its own distinctive character.

Ver. 37. Bottles. —JZ.e. wine-skins. The old skins would be rent, if filled with new
fermenting wine.

Ver. 38. New wine .. . new bottles.—Rather, ““New wine . . . fresh wine-skins” (R.V.).
And both are preserved.—Omitted in R.V.

Ver. 39. Straightway.—Omit: omitted in R.V. The old is better.—Rather, “the old is
good” (R.V.). This is a very kindly apology, as it were, for those who had become
habituated to the old religious system and could not as yet accept and enjoy the “new
wine ” of Christianity. The old is not better in itself, but better in their estimation.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—11.


A Parable in a Miracle.—There are three stages in this incident: the sermon


- from the fishing-boat, the draught of fishes, and the call of Simon.


I. The sermon from the fishing-boat.—The narrative is vivid and picturesque.
We can fancy the little crowd on the beach in the fresh morning; their
unmannerly jostling; the singular inattention of Simon and the others; the
wet, slimy boats drawn up, in token that fishing was done for the day; the
crews busy cleaning the nets; and stretching from the strip of busy beach
the glittering waters, shining in the early sun as it rose over the eastern hills.
Though the fishermen had not lifted their heads from washing the nets to listen
to Jesus, they were all His disciples; but they had not been summoned to
forsake their callings, and Jesus had been going about preaching alone. They
did not know how far He wished them to swell the crowd of listeners, and so
they went on with their work. The patient doing of common duties is as true
a service as any other. Who looked likest disciples—the eager listeners, or the
knot of fishers? The light-minded crowd shows us that open ears and shut
hearts often go together, and the true sign of discipleship was dropping the nets
and pushing off just because He wished it. Let us learn to stick to our small
secular duties till Jesus asks other service, and then to drop them immediately
and cheerily, like these men. What a pulpit for such a preacher the rough,
untidy fishing-boat was! How willingly He shared the lowly lot of His friends,
and how little He cared for comfort, or what people call dignity! The gospel
for all men, poor as well as rich, was fitly preached from a fishing-boat ; and its
power to exalt all secular work into Divine and priestly service was plain from
the very place of its utterance. es

IJ. The draught of fishes.—‘“ At Thy word I will” is the very essence of
obedience. Never mind though use and wont say “ Folly”; never mind how vain
the night’s work has been, nor how weary the arms with rowing and hauling;
if Jesus says, “ Down with the nets,” then down they should go, and he who
truly calls Him Master will not stop to argue or remonstrate. Swiftness is
part of obedience. The reward is as swift. The load threatens to break the
nets. The miracle is remarkable, in that it was not done in answer to any cry
of distress, and in that it had not for its purpose the supply of any sore need.
Its valuo is didactic and symbolical. In the former aspect it reveals Jesus as
the Lord of nature, and as fulfilling the ancient psalm (viii. 8), which ascribes
to man dominion over “the fish of the sea.” The incident shows how the
K 129


OHAP, V. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





original and forfeited glory of humanity was restored in Jesus. ‘‘ We see not
yet all things put under” man, but “we see Jesus.” This teaching is equally
clear whether we regard the point of the miracle as being our Lord’s super-
natural knowledge of these passers “through the paths of the seas,” or as His
sovereign power bringing them to the nets. It teaches, too, His care for His
followers’ material needs, and prophesies the blessing which crowns obedient
work in secular callings. If we are sure of what is duty, we are to stick
to it, come failure or success. Then, too, we learn the need for prompt,
unhesitating obedience to every command of Christ’s, however it may break in
on our rest or contradict our notions. If all our common duties have this motto
written on them, ‘“‘At Thy word,” the distasteful will become pleasant and
fatigue light, and success and failure will be wisely alternated by Him as may
be best for us; and whatever the outward issues of our work, its effects on
ourselves will be to bring us nearer to Him; and though our nets may often be
empty, our hearts will be full of perfect peace.

Ii. The call of Simon.—The miracle heightened Peter’s conception of the
Worker, for ‘“ Lord” is a loftier form of address than “ Master.” It had also
flashed upon him a sudden consciousness of his own sinfulness, which was altogether
wholesome. It is well when great mercies reveal the Giver more clearly, and
when the glimpse of the gracious Giver bows us with the sense of our own
unworthiness. To know ourselves sinful and Christ as Lord is the beginning of
deliverance from sin and of fitness for apostleship. But Peter was sadly wrong
in his “Depart from me.” The disease is a reason for the coming, not for the
going, of the Healer. He would have understood himself and His Lord better
if he had cried, ‘‘ Never leave me, for I am sinful.” He did understand matters
better when, on the occasion of the second miraculous draught of fishes, he flung
himself into the water to get close to his Master. A partial sense of sin and
surface knowledge of Jesus drive from Him: a deeper understanding of ourselves
and of Him drives to Him. Christ knows what Peter means by his foolish ery.
What he wants to get rid of is, not Jesus, but the sin that separates him from
Jesus. “Go away,” said Peter. ‘‘Come to Me henceforth permanently, and
leave all else to be with Me,” replied Jesus. Christ knows our hearts better
than we do, and often reads our wishes more truly than we put them into
utterance. ‘From henceforth” indicates the change in Peter’s calling and
relation to Jesus. The moment was an epoch, making a revolution in his life.
Our sight of our own sinfulness and of His holiness ever makes a turning-point.
Well for us if “henceforth” we are nearer Him, and lifted above our old selves.

The fisherman’s trade is the symbol of evangelistic activity, and the points of
resemblance are very obvious. There is need for the same patient toil, the
same persistent bearing up against discouragement. ‘There will come the same
apparent want of success, and there should ever sound in the servant's ears the
Master’s command to launch out into the deep—to push boldly into untried
ground, and to ply his task, undaunted by discouragements and unwearied by
the long night of toil. The conditions of success are diligence, obedience, hope.
The preliminary is to leave all and follow Him. We may have little, or we may
have much; but whatever it be, we have to give it up; and he who surrenders
an ‘‘all” which is little is one in motive, and will be one in reward, with him
who gives up an all which 1s much.—Maclaren.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 1—11.


Vers. 1-11. First Studies in Christ's land.—Peter is first asked to lend his
College. boat for the preaching of the word.
I. Thrust out a little from the For the first time the instruments of


130


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP V.





his ordinary life are turned to the use
of his new calling : his boat, his oars,
his strength and skill. What a lesson
is here for every disciple—to be ready
to give his house, his field, his shop, his
seat at the receipt of custom, not to
any mere selfish purpose, but to further
the preaching of the word! For thus
disciples are first taught to thrust out
a little, in a venture to which they are
new and timid.

II. Launch out into the deep.—
That first lesson is followed by a
second, and all the more suggestive
that their life-long skill now finds a
Master. For themselves they have
toiled all night in vain ; but they learn
to begin anew at His word, and now
they are astonished at their success.
How often would this scene and its
teaching come up to memory in after-
times, with other lights and other ap-
plications! How often would Peter
think in other waters of his partners
in the ship, of fellowship in work as
well as faith, of the joy of drawing men
to the shore when the Master watches
and directs, and of the wonder of nets
unbroken under the heavy strain !—


MacColl.


Trust in Christ taught by the Miracle.
—Peter learnt from this miracle that
it was best to trust Christ. He might
say to himself, “I never felt more
convinced that we should take nothing
by letting down the nets than I did on
that morning on the lake; but I let
them down, and found I was wrong.”
A memorable act is not done with edu-
cationally when it is over. The recol-
lection of it is an attendant monitor,
always pointing the same way; and
so this miracle may have done much
towards accustoming Peter to look to
the Lord’s prompting, and to be ready
at His word to give up that about
which he felt most sure.—Latham.


A Miracle of Instruction.—The early
miracles were mostly wrought in the
sight of the multitude ; but this miracle
of the draught of fishes was performed
when few but the disciples were by.


It was a miracle of instruction: it
lent great impressiveness to great
lessons, it emphasised in a way never
to ke forgotten the call to become
“fishers of men,” and it gave good
augury of success. The thought of this
draught must have come back to Peter
at many a juncture in his life—a
notable one being the morrow of the
feast of Pentecost, when ‘there were
added to them in that day about three
thousand souls ! ’—Jbid.


Christ the Ruler of our Lives.—In
this incident Christ unfolds Himself


.to His disciples as Lord of their lives


and of their lives’ mission. He shows ©
that their mission will be among
men whom they are to seek to win;
He gives them a glimpse of a king-
dom which is moral rather than
material; and at the same time He
shows Himself as Lord of their lives.—
Boyd Carpenter.


I. The scene.— Here you have week-
day ministry, open-air preaching, a
quite extempore service, an occasional
and entirely singular pulpit.

II. The sign.—The deed which fol-
lowed when He had “left speaking ”
is a good illustration of the mutual
influence of every-day religion and
every-day work.

Ili. The purpose and effects.—A
general impression of astonishment, a
spiritual crisis in Peter’s case, and a
complete and immediate decision on
his part and on that of the other fisher-
apostles. The crowning purpose of the
miracle was to be a sign and seal
of the calling of these converts as
preachers of the gospel, messengers
of the kingdom, fishers of men.

IV. The symbolic meaning.—It was
an acted parable. The analogies be-
tween the work of fishers and the
work of Christ’s servants are many.—
Laidlaw.


Ver. 1. “The people pressed upon
Him.”—The presence of a large crowd
of men and women eager to hear
the word of God lends additional


131


CHAP. Y.





significance to the spiritual meaning
of the miracle now wrought, and to
the call now addressed to these fisher-
men to leave their trade and become
fellow-workers with Christ in the task
of savingmen. The multitude gathered
together upon the beach were ready
and waiting to be enclosed in the
gospel net.


Ver. 2. “ Were washing their nets.”
—It is interesting to notice how often
in the Gospels Christ is revealed to
men while they are busy in their
worldly occupations, and how those
very occupations are made the means
of giving them truer knowledge of
Him and of their relations to Him.
1. The shepherds at Bethlehem, while
tending their flocks, receive tidings of
the birth of Him who was to be the
Good Shepherd. 2. The Magi, while
engaged in watching the heavens, see
the star that guides them to Christ,
who was Himself the Star which was
to arise ont of Jacob (Num. xxiv. 17).
3. The fishermen of the Galilean lake,
Simon and Andrew, James and John,
while engaged in their trade, are called
to join Him and to become fishers of
men. The figure of Christ as a fisher-
man was common in the early litera-
ture of the Church: it is based upon
this passage and upon the parable in
Matt. xiii. 47-50. Various refinements
upon the figure were current, e.g. the
mystical symbol of the iy@vs (ie. an
acrostic upon Jesus Christ, Son of God,
Saviour), the idea of the soul, like the
fish, being born in the water (of bap-
tism), etc.


Ver. 3. “ Entered into one of the
ships.”—An old writer fancifully says
of Christ in the boat and the people
on the shore, “ Behold the Fisherman
upon the sea and the fish upon the
land.”





Vers. 4, 5. “Launch out into the
deep.” —The faith of Simon Peter is
now tested. The night-fishing had
been utterly unsuccessful, and the idea


132


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


1


of renewing the attempt that day had
been abandoned: the boats had been
drawn up on the shore, and the nets:
were being cleaned and dried. The
fisherman is now told to launch out
into the deep, and cast the nets again.
Simon’s knowledge of his craft, of the
habits of fish, of the weather, etc.,
would have led him to refuse; but his
deference to Christ and reverence for
Him disposed Him to obey. To labour
at the command of Christ, and to do
so with alacrity and pains, is proof of
a docile and implicit faith. Simon’s
obedience was perhaps not very severely
tested by this command, but it must
be remembered that his faith in Christ
was as yet only in an early stage of
development, and therefore more easily
shaken: he now manifested deference
to a’ Teacher, where afterwards he
showed ardent obedience toa Lord and
Saviour.


Ver. 5. “ Nevertheless.” —Two feelings
predominant in Peter’s words: (1) weari-
ness; (2) discouragement. ‘‘ Never-
theless.” Here is the correction of the
two feelings. ‘This or that is against
it, yet it shall be done.”

I. Life as a whole is one great
“ nevertheless.”

II. Each act of the lifo is a little
“nevertheless."—A “though” and a
“vet” in perpetual conflict, the
“though,” being the plausible thing, and
the tempting thing, and the half-truth ;
the ‘‘ yet” less apparent, but the manly
thing, and the courageous and the right.
There is a “though” as well as a
“yet” in the simplest action. Though
it is pleasant to sit still, I must be
upand doing. It is irksome to perform
this particular duty, but it must be
done.— Vaughan.


Failure a Proof of Want of Faith—
Every failure is a proof of the want of
faith. If faith were present, failure
could not be. But there is such a
thing as faith, after defeat, returning
to the charge ; and it isin that return-
ing to the charge that the test of our
Christianity lies.—Jbid.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. V.





“At Thy bidding.”—This is the
disciple’s ‘* nevertheless,” and finds its
place in the disciple’s daily duty and
service. nd by the faithful use
of it the disciple is trained and
prepared to meet other and higher
demands. Humbly recognising past
failure, and feeling the full weight of
the disappointment, not ignoring the
pressure of difficulty and the sting of
pain, yet trusting in His grace, we set
against the stream of indifference and
unbelief the whole force of our will
consecrated to Him, and say, ‘“ Never-
_ theless, at hy bidding we will let down

‘the net.” —WVicoll.


Ver. 6. “ A great multitude of fishes.”
—It seems unnecessary to inquire
minutely whether this miracle was
due to Christ’s omniscience or to His
omnipotence, i.e. whether by super-
natural knowledge He was aware of
the near presence of a shoal of fish,
or whether by His Divine power He
brought together a multitude of the
fish of the lake. Perhaps the former
supposition would commend itself to
most of us; but in favour of the latter
we have the passage in Ps. viii. 8, in
which the ideal son of man, who finds
his true representative in Christ, is
described as having supreme authority,
not only over cattle and beasts of
the earth, but over the fish and all
creatures that live in the sea. In
either case the miracle was equally
stupendous.


Ver. 7. ‘“ Beckoned.”—Perhaps be-
cause of the distance they were away
from the land, or because fishing opera-
tions are best carried on in silence.
The noise of shouting might only drive
the fish to struggle to escape, and add
to the risk of losing them by their
breaking through the nets.


The Miracle a Parable-—With this
miracle we may compare the second
of the kind wrought after the Resur-
rection, and also the parable in Matt.
=i. 47-50. We shall do well to
keep in mind that these miracles


were also parables and prophecies :


"everything connected with them is


symbclical. The fishermen represent
apostles and ministers of Christ, the
ship is the Church, the net is the
gospel, the sea is the world, and
the shore is eternity. One part of the
figure is inappropriate: the fish die
when drawn out of the water, while
the souls of men are taken captive to
be introduced to a higher life. Perhaps
this latter idea is conveyed in the words
of Christ (ver. 10), “Catch men,” lit.
“take alive men,” 7.¢. catch them for
life eternal, instead of catching fish for
death.


Ver. 8. “ Depart... for Iam...
sinful.”

I. An important fact——Peter saw
himself a very sinful creature. When
we stand near Jesus, we see ourselves :
1. Without moral beauty. Sin has
taken away our comeliness. 2.. With-
out moral purity. Sin has robbed us
of our integrity. 3. Without moral
utility. Our usefuluess has gone.
4, Without moral prospect. The future
is dark.

II. A mistaken impression.—1. ‘“‘ De--
part from me”: no, because there is
something there besides sin. The
Saviour beheld the man and the apostle
there. 2. ‘Depart from me”: no,
because there is a great service to be
rendered. Peter became a fisherman
to catch men. 3. ‘ Depart from me”:
no, for nearer Thee we have more light,
more holiness.


The Repulsion and Attraction of
Christ—“ Depart from me”: ‘To
whom shall we go?” (John vi. 68).
The speaker of both texts is the same ;
the person addressed is the same. Yet
the one utterance is the direct negation
of the other. Whence comes this
paradox? It is a paradox inherent in
the religious life. This contrast of
repulsion and attraction is the true
attitude of the devout spirit towards
God. Side by side they have their
place in the heart—the awe which
repels, the love which attracts. We


133


CHAP. V.


thrust God away, and yet we run
after Him.—Lightfoot.


Peter's First Impulse.—An oppressive
sense of sin had come over Peter in
a moment. The eyes of God were
looking from that heavenly face down
into the depths of his heart. This
wrung from him the cry of fear. So
must it ever be when we come face
to face with God. Observe Peter’s
first impulse when he realises how
sinful he is. ‘Depart from me.”
The desire is to get away from God.
Many do not like to think about God.
But for Him to depart would be to
leave the sinner helpless and hopeless.
What we need is not less but more of


Him. What was Peter’s final im-
pulse? To “forsake all, and follow
Him.”—Gibson.


Mixed Elements of Character.—This
exclamation opens a window into the
inner man of Peter through which
we can see his spiritual state. There
is in him that characteristic mixture
of good and evil of which we have
so many reappearances. Among the
good elements are reverential awe
in presence of Divine power, tender-
ness of conscience, and unfeigned self-
humiliation—all valuable features of
character, but not existing without
alloy. Along with them were associated
superstitious dread of the supernatural,
and a slavish fear of God, showing
how unfit, as yet, Peter is to be an
apostle of a gospel which magnifies
the grace of God even to the chief of
sinners.—Bruce.


Self-humiliation.—With the  self-
humiliation of Simon Peter compare
the confession of Isaiah (vi. 5) and
that of St. Paul (1 Tim. i. 15). Note,
also, how utterly imappropriate his
words would have been, if Christ had
been a mere man—even the holiest
of men. They express a self-loathing
which is excited only by the contem-
plation of infinite holiness, and by the
thought of the near presence of God.


134


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


“ Depart from me.”—The exclama-
tion of St. Peter was wrung from a
heart touched with a sense of humility,
and his words did not express his
thoughts. They were the cry of
agonised humility, and only emphasised
his own utter unworthiness. They
were in reality the reverse of the
deliberate and calculated request of
the swine-feeding Gadarenes. The
dead and profane soul tries to get rid
of the presence of the Divine. The
soul awakened only to conviction of sin
is terrified. The soul that has found
God is conscious of utter unworthiness,
but fear is lost in love (1 John iv. 18).
—Farrar.


1 Strong Plea for Christ to remain.
—Simon doth not greedily fall upon so
unexpected and profitable a booty, but
he turns his eyes from the draught to
himself, from the act to the Author,
acknowledging vileness in the one, in
the other majesty: “Go from me,
Lord, for I am a sinful man.” It had
been a pity the honest fisher should
have been taken at his word. O Simon,
thy Saviour is come into thine own
ship to call thee, to call others by
thee, unto blessedness; and dost thou
say, ‘Lord, go from me”? as if the
patient should say to the physician,
“ Depart from me, for I am sick.” But
it was the voice of astonishment, not
of dislike—the voice of humility, not of
discontentment ; yea, because thou art a
sinful man, therefore hath thy Saviour
need to come to thee, to stay with
thee ; and because thou art humble in
the acknowledgment of thy sinfulness,
therefore Christ delights to abide with
thee, and will call thee to abide with
Him. No man ever fared the worse
for abasing himself to his God. Christ
hath left many a soul for froward
and unkind usage; never any for the
disparagement of itself, and entreaties
of humility. Simon could not devise
how to hold Christ faster than by thus
suing Him to be gone, than by thus
pleading his unworthiness,— Hall.


The Deepest Thing in Man's Heart,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. V.





—At moments like these all that is
merely conventional is swept away,
and the deep heart utters itself, and
the deepest?things that are there come
forth to the light. And the deepest
thing in man’s heart under the law is
this sense of God’s holiness as something
bringing death and destruction to the
unholy creature. Below this is the
utterly profane state, in which there is
no contradiction felt between the holy
and the unholy, between God and the
sinner. Above it is the state of grace ;
‘in which all tho contradiction is felt,
God is still a consuming fire, yet not
any more for the sinner, but only for
the sin. It is still felt—felt far more
strongly than ever—how profound a
gulf separates between sinful man and
a holy God ; but felt no less that this
gulf has been bridged over, that the
two can meet, that in One who shares
with both they have already met.—
Trench.


Vers. 8-10. A Strange Prayer and a
Wonderful Answer.

I. The prayer is a strange one, when
we think by whom and to whom it was
offered. This is a familiar gospel story.
The prayer sounds like that of the
Gadarene demoniacs ; but no two cases
could be more dissimilar. This prayer
is wrung from a human soul by the
sudden revelation of a Divine presence,
of which it feels itself unworthy. Very
strange must this prayer have looked
to Peter in the retrospect—this prayer
for separation from the Saviour, and
that because he isa sinner. Here is
a conversion of the converted, and
that not the last or most memorable
conversion. There will always be in
heroic souls an experience, or many
such, analogous to this of Peter. For
lack of it we are ineffective, trifling,
confident, wavering, unimpressive. Oh
for the grace of reverence !

II. The answer.—Jesus does not
blame the fear which He comforts.
He first calms and then transfigures
it. ‘There isa more excellent way ;
there is a Divine remedy for the fear
that would shrink from Me: I will


give thee work to do for Me.” Two
words are prominent in the commission.
1. “Men.” Great stress is laid upon
it. The object of the ministerial work
is men, not “souls” merely, but
“men.” 2. The other word, ‘“ catch,”
speaks of a living capture, of a taking
alive in the great net of the gospel.
It might be said of some evangelists
that they are satisfied to catch a piece
of the man, and to catch that piece
itself dead! How unlike this to the
gospel of St. Peter! How is it that
men, even religious men, must always
dismember, never unite, the compound
being to which they address them-
selves? There are those who despair
of a gospel to the whole man. Not
so Jesus Christ.— Vaughan.


Ver. 10. “ Thou shalt catch men.”—
Those that were wandering, restless
and at random, through the deep, un-
quiet waters of the world, the smaller
falling a prey to the greater, and all
with the weary sense of a vast prison, he
shall embrace within the safe folds and
recesses of the same gospel net, which
if they break not through, nor leap
over, they shall at length be drawn up
to shore, out of the dark, gloomy waters
into the bright, clear light of day, so
that they may be gathered into vessels
for eternal life (Matt. xiii. 48).—-
Trench.


The Fisherman and the Shepherd.—
The figure here used does not set forth
the whole work of the Christian minis-
ter, but only two aspects of successful
work He may accomplish, viz. that of
securing within the net, and that of
landing safely upon the shore. These
are the first and last stages in the
salvation of thesoul. The intermediate
stages are those in which the soul is
ministered to, and fed, and encouraged,
and guarded from harm ; and these are
represented under the figure of a shep-
herd caring for sheep. Hence the
two figures mutually supplement one
another, and show us the offices of a
Christian minister as an evangelist and
pastor respectively. Other thoughts

135


CHAP. V.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


ST. LUKE,





in connection with these two figures
are suggested by Jeremy Taylor: “In
the days of the patriarchs, the gover-
nors of the Lord’s people were called
shepherds. In the days of the gospel
they are shepherds still, but with the
addition of a new appellative, for now
they are called fishers. Both of the
callings were honest, humble, and
laborious, watchful and full of trouble ;
but now that both the titles are con-
junct, we may observe the symbol of
an implicit and folded duty. There is
much simplicity and care in the shep-
herd’s trade; there is much craft and
labour in the fisher’s ; and a prelate is
to be both full of piety to his flock,
careful of their welfare, and also to be
discreet and wary, observant of advan-
tages, laying such baits for the people
as may entice them into the nets of
Jesus’ discipline.”


The Significance of the Miracle.—
The physical miracle was to be super-
seded by miracles of a higher kind,
inasmuch as success in the spiritual
labours of apostles is a greater proof of
Divine power than mighty works that
appeal to the bodily senses. The
_ miraculous draught of men which Peter
was at a later time to secure (Acts ii. 41)
was more wonderful than the miracle
now wrought. The purpose of the
miracle seems to have been to deepen
and strengthen the faith of those whom
Christ now called to engage in spiritual
labours, to secure obedience to that call,
and to give intimation of splendid
success in pursuing that higher work.
Observe that Jesus calls these men
to have more than faith, to give up
their secular employment and to engage
in work of a sacred kind. As they are
not yet appointed to be apostles, their
status is very similar to that of the
Christian minister.—Grodet.


The Training of the Apostles, —
“Christ selected rough mechanics—


136


persons not only destitute of learning,
but inferior in capacity—that He might
train, or rather renew, them by the
power of His Spirit, so as to excel all
the wise men of the world” (Calvin).
No one need imagine that want of
learning and ability are not drawbacks
in the case of those who wish to become
Christian ministers. Only a gross and
ignorant fanaticism could foster such
an idea. ‘These fishermen were not
called to teach, but to be trained to
teach. What they learned from the
example and teaching of Christ, from
knowledge of human character and
society as they went up and down the
country with Him, prepared them for
their great work. The various kinds
of training our theological students are ©
exercised in, are the best and most
efficient substitutes which can be found
for the methods employed in the case
of the apostles.


Ver. 11. “ Forsook all.”—They re-
turned again to their occupation as
fishermen after the Crucifixion, and were
again called to abandon it and devote
themselves to spiritual labours by a
second miraculous draught of fishes
and by the direct precept of Jesus.
After Pentecost they never resumed
their former secular calling. Probably
in their going back to it we have an
indication of their belief that with the
death of Jesus all the hopes they had
cherished were overthrown, and His
call to them to become fishers of men
nullified. The example of Simon Peter
suggests the duties of (1) prompt obe-
dience to Jesus, (2) self-distrust, (3) and
complete devotion to Him (“leaving
all to follow Him ”).


“Thou hast the art on’t, Peter, and canst
tell
To cast thy net on all occasions well.
When Christ calls, and thy nets would
have thee stay,
To cast them well’s to cast them quite
away ” (Crashan).


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. V.





MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 12—16.


“* Be clean: be silent.”—The Mosaic law, which banished the leper from camp
and city, which compelled him to go with bare head and rent garment, as one
who mourned his own death, and to ery, “ Unclean, unclean!” so often as he
approached the haunts of men, was not a sanitary precaution, but a dramatic
religious parable setting forth God’s hatred for the various forms of disease and
death which spring from sin. Those afflicted by this disease were doubly
_ burdened—they were the prey of the most loathsome of all physical maladies,
and were living emblems of the disastrous effects of sin and of God’s anger
against it. Hence we can understand the intense longing with which this leper
entreated to be cured, and the compassion of the Saviour for one in his pitiable
condition. Note :—

I. The astonishing and sublime faith of the leper—* Full of leprosy,” he
draws near to Jesus with the cry, “ Lord, if Thou wilt, Thou canst make me
clean.” Jesus had not long begun His public ministry. He had only just
delivered the Sermon on the Mount. He had not fully showed Himself unto
Israel. The leper could not possibly have heard many of His words, or have
seen many of His works. He may have sat on the mountain, apart from the
the groups which gathered immediately round Jesus, and may have heard the
divinest words which ever fell from human lips. But a great multitude had
also heard them. Yet none but the leper seems to have felt that He who spake
as never man spake must be more than man—the Lord from heaven. He does
not hesitate to address Christ as “Lord”; nay, he worships this ‘“ Lord” as
God. He kneels down, and falls on his face before Him, as though seeing in
Him a divine and ineffable majesty. He has no doubt of Christ’s power to
heal a disease which was yet beyond the scope of human power. But he is.
humble; he refers himself solely to the pure and kindly will of Christ, leaves the
decision to Him, and is prepared to accept it, whatever it may be.

-II. The compassion of Christ.“ Moved with compassion ” (Mark i. 41), “‘ He
put forth His hand and touched him.” To touch a leper was to become a leper
in the eye of the law and of the priests. So that to heal a leper Christ became
a leper, just as to save sinners He who knew no sin became sin for us. What
comfort was in that touch, and what promise! For how should Christ take him
by the hand and not heal him? how bid him rise, and lift him from the dust,
without also raising him from death to life? The touch of Christ was His
response to the leper’s worship: the words He speaks respond to the leper’s
prayer. ‘Lord, if Thou wilt, Thou canst make me clean.” “TI will: be thou
clean.” Word answers to word: the response of Christ is a mere echo of the
leper’s prayer. And so when we cry, “ Make us clean,” God always answers,
“ Be thou clean.” But that is not always the answer we hear or seem to hear.
We often ask God to create a clean heart within us when He can only cleanse
our hearts with a torrent of affliction or with bitter tears of repentance.

TI. Our Lord’s command.—“ To tell no man, and to show himself to the priests.”
We should have thought that the man’s first duty was not to hold his peace, but
to tell every man he met what a great Saviour he had found, and to urge them
to repair to the Healer, in order that they too might be made whole. Perhaps
after all, in spite of the opinion of many good men in the present day, it is not
every convert’s first and great duty to bear verbal witness to the Saviour who
has redeemed him. One of the reasons for this command was, doubtless, that
our Lord did not as yet wish to draw on Himself the public attention. It was
perilous to the higher objects of His mission that the people of Galilee, ignorant
‘and sensual in their thoughts, should crowd round Him, and try to make Him


137


CHAP. V. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





by force the sort of king He would not be. And, therefore, for a time He set
Himself to repress the eager zeal of his converts and disciples. Another and
more special reason was, that He wished the leper to discharge a special duty,
viz. to bear “‘a testimony to the priests.” He cared for the absent priests
in distant Jerusalem, no less than for the leper’s immediate neighbours in
Galilee. As yet the priests were prejudiced against Him. They thought of
Him as a zealot, a fanatic, who in cleansing the Temple had swept away
corruptions at which they connived, by which they had profited. The testimony
He wished to send them could hardly have failed to make a deep and auspicious
impression on their minds. Jesus would fain have brought them all to a
knowledge of the truth and a better mind. And then, too, His deference to
their priestly authority could hardly have failed to propitiate them, and to
convince them that He was bent on establishing the law, not on making it void.

IV. The leper’s blended obedience and disobedience to the command.—By
lingering on the way and prating to every man he met, it is likely that confused
and misleading rumours concerning the miracle would travel before him, and
his message would lose much of its value. Till the priests have pronounced him
clean, he was a leper in the eye of the law, and had no right to enter the cities
and talk with men. If he assumed that he was clean before they pronounced
him clean, they would infer that both he and Christ were wanting in respect
both to them and to the law. All the grace, all the courtesy and deference, of
our Lord’s act would be cast away, and the special value and force of the
testimony to the priests would be impaired, if not lost. Obviously, he thought
to honour Christ by “much publishing” what He had done. Yet to what good
end did he honour Christ with his tongue, while he dishonoured by disobeying
Him in his life. Let us take the warning, and be “swift to hear, slow to
speak.” Much talk about religion—and especially about the externals of religion,
about miracles and proofs, about ceremonies or the affairs of the Church—so far
from strengthening the spirit of devotion, is perilously apt to weaken it. There
are few who are strong enough to talk as well as to act. A great faith such as
this leper’s is not always a patient, submissive faith. No doubt he would have
found it much easier to lay down his life for Christ’s sake than to hold his
tongue for Christ’s sake, just as Naaman would have found it easier to “do
some great thing” than simply to bathe in the Jordan. Yet we need not think
too hardly of him because he could not refrain his tongue. The man who can
rule that member is a perfect man, for his faith covers his whole life down to
its lightest action.—Cox.


The Leper and the Lord.

' I. The leper’s cry.—There is a keen sense of misery. This impels him to
passionate desire for healing. How this contrasts with the indifference of men
as to soul-cleansing! 1. Note his confidence. He was sure of Christ’s power to
heal. 2. Note his dowbt. He is uncertain as to Christ’s willingness. He has no
right to presume on it. Therefore he comes with a modest prayer, breathing
entreaty quite as much as doubt. The leper’s doubt is our certainty. We know
the principle on which Christ’s mercy flows.

IJ. The Lord’s answer.—Show Him misery, and He answers with pity.
Christ’s touch accompanies His compassion. Those who would heal “lepers”
must “touch” them. Christ’s word accompanies His touch. A word of dignity
and conscious power, curt, authoritative, imperative.

III. The immediate cure.—‘ Straightway.” The healing of the leprosy of
sin may be equally immediate. Forgiveness may be the act of a moment, though
the conquering of sin be gradual and life-long. Do not suspect, but expect,
immediate conversions.—Maclaren.


138


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


OHAP. V.





SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 12—16.


Ver. 12. Leprosy is Typical of Sin.

I. In virtue of its repulsiveness. .

Il. As suggesting impurity or defile-
ment.

III. As leading to
separation.— Laidlaw.


isolation or


Leprosy a Symbol of Divine Anger.—
Leprosy was the most frightful of all
diseases, and was regarded by the Jews
with special horror, as a symbol of
God’s wrath against sin. In Jewish
history we read of it as having been
directly inflicted by God in punishment
of (1) rebellion (Miriam—Num. xii.),
(2) lying (Gehazi—2 Kings v. 27), and
(3) presumption (Uzziah—-2 Chron.
xxvi. 19). The sufferings of the leper
arose (1) from the physical malady,
which gradually and slowly consumed
the body, and could neither be cure] nor
alleviated by human skill, and (2) from
the ceremonial defilement which it in-
volved, and which both excluded him
from the Temple and imposed upon
him separation from human society.
We read of these unhappy outcasts as
gathering together into companies out-
side towns (2 Kings vi. 3; Luke
xvii. 12). Leprosy is taken as a symbol
of the depth of spiritual defilement
and death in Ps. li. 7 and Isa. i. 6.
“Leprosy ‘was nothing short of a
living death, a corrupting of all the
humours, a poisoning of the very
springs of life, a dissolution little by
little of the whole body, so that one
limb after another actually decayed
and fell away (Z'rench).


Leprosy and Death.—The leper was
the type of one dead in sin: the same
emblems are used in his misery as
those of mourning for the dead; the
same means of cleansing as for unclean-
ness in connection with death, and
which were never used except on these
two occasions.—A (ford.


Human Nature typified by this Leper.
—Leprosy was to the body what sin


is to the soul. Christ heals the leper
by His touch. Human nature was
typified by this leper. Christ healed
us all by His touch. He touched us
by taking our nature (Heb. ii. 16), and
thus cleansed us —Wordsworth.


“ Fell on his face.”—By this act of
reverence we should not necessarily be
led to suppose that this sufferer knew
Jesus as a Divine being; but taken
in connection with his belief in our
Saviour’s omnipotence, and his use
of the title “ Lord,” it indicates that
genuine worship was now offered to
Christ and accepted by Him.


“ Tf Thow wilt, Thou canst.” —He was
convinced of Christ’s power, but not
sure whether He would cleanse this
sickness, as evidently this was the
first case of leprosy which our Lord
had been asked to cure.


“ Make me clean.”

I. The prayer of faith No doubt
of Christ’s ability to heal him. The
only question is—Is Christ willing to
help him? The prayer shows acqui-
escence as well as humility.

Il. A prayer for physical blessing.
—In such things we never can know
what is really best for us. Threatened
death, or loss of property. Are we to
pray to have these averted? We are
never sure. We must in such temporal
emergencies ever say, “If Thou wilt,
Thou canst.” —Miller.


An Exemplary Prayer.—Whether
the leper consciously meant it or not,
his words, “If Thou wilt, Thou canst
make me clean,” are quite in the
spirit of prayer as Christ has taught
it to us and exemplified it Himself.
It was a prayer for a temporal blessing
—the restoration of his health, and
is made conditional upon the will of
the Lord. So is it with all temporal
blessings. We may desire them
earnestly and ask for them from God,


139


OHAP. V.


but leave the bestowal or withholding
of them to His gracious will. We
accept this as the condition of prayer,
because we feel that God in His
wisdom knows better than we do
what would be best for us. But no
such condition attaches to prayers we
offer for spiritual blessings, for we can
be perfectly sure that all such are
good for us. And we see that Christ
Himself, in offering the prayer in the
Garden of Gethsemane to be saved
from death (Heb. v. 7), left the grant-
ing of His request to be determined by
the will of God (chap. xxii. 42). The
same recognition of the Divine power
to fulfil the prayers of the afflicted,
together with an equally calm resigna-
tion to the will of God, whatever it
may be, are to be found in Dan. ii.
17, 18, and 2 Sam. xv. 25, 26.


Christ's Omnipotence.—Christ’s om-
nipotence is the first attribute that
impresses a spectator of His life and
work: His calm bearing and air of
authority produce a deep impression ;
His infinite goodness and compassion
can only be fully realised as He be-
comes better known by us. Both
anxiety and faith are manifest in this
leper’s words.


Ver. 13. “ Jesus touched him.”

I. None of the Jews would have
done this.—He was a leper. They
kept lepers afar off, for fear of defile-
ment. Jesus was not afraid of defile-
ment. He could have healel him
without a touch. But the man needed
the touch of a warm hand to assure
him of sympathy. Many wish to do
Christian work from a _ distance—
through agents and committees. It
is much better to come close to those
we wish to benefit. There is a won-
drous power in a human touch. You
put something of yourself into your
gift.

IT. The touch left no taint of defile-
ment on Christ.—It left the leprous
body clean without making the Healer
leprous. There is no danger in touch-
ing the lowest outcasts, if you go to


140


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


them with God’s love in your heart,
and yearning to do good. Do not slip_
your tract under the door and hurry
away as if you were afraid or ashamed.
Go inside these homes. It will not
soil your hand to clasp the hands
of the poor. You will both bless and
be blessed in the deed. —Miller.


Christ's Union with our Nature.—
When He took upon Him our flesh,
He did not only deign to touch us
with His hand, but was united to
one and the same body with ourselves,
that we might be flesh of His flesh._—
Calvin.


“ Be thou clean.” — Such an impera-
tive as the tongue of man had never
hitherto uttered. Thus has hitherto
no prophet healed. Thus He speaks
in the might of God who speaks and
it is done” (Stier). Contrast with
Christ’s words those used by St. Peter
in Acts iii. 6, 12.


Answers to Prayer.—The leper had
known that Christ was able to heal
him; now he knew that Christ was
willing to do so. In his case there was
no delay between the offering of the
prayer and the gift of the blessing
asked. But in our experience there
may be delay in our receiving the
blessing we crave. There may lie
between the majestic and merciful
words ‘‘T will” and the visible result
sometimes weeks and years. The
prayer of faith our Lord hears at
once, and He gives the soul assurance
of having been heard through the
Holy Spirit ; but the fulfilment of the
prayer He often accomplishes only
after a long time, and by the delay
He would prepare us for a greater
benefit than that for which we asked.
In the holy sacraments which appeal
to our senses we have Christ stretching
forth His hands to touch and cleanse
the soul.


Ver, 14. “ 7 tell no man.”—The soul
that has received blessing from God,
and is conscious of it, is apt to lose the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


freshness and beauty of its spiritual
life by talking too freely to others of
its secret experiences, just as a rose
sprinkled with dew loses something
of its fresness when it is plucked
and passed from hand to hand. We
are instinctively slow to speak of the
things that touch us deeply, and a
certain hardness and coarseness are
observable in the character of those
who are ready to speak of their deepest
spiritual experiences to those who are
willing to listen to them. No one
can, indeed, receive great spiritual
benefits from God without revealing
the fact to others, but the unconscious
testimony of a humble, devout life is
often far more eloquent than words
that come too readily from the lips.


“To tell no man.’—Besides the
reason suggested above in the Critical
Notes, Christ may have intended that
the man who had been cleansed should
lose no time in proceeding to the
Temple—should go on this errand
“ without saluting any by the way”
or pausing to tell about his cure. The
reasons for the journey: 1. Obedience
to the Mosaic regulations concerning
leprosy. 2. The expression of grati-
tude to God for the benefit received.
3. That the priests might learn, and
by their examination of the person
cleansed attest, that a mighty work had
been wrought by the power of God.


“Testimony.” —The priests and people
of Jerusalem were inclined to be hostile
towards Christ: the effect of this
miracle notifiel to them should have
been to produce faith in Jesus. It was
now a testimony to them; it might,
in case of persistent unbelief, become
a testimony against them.


The Kings Touch.—This King’s
touch cures all sorts of diseases. It did
so while He walked in a low, despised
condition on earth; and it does so still
by that virtual Divine power now that
He is in heaven. And although His
glory there is greater, His compassion
is not less than when He was here;


ClLAP. V.


and His compassion always was, and
is, directed much more to souls dis-
eased than to bodies, as they are better
and more valuable.—Leighton.


Superstitious Inferences from the
Narrative.—The use made of this pass-
age by Roman Catholic theologians
in support of confession to. priests and
the observance of penance seems far-
fetched. It is not the priests who
heal, but Christ: they merely attest
the fact, and their doing so is simply
because of their administration of laws
partly ceremonial and partly sanitary,
which are now abolished. There is no
record of powers corresponding to theirs
being instituted in connection with the
ministers of the Christian religion.


Ver. 15. Grateful, but disobedient.—
St. Mark informs us that the man
who had been cleansed disobeyed the
strict injunction of Christ and “ blazed
abroad the matter.” His disobedience
was culpable, though natural. His joy
at recovering health must have been
very intense, and his instinctive feelings
must have led him to say, like the
psalmist, “Come ye and hear, all ye
who fear God, and I will declare what
He hath done for my soul” (Ps. lxvi. 16).
As a result, however, of his impulsive
conduct, Christ was incommoded in His
work by the multitudes that thronged
to Him to be healed of their infirmities.


What the Miracles of Healing were.—
Our Lord’s miracles of healing may be
regarded—

I. As proofs of His Divine mission,
His Messiahship, and His divinity.

II. As a means of disarming pre-
judice, and thereby securing a favour-
able recep tion for His teachings.

III. As encouregements to believing
prayer under the ordinary trials of life.

IV. As emblems of the spiritual
blessings which He bestows.

V. As examples to be copied by His
disciples in all time.— Johnston.


Vers. 15, 16. “ Great multitudes came
together... and He withdrew Himself.”


141


CHAP. V.





I. The first cleansing of a leper was
a trumpet-call to all sufferers to flock
to the Emmanuel presence.

II. But He, whose praise was on all
lips, and who was liimself the holy
centre of all these activities and all
these mercies, ‘“ withdrew ... and
prayed.” It was not one withdrawal,
one wilderness, one prayer (all is
plural in the original): the withdrawals
were repeated, the wildernesses were
more than one, the prayers were
habitual. Solitary prayer was His
custom. Is it ours? Does not the
question humble us? Prayer divided
His life with teaching and healing.
We too need the desert. It is not safe
to have the world always with us.—
Vaughan.


The Prayers of Christ.

I. How different from ours!—No
confession of sin. That topic was a
blankto Him. No need of forgiveness.

II. How real His prayers !—For
strength. How often is it said, “ He
looked up to heaven”! ‘Father, I
thank Thee!” There was no acting,
no feigning, in His devotions. He really
prayed, and was really answered.
Prayer was no luxury, no self-indulg-
ence.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





III. How continual His prayers !—
He was ever withdrawing Himself
from human sight and contact. Do
we not need like withdrawings, and
more of them ?—Jbzd.


Ver. 16. “ Withdrew Himself into the
wilderness.” —By solitary communion
with God and by holy meditation even
Jesus was strengthened. It is a proof
of the completeness of His assimilation
to us that He sought and found help
by those means of grace which are at
our service. Could any argument for
the duty of prayer to God be stronger
than this which is afforded by the
example of Christ? If He found
prayer a necessity of His life, how
much more should we!


A Testimony to the Truthfulness of the
Gospels.—The insertion of this reference
to Christ’s prayers is a testimony to the
truthfulness of the Gospels. Had the
writers invented the stories of His
miraculous powers, and aimed at repre-
senting Him as altogether a super-
natural being, the ideas of humility
and dependence upon God, which prayer
implies, would have seemed to them
foreign and contradictory to their
purpose.





'


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 17—26.


Christ's Claim to forgive, and its Attestations—The important part of this
story is not the miracle, but the forgiveness preceding it, and the teaching
as to the relation between the invisible and perpetual work of Christ on men’s
consciences and His visible work on their outward condition.

I. The first thought suggested is—that our deepest need is forgiveness.
Christ’s answer to the faith He discerned here seems irrelevant and _ beside
the mark. “Man, thy sins are forgiven thee,” was far away from the wishes
of the bearers ; but it was the shortest road to their accomplishment, and goes
straight to the heart of the case. Probably the sick man felt that, whatever
his friends wanted for him, what he wanted most for himself was pardon. And
forgiveness is our prime need. A man’s relation to God is the most important
thing. If that is wrong, everything is wrong. The consciousness that we have
sinned is the source of all sorrow ; for the most of our misery comes either from
our own or others’ wrong-doing, and the rest is needful because of sin, in order
to discipline and purify. Hence the profound wisdom of Christ and of His
gospel in not trifling with the surface, but going right to the centre. The
wise physician pays little heed to secondary symptoms, but grapples with the
disease. Christ makes the tree good, and trusts the good tree to make, as

142


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. V.





it will, good fruit. The first thing to do, in order to heal men’s misery, is
to make them pure, and the first step towards that is to assure them of Divine
forgiveness. All other attempts to deliver men will fail if this deepest wound
be not deajt with first.

II. Forgiveness is an exclusively Divine act.—Those who now in their
hearts accused Christ of blasphemy were quite right in believing that forgive-
ness is God’s prerogative. “Sin” has to do with God only; vice has to do
with morality; crime has to do with human law; and the same act may be
regarded in any one of these three aspects, When regarded as sin, only He
against whom it has been committed can forgive it. Forgiveness is mainly
that the love of the offended shall flow to the offender, notwithstanding the
offence. It is love rising above the dam which we have flung across its course,
and pouring into our hearts. The essence of forgiveness is not the suspension
of penalty, but the unchecked and unembittered gift of God’s love to the sinner.
This is what we need, and we need to have a definite Divine declaration of it.
A vague trust in the possible mercy of a silent God is not enough: we need
to hear with infallible certitude the assurance of forgiveness.

III. Jesus claims and exercises the Divine prerogative of forgiveness.—Had
He been a mere man, His critics would have been justified in bringing the
charge of blasphemy against Him. And he would have been bound, as a
religious teacher and as a devout man, to disdain any intention of usurping
the Divine prerogative. But He recognises their premises, and then asserts
that He, the Son of man, has the power which they and He agree in acknow-
ledging to belong to God only. “No man can forgive sins, but God only.
I forgive sins. Whom think ye that I, the Son of man, am?” Surely we
are here brought face to face with a very sharp alternative: either Jesus was
an audacious blasphemer, or He was God manifest in the flesh. The whole
context forbids us to take these words, ‘‘ Thy sins are forgiven thee,” as anything
less than Divine love wiping out the man’s transgressions; and if Jesus Christ
said them, no hypothesis can save His character for the undiminished reverence
of the world but that which sees in Him God revealed in manhood, the Son
of man, who is the Son of God, the Judge of men, and their Pardoner.

IV. Jesus Christ brings visible facts to attest His invisible power.—The
sentences, “ Thy sins are forgiven thee,” and “ Arise, and take up thy couch,”
are equally easy to pronounce; the fulfilments of them are equally impossible
for a man to bring about; but the difference between them is that the one
can be checked, and the other cannot. He will do the visible impossibility,
and leave them to judge whether He can do the invisible one or not. Of course
the miracle was a witness to His right to assume the Divine prerogative,
and to the efficacy of His announcement of forgiveness, only if He did it (as
He assumed to give pardon) by virtue of His being in an altogether unique
way the wielder of Divine power. If He did the one as a mere minister and
recipient of that power, as a Moses or an Elijah, He must do the other in
the same way, i.e. merely declare that God had forgiven the sinner. But
the very stamp on all His miracles is that they are His in a fashion which
is perfectly unique. True, “the Father that dwelleth in Me, He doeth the
works”; but that dwelling of the Father in Him was unexampled, and pre-
supposed His own divinity. Note, then, that our Lord here teaches us the
power of His miracles as evidences of His Deity, and sets forth lucidly the
relative importance of the miracle and of the inward forgiveness which it attests.
The miracle is subordinate to the higher and the permanent work of bringing
pardon and peace to sinners.

The subsidiary, visible effects of the gospel constitute very strong evidence
of the reality of Christ’s claims to exercise the invisible power of pardon. Men


143


CHAP. V.


!


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





reclaimed, passions tamed, homes made, instead of pandemoniums, houses of
God, are proofs that the forgiveness which He gives is no mere delusion.—


Maclaren.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 7—26.


Vers. 17-26. Christ forgiving Sin.

I. Sin and disease.—Christ forgave
the sin first, showing that He regarded
it as having come first, the disease
being in some measure the result of
sin. There is punishment for sin in
this life. If not seen in the physical
frame, it is seen in the deadened con-
science, the hardened heart.

II. Faith and forgiveness.—The
man knew that he needed healing, and
believed that Christ could and would
heal him. If he did not yet fully
admit that sin was at the root of his
ailment, Christ’s words settled that,
and he confessed it in his heart. Sin
injures not only man, but God. David
said, “Against Thee only have I
sinned,” though he had sinned against
others, and against himself. This sin
entails the burden of guilt. This bur-
den can be cleared away. Sin’s worst
effect can be, and at a great cost has
been, removed. It is as easy to say,
“ Thy sins be forgiven thee,” as to say,
“ Rise up, and walk.” But the first
is harder to accomplish. Nature never
forgives—is merciless to those who get
in her way. Man cannot forgive com-
pletely : only God can so forgive as to
restore love and confidence. But it is
not easy even for God todo so. Should
we not value forgiveness all the more ?
It is a blessing greater and better than
bodily healing.— Hastings.


Ver. 17. “ Pharisees and doctors of the
law sitting by.” —I.e. occupying places
of honour and pre-eminence ; seated as
critics to judge the teaching and actions
of Jesus. Their want of sympathy
with Him and their prejudices soon
brought them into collision with Him.
We can only truly learn of Christ
and understand Him by abandoning
the attitude of critics, and taking up
that of humble, childlike faith. Th


144


power to heal was present with Christ,
yet it was only faith that could give
it free scope. Such faith was mani-
fested in the incident that follows.


Ver. 18.
Burdens.

I. This is the kind of help we ought
to render to each other.—There are
many all around us needing such aid.

Il. There are many ways of doing
this neighbourly duty.

III. There was co-operation in this
work.—One could not have done this
work. It needed four. United, they
had no difficulty. So it is in helping
sinners to Christ. There is strength
in the union of hearts and hands,
when one alone cannot take his friend
to the Saviour.— Miller.


Bearing one another's


Intercession for Others.—It is clear
that the faith of those who carried
him was helpful to the sick man
and specially moved our Saviour. It
is true that the wise virgins cannot
lend ther oil to those who have it
not—that no one is saved through
the faith and prayers of another,
if he does not himself believe. But
there is a place for intercession for
others. A believing heart can by
prayer an: supplication prevail with
God to give another a new heart and
faith. The words of Ambrose to
Monica, grieving over the sins of her
son Augustine, beautifully express this
truth : “Tt is impossible that so many
tears from a believing heart should be
in vain. You will see that God will
melt the heart of the son of thy tears,
and bring him to repentance and faith.”
And it happened as the bishop had said.


Ver. 19. “ Let him down through the
tiling."—A. fine illustration of the
saying, “The kingdom of heaven suf-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. V.


a a Ly


fereth violence, and the violent take
it by force” (Matt. xi. 12).


Ver. 20? Their Faith.—Which per-
sisted in spite of obstacles until the
sick man was brought into His pre-
sence. The holy boldness manifested
could not but please Him. It is in-
teresting to observe that the faith
of the bearers is of a kind Christ
approves and rewards : this fact should
encourage us in making intercession
for others. So far as appears the
sufferer was entirely passive, and
offered no petition for himself. In
answer to the question, How far do
men derive benefit from the faith of
others, Calvin says, “ It is certain that
the faith of Abraham was of advantage
for his posterity when he embraced the
free covenant offered to him and to his
seed. We must hold a similar belief
with regard to all believers, that, by
their faith, the grace of God is ex-
tended to their children and their
children’s children, even before they are
born. It is also beyond all question
that earthly blessings are often, for
the sake of the godly, bestowed on
unbelievers.”


Faith seen in Works.—The efforts of
the sick man’s friends told of—

I. A very strong faith.—The best
evidence of faith is the effort we make
to obtain faith’s prize. There is no
need of words or protestations where
acts of faith attest its existence.

II. Christ sees faith.—He sees it in
the heart where it is exercised, before
there has been any expression of it in
word or act; but the emphasis here
lies on the fact that He sees it in act,
and is pleased when it is evidenced by
works. He hears wordless prayers;
but where possible prayer should em-
body itself in act. God wants to see
our faith.— Miller.


“ Thy sins are forgiven thee.” —It is
evident that while the thoughts of his
friends were bent upon the cure of his
physical malady, the man himself was
chiefly concerned about his spiritual


state. He seems, too, to have been
desponcent, if not despairing, since
Christ’s first words to him, as St.
Matthew says (ix. 2), were, “Son, be
of good cheer.” From the word “son”
(lit. “‘ child), we understand that he
was but young in years. Probably
the reference to his sins before the
cure is wrought is to be explained by
the disease being the consequence of
sinful courses.


A Declaration of Forgiveness.—The
absolving words are not optative only,
no mere desire that so it might be,
but declaratory that so it was: the
man’s sins were forgiven. Nor yet
were they declaratory only’of some-
thing which passed in the mind and
intention of God; but, even as the
words were spoken, there was shed
abroad in his heart the sense of for-
giveness and of reconciliation with God.
—T'rench.


Forgiveness of Sin and Remission of
Penalty.—An interval took place, there-
fore, between the forgiveness of sin and
the remission of the penalty which sin
had brought. In this case it was but
a short interval. In many other in-
stances men have to bear for long, and
perhaps while they live, the penal
consequences of their sins, even though
they have obtained forgiveness. But
in their case there is this compensation,
that the displeasure of God being re-
moved, their sufferings are no longer
punishments.





Ver. 21. “ Speaketh blasphemies.”—
From their point of view, since they
regarded Christ as a mere man, the
objection raised by the scribes and
Pharisees was perfectly justifiable.
Their fault lay in the culpable spiritual
blindness which hindered their recogni-
tion of His Divine glory.


Blasphemy.—Profane antiquity was
unacquainted with the profound
Biblical meaning of “ blasphemy.” ‘In
the sense in which they viewed it, it
only signifies, first, to speak evil cf


145


CHAP. V.


any one ; and secondly, to utter words
of evil foreboding. Monotheism alone


leads to the true notion of blasphemy, |


which denotes not only imprecations,
and injurious words against God, but
more especially the assumption on the
part of the creature of the honour
belonging to the Creator (John x. 33).
—Olshausen.


Of what this Sin consists. Blasphemy
is when (1) unworthy things are
ascribed to God, (2) when the honour
due to Him is withheld, and (3) when
that which is specially His is conferred
upon those to whom it does not belong.
— Bengel.


All Sins are against God.—They
are against God only (Ps. li. 4).
They may be injuries and cruelties to
others, but, as sins, they are relative
to God only. And hence God only can
forgive them.—WMorison.


Absolution.—The belief in a human
absolving power retains a pertinacious
hold upon mankind. The savage
believes that his priest can shield him
from the consequences of sin. There
was not a people in antiquity who had
not dispensers of Divine favour. That
same belief passed from Paganism into
Romanism. It was exposed at the
period of the Reformation: the whole
idea of a human priesthood was proved
baseless, human mediation was vehe-
mently controverted, and men were
referred back to God as the sole
absolver. Yet still now again, three
centuries after, the belief is as strong
as ever. The question is not solved by
merely denying the error. ‘The heart
craves human assurance of forgiveness,
and can only be satisfied by positive
truth.

I. The impotency of the negation.
—‘ None can forgive sins, but God
only.” The Pharisees denied the
efficacy of human absolution :.but what
did they effect by such denial? They
conferred no peace; they produced no
holiness, They were startled at hear-
ing a men freely announcing forgive-


146


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


ness. It appeared to them licence
given to sin. If this new Teacher were
to go about the land telling sinners to
be at peace, to forget the past and
to work onwards, bidding men’s con-
sciences be at rest, and commanding
them not to fear the God whom they
had offended, but to trust in Him,
what would become of morality and
religion? What remained to restrain
them from sin? For to dread God, and
not to love and trust Him, was their
conception of religion. Another class
of men, the scribes, also denied human
power of absolution. They were men
of ponderous learning and accurate
definitions. They could define. the
exact number of yards that might be
travelled on the Sabbath day without
infringement of the law; they could
decide the respective importance of
each duty, and tell which was the great
commandment of the law. The scribe
is the man who turns religion into
etiquette ; his idea of God is that of a
monarch, transgression against whom
is an offence against statute law ; and
he, the scribe, is there to explain the
prescribed conditions upon which the
offence may be expiated. And there
are scribes in the present day, who
have no idea of God but as an incensed
judge, and prescribe certain methods
of appeasing Him —certain prices—in
consideration of which He is willing to
sell forgiveness. What wonder is it
that many should cry, “You have
restricted God’s love and narrowed
the path to heaven : you have terrified
me with so many snares and pitfalls, on
every side, that I dare not tread at all.
Give me peace ; give me human guid-
ance: I want a human arm to lean on.”

II. The power of the positive truth.
—What is forgiveness? It is God
reconciled to us. What is absolution ?
It is the authoritative declaration that
God is reconciled. Authoritative—that
is, a real power of conveying a sense
and feeling of forgiveness. It is the
power of the Son of man on earth to
forgive sins. It is man, God’s image,
representing by his forgiveness on
earth God’s forgiveness in heaven.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:





Absolution is the conveyance to the
conscience of the conviction of forgive
ness; to absolve is to free—to comfort
by strengtHening—to afford repose from
fear. The Saviour emancipated from
sin by the freeness of absolution. The
moment the sinner’s feelings changed
towards God, He proclaimed that
God was reconciled to him. Hence
came His wondrous power with sinful,
erring hearts; hence the life and fresh
impulse which He imparted to the
being and experience of those with
whom He dealt. The absolving power
is the central secret of the gospel.
Salvation is unconditional: not an
offer, but a gift; not clogged with
conditions, but free as the air we
breathe. And the power Christ exer-
cised of declaring forgiveness He
delegated to His Church: ‘ Whoseso-
ever sins ye remit, they are remitted.”
An example of the use of this power
is given in 2 Cor. ii. 10. The apostle
absolves a man because the congre-
gation absolved him ; not as a pleni-
potentiary supernaturally gifted to
convey a mysterious benefit, but as
himself an organ and representative
of the Church. The power of absolu-
tion, therefore, belonged to the Church,
and to the apostle through the Church.
It was a power belonging to all
Christians: to the apostle, because he
was a Christian, not because he was
an apostle. A priestly power, no
doubt, because Christ has made all
Christians kings and priests. By
every magnanimous act, by every free
forgiveness with which a pure man
forgives, or pleads for mercy, or assures
the penitent, he proclaims this truth,
that ‘the Son of man hath power on
earth to forgive sins ”—he exhibits the
priestly power of humanity—he does
absolve: let theology say what it will
of absolution, he gives peace to the
conscience—he is a type and assurance
of what God is—he breaks the chains
and lets the captive go free.— Robertson.


A Delayed Cure.—It seems hard that
the “doctors of the law” should be
permitted to interpose,


Sil LOK, CHAP. V.


I. But it was good for them that the
cure was delayed till they had fixed on
a test by which they would try Jesus,
until He had reduced their doubts to a
single, definite issue, and then triumph-
antly encountered it. And—

II. And it was good for the paralytic
himself.—It gave him time to reflect
on the gracious words, “Thy sins are
forgiven thee”—to feel their power, to
lay their comfort to heart. God will
often delay to grant our prayers, because
He loves us, because He wishes to
assure us that we are really His.—Coe.


The Inward certified by the Outward.
—The Saviour, in the most felicitous
manner imaginable, brings the case
to the simplest of issues. There was
no need for any long discussion. The
whole matter could be settled with a
few words. The inward could be certi-
fied by the outward, without any
circumlocution ; the upward could be
reflected by the downward, immedi-
ately ; the invisible could be manifested
in the visible, just at once. And if,
therefore, it would be more satisfactory
to them, or would carry more of the
evidence of Divine authority, He could
speak a few words of fiat in reference
to the visible, and downward, and out-
ward; and He would do that just as
easily as He had authoritatively said,
Thy sins have been forgiven. They
might call in question His authority to
say, Thy sins have been forgiven, inas-
much as they could not actually see the
dismissal of the sins. But if when He
said, Arise, take up thy bed, and walk,
they could see with their eyes that
the fiat was fulfilled, then surely they
would have no just reason for calling
in question the fulness of the Divine
authority that was behind all that He
was saying and doing.—J/orison.


Ver. 22. “ Perceived their thoughts.”
—The supernatural insight of Christ
is plainly indicated in this narrative.
The secret thoughts of men lie open to
Him. (1) He recognises the penitence
and faith of the sufferer, though He
speaks no word, and (2) He perceives


147


CHAP. V. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


and follows out the reasonings of the
unbelieving scribes and Pharisees,


Ver. 23. ‘ Whether is easier,” etc.— ~


That is to utter words which lead to
no visible consequences, or to utter
words which are meant to disturb the
visible course of nature? Our Lord
does not compare the acts themselves,
but the safety of claiming the power
to perform them.—Burgon.


Ver. 24. “ But that ye may know.” —
The miracle was meant not only to
reward the faith of those who had
sought this benefit from Christ, but to
convince the unbelieving spectators of
His true power and claims. In it we
may see His mercy toward even those
who were hard of heart and who accused
Him of blasphemy. He would give
them a sign by which they might be
enabled to overcome their’ unbelief.


Christ's Consciousness of Divine
Authority.—How thoroughly conscious
the Saviour must have been of His
Divine authority and power! His whole
influence in the country and the world
at large, in the age and for all ages,


lay trembling as it were in the balance, ©


and perilled so to speak on the result
of His fiat. If failure had been the
result, His humiliation would have
been overwhelming and final. The
supposed blasphemy of His assumption
in reference to the forgiveness of sins
would have been demonstrated. The
triumph of His censors would have
been complete and legitimate. This
being obviously the case, He must have
known, ere He spoke, that there was
really no peril; otherwise, His fiat would
have faltered on His tongue, and would,
indeed, have been utterly irreconcilable
with the lowest degree of prudence, not
to speak of the highest degrees of good
sense and sincerity. —Morison.


“ Power on earth.”—-In the words


148


5


“power on earth” there lies a tacit
opposition to “powerin heaven.” This
power is not exercised as you deem,
ouly by God in heaven, but also by
the Son of man upon earth. You
rightly assert that it is only exercised
by Him who dwelleth in the heavens ;
but He, who, in the person of the Son
of man, has descended also upon earth,
has brought down this power with
Him here.—Trench.


Strength bestowed.— I say unto thee,
Arise !”

J. A strange command.—The man
was paralysed. He was helpless as a


corpse. Why did Jesus require of him
such an impossibility ?

II. As the will obeys power
returns.


III. It is the same in spiritual life.
IV. Strength will not come until
we try to obey.— Miller.


Ver. 25. “Took up that whereor he
lay.” —A mat orcouch. “ The bed had
borne him; now he bears the bed”
(Bengel). There is a touch of triumph
in this description of the full strength
imparted to the paralytic.


Ver. 26. “They glorified God.”—
Nothing is said as to the effect produced
by this miracle upon the unbelieving
scribes and Pharisees ; but we are told
that both the man himself and the
multitude gave glory to God. This
was, indeed, a fulfilment of the effect
Jesus desired to accomplish.


“ Strange things.” —L.e. (1) the claim
to be able to forgive sins, and (2) the
miracle wrought in support of this
claim. The thought must have been
excited in many minds that God would
not have given the power to work this
miracle to one who had really been
guilty of blasphemy or infringed the
Divine prerogative of mercy to sinners,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE, CHAP. V,


— hw sSSSesSSsssSsSsssssssSSSSsSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSshhehesesFe


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 27—32.


The Calltof Matthew.—The call of Matthew signally illustrates a very
prominent feature in the public action of Jesus, viz. His utter disregard of the
maxims of worldly wisdom. A publican disciple, much more a publican apostle,
would not fail to be a stumbling-block to Jewish prejudice, and therefore to be,
for the time at least, a source of weakness rather than of strength. Yet, while
perfectly aware of this fact, Jesus invited to the intimate fellowship of disciple-
hood one who had pursued the occupation of a tax-gatherer, and at a later period
selected him to be one of the twelve. The eye of Jesus was single as well
as omniscient: He looked on the heart, and had respect solely to spiritual
fitness. He had no fear of the drawbacks arising out of the external connections
or past history of true believers, but was entirely indifferent to men’s
antecedents.

I. The call obeyed.—The fact that Matthew, while a publican, resided in
Capernaum, makes it absolutely certain that he knew of Jesus before he was
called. It was not, however, a matter of course that he should become a follower
of Jesus merely because he had heard of, or even seen, His wonderful works.
Miracles of themselves could make no man a believer; otherwise all the people
of Capernaum would have believed. Christ complained of the inhabitants of
Capernaum in particular that they did not repent on witnessing His mighty
works. It was not so with Matthew. He not merely wondered and talked, but
he repented. Whether he had more to repent of than his neighbours we cannot
tell. It is true that he belonged to a class of men who, seen through the
coloured medium of popular prejudice, were all bad alike, and many of whom
were really guilty of fraud and extortion; but he may have keen an exception.
His farewell feast showed that he possessed means, but we must not take for
granted that they were dishonestly earned. This only we may safely say, that
if the publican disciple had been covetous, the spirit of greed was now exorcised ;
if he had ever been guilty of oppressing the poor, he now abhorred such work.
He had grown weary of collecting revenue from a reluctant population, and was
glad to follow One who had come to take burdens off inst:ad of laying them on,
to remit debts instead of exacting them with rigour. And so it came to pass
that the voice of Jesus acted on his heart like a spell: ‘ He left all, rose up, and
followed Him.”

II. The banquet.—The great decision was followed by a feast in Matthew’s
house, at which Jesus was present. It had all the character of a great occasion,
and was given in honour of Jesus. The honour, however, was such as few would
value, for the other guests were peculiar. “There was a great company of
publicans and of others that sat down with them.” The feast was not less rich
in moral significance than in the viands set on the board. For the host himself
it was without doubt a jubilee feast commemorative of his emancipation from
drudgery and uncongenial society and sin, or at all events temptation to sin,
and of his entrance on the free, blessed life of fellowship with Jesus. The feast
was also, as already said, an act of homage to Jesus. Matthew made his splendid
feast in honour of his new Master, as Mary of Bethany shed her precious ointment.
It is the way of those to whom much grace is shown and given to manifest their
grateful love in deeds bearing the stamp of what a Greek philosopher called
magnificence and churls call extravagance ; and whoever might blame such acts
of devotion, Jesus always accepted them with pleasure. The ex-publican’s feast
seems further to have had the character of a farewell entertainment to his fellow-
publicans. He and they were to go different ways henceforth, and he would
part with his old comrades in peace. Once more: we can believe that Matthew


149


OHAP. V. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,





meant his feast to be the means of introducing his friends and neighbours to the
acquaintance of Jesus, seeking, with the characteristic zeal of a young disciple,
to induce others to take the step which he had resolved on himself, or at least
hoping that some sinners present might be drawn from evil ways into the paths of
righteousness. Matthew’s feast was thus, looked at from within, a very joyous,
innocent, and even edifying one. But looked at from without, like stained windows,
it wore a different aspect ; it was, indeed, nothing short of scandalous. Certain
Pharisees observed the company assemble or disperse, noted their character, and
made, after their wont, sinister reflections. Opportunity offering itself, they
asked the disciples of Jesus the at once complimentary and censorious question,
“Why eateth your Master with publicans and sinners?” On various occasions,
when the same charge was made against Him, he returned different answers.
The answer here may be distinguished as the professional argument, and is to
this effect : “I frequent the haunts of sinners, because I am a physician, and
they are sick and need healing. Where should a physician be but among his
patients? where oftenest but among those most grievously afflicted?” Our
Lord’s last words to the persons who called His conduct in question at this
time were not merely apologetic, but judicial. “I came not,” He said, “ to
call the righteous, but sinners”; intimating a purpose to let the self-righteous
alone, and to call to repentance and to the joys of the kingdom those who were
not too self-satisfied to care for the benefits offered, and to whom the gospel feast
would be a real entertainment. The word, in truth, contained a significant hint
of an approaching religious revolution, in which the last should become first and
the first last ; Jewish outcasts, Gentile dogs, made partakers of the joys of the
kingdom, and “ the righteous” shut out. It was one of the pregnant sayings by
which Jesus made known to those who could understand that His religion was
a universal one—a religion for humanity, a gospel for mankind, because a gospel
for sinners. And what this saying declared in word, the conduct it apologised
for proclaimed yet more expressively by deed. It was an ominous thing that
loving sympathy for,“ publicans and sinners ”—the Pharisaic instinct discerned
it to be so, and rightly took the alarm. It meant death to privileged monopolies
of grace and to Jewish pride and exclusivism—all men equal in God’s sight, and
welcome to salvation on the same terms.— Bruce.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 27—32.


Ver. 27. “ Follow Me.”—The special
call to apostleship is recorded in the
case of five only of the twelve: Peter,
Andrew, James, John, and Matthew.
No doubt the other seven in like
manner were selected individually by
Jesus, and called to leave all and follow
Him—a call not given to all disciples.


“A publican.” —Probably Matthew
was one of the subordinate officers be-
longing to Palestine, who were in the
employment of the Roman publicanus,
who farmed the taxes. ‘These inferior
officers were notorious for their im-
pudent exactions everywhere ; but to
the Jews they were specially odious,


150


for they were the very spot where the
Roman chain galled them—the visible
proof of the degraded state of the
nation. As a rule none but the lowest
would accept such an unpopular office,
and thus the class became more
worthy of the hatred with which the
Jews in any case would have regarded
it” (Smith, “ Dictionary of the Bible,”
“ Publican ”).


A Shock to Prejudice——The shock
given to the prejudices of society by
Christ’s choosing a publican to be an
apostle must have been very great.
It was an illustration of the principle
of the Divine action stated by St.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. V.


SS ee Se ee Be ee


Paul—the base things of the world,
and things that are despised, being
chosen to confound the things that are
mighty (1 Gor. i. 26-28).


Matthew “the publican.”—It is
worthy of notice that St. Matthew, in
giving the list of apostles, appends
the words “the publican” to his own
name, as if to mark the lowly estate
he occupied when Christ called him
(x. 3).


“Sitting at the place of toll” (R.V.).—
There sat Matthew the publican, busy
in his counting-house, reckoning up
the sums of his rentals, taking up his
arrearages, and wrangling for denied
duties, and did so little think of a
Saviour that he did not so much as
look at His passage; but Jesus, as
He passed by, saw him.—Hall.


“Went forth, and saw.”—It would
seem to have been an accidental pass-
ing-by—one of those chance meetings
which so often turn the course of a
man’s life, and even that of a nation’s
history. Yet there was nothing acci-
dental in the life of Christ, any more
than there is in our own lives. A
long train of circumstances led up to
this meeting, and found in it a natural
completion. It was in Capernaum
that Matthew lived—the headquarters
of Christ’s public ministry. Matthew
had, no doubt, often seen and heard
Christ : he had known of His mighty
deeds, and of the authority with which
He spoke and acted ; and perhaps the
publican had been slowly making up
his mind as to what his duty towards
Christ was. So that when this moment
came, and the Saviour paused before
him and held up His finger and said
“ Follow Me,” he was ready to obey.
The vague thoughts and feelings took
definite shape: the gesture and word
of His Lord concluded the struggle.
His choice was made—the die was
cast, and he arose and followed Him.
‘Doubtless he immediately made, or
had previously made, every requisite
arrangement for leaving the affairs of


his office, not in confusion, but in order.
Jesus was no patron of confusion. It
is the desire both of God and Jesus
that all things should be done “ decently
and in order” (Morison).


Vers. 27, 28. “ Rose up, and followed
Him.” —That word was enough,
“Follow Me”; spoken by the same
tongue that said to the corpse at Nain,
“Young man, I say to thee, Arise.”
He that said at first, “Let there be
light,” says now, “ Follow Me.” That
power sweetly inclines which could
forcibly command: the force is not


more irresistible than the inclination.


When the sun shines upon the icicles,
can they choose but melt and fall? when
it looks into a dungeon, can the place
choose but to be enlightened? Do
we see the jet drawing up straws to
it, the loadstone iron, and do we marvel
if the omnipotent Saviour, by the
influence of His grace, attract the
heart of a publican? “ He arose, and
fellowed Him.” We are all naturally
averse from thee, O God ; do Thou but
bid us follow Thee, draw us by Thy
powerful word, and we shall run after
Thee. Alas! Thou speakest, and we
sit still; Thou speakest by Thine out-
ward word to our ear, and we stir not.
Speak Thou by the secret and effectual
word of Thy Spirit to our heart, the
world cannot hold us down, Satan
cannot stop our way, we shall arise
and follow Thee.—Hail.


The Privileges and Honours conferred
on Matthew —The skill of Matthew in
using his pen was afterwards to be
employed in writing the first biography
of His Lord and Master: his name,
which had up till now borne a mark
of infamy as that of a publican, was
destined to be inscribed on one of the
foundations of the heavenly Jerusalem
(Rey. xxi. 14).


Ver. 28. The obvious moral of the story
is that.we are none of us beyond the
reach of Christ, none so base but that
He can redeem us, none so hateful but
that He would fain save us. The one


15]


z


CHAP. V.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





fatal thing is to despair of ourselves,
because we despair of His mercy and
its power to recover us. Whatever we
may be, whatever we may have done,
there is in Christ a grace which can
sweep away all our sins, and a saving
health which can redeem us into
spiritual life and vigour, into heavenly
service and rest.—Cow.


Ver. 29. “ Levi made him a great
feast.” —The feast in the house of
Matthew took place evidently a few
days or weeks later, and seems to have
been a farewell feast to his former


friends and associates. Probably in the.


meantime he had been making arrange-
ments for the new mode of life he was
to follow, and for the proper trans-
action of the business with which he
had been connected.


“A great company of publicans.”—
The call of Matthew seems to have been
accompanied by, if, indeed, it did not
occasion, a great awakening in the out-
cast class to which he belonged. Many
would be touched in heart by the mercy
shown by Jesus to one of their number.
There is something very beautiful in
this mutual fellowship of the disciple
and the Master—the one being the
host and the other a guest at the same
table. When we consider the relations
between the two—how Jesus was to
Matthew the King to whom he had
sworn allegiance, the Redeemer by
whom he was to be saved, the Judge
by whom his eternal destiny was to be
decided, and the Object of his worship
—there is something very winning and
beautiful in their sitting together at
the same table. They were a motley
company that met in the house of
Matthew: men hated and despised by
their neighbours for their trade or for
their evil lives—persons on many of
whom it was only too evident that the
stamp of sin had been set deeply, who
repaid scorn with scorn, and grew only
more hardened and reckless as they
found that they had lost the respect of
others and of themselves. Yet along
with them the Son of God sat down


152


as a fellow-guest—He whose holiness
was so perfect, whose hatred of sin
was far more keen than that which
any other mortal ever felt. The loath-
ing and scorn of men only hardened
those on whom it was spent. But
these publicans and sinners were
touched and melted and won by the
love of Jesus, who treated them as
though they were worthy of fellowship
with Him, and was hopeful of even the
most depraved among them. Is there
not here a lesson for us? The hard,
Pharisaic spirit that prides itself on its
cwn immaculate virtue, and passes
harsh judgments on the faults of
others, incapacitates one for recover-
ing the vicious or restoring the out-
cast and banished. Even if we were
justified in cherishing such a spirit,
it has no power to cope with and over-
come the evils which it condemns. It
is by love, by sympathy, by tenderest
compassion that the wayward and err-
ing are to be won to a love and practice
of goodness. The feast in the house of
Matthew is a subject which, strangely
enough, has not been treated by any of
the great artists. Yet it is one of the
most striking and picturesque scenes
in the life of Jesus. The Son of God
surrounded with publicans and sinners!
Imagine Him with His face and mien
of holiness, and love, and majestic
peace. See the change wrought even
in the countenances of those who
received Him as their Saviour—the
John-like, the Stephen-like expression
beginning to show itself in the faces
of men who up to this time had been
intent only on gain and vicious plea-
tures —the rapt, Madonna-like air
already beginning to transfigure the
faces of sinful women! ‘“O happy
publicans and sinners that had found
out their Saviour! O merciful Saviour
that disdained not publicans and
sinners !”


Ver. 30. “ Murmured against His
disciples.” —The Pharisees and scribes
are still restrained by awe of Jesus,
and do not attack Him directly, but
impeach His disciples with laxity of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. V.





conduct. The accusation the Pharisees
bring is that of undue intimacy with
those outside the pale of respectability
and of religjon, Christ’s disciples need
to keep in mind (1) that their conduct
is watched by a censorious world, and
(2) that they need to have a well-
grounded reason for the things that
they do. If they cannot justify their
actions, they run the risk of bringing
discredit upon their Master’s name and
cause, Association of an intimate kind
with the ungodly may arise from
having too weak a sense of their sin-
fulness, or, on the other hand, it may
be deliberately engaged in with the
view oi effecting a change in them
from sin to holiness. A complete
separation between the Church and
the world is not to be desired, if the
leaven of holiness is to be allowed to
penetrate and transform society.


Ver. 31. The Physician and His
Patients.

I. A complete and unanswerable
defence.—Our Saviour does not dispute
the unfavourable character imputed to
the publicans and sinners. It is true,
therefore, the need of visiting them.
He is a Physician, and must spend
much of His time and ministry on
those who have need of healing. To
go to houses that other men shun is
the honourable mark of the physician’s
profession. His answer could not be
misunderstood. He referred to spiritual
ailments, and to spiritual healing. In-
stead of being reproached He ought
to be praised. And He will be praised
for ever by those whom He has healed.

II. A direction to His followers.—
It was a word not only to the Pharisees,
but to His disciples. As He was, so
should they become in His service.
His Church was to be a prolonged
expression and an active exponent of
healing skill and mercy. 1. Chris-
tianity is remedial. 2. Christianity is
hopeful. The sin and misery of the
world call loudly for the enthusiasm
and ingenuity of Christian hope and
love; and they please the heavenly
Physician best who carry the gospel


of His salvation to those whom the
successors of the Pharisees despair of
or disdain.—/’raser.


A Defence of the Disciples.—Jesus
takes up the defence of His disciples:
probably they were unable to return
a satisfactory answer to their critics.
There is humour in His words: an
ironical acceptance of the Pharisees,
on their own estimate as whole and
needing no physician, when in reality
they were corrupt and self-deceived.
But if there is (1) irony towards the
Pharisees, there is (2) a serious allusion
to the state of the publicans and
sinners, Whether the Pharisees were
whole or not, there could be no doubt
that those, for associating with whom
they blamed Him and His disciples,
were indeed sick. Not only (1) sick-
ness, but (2) admission of the fact of
sickness, is required before the services
of the great Physician can benefit us.
This latter condition the Pharisees did
not fulfil: the fact that publicans and
sinners did fulfil it was the hopeful
element in their case. Was it wonder-
ful that Jesus associated with these
outcasts? It was still more wonderful
that these outcasts weleomed Him. It
was the sick appealing to the Physician
—a sight that should have made the
Pharisees glad.


Ver. 32. “Not... the righteous, but
sinners.” Again we find irony in the
Saviour’s words : ‘‘to call the righteous
to repentance!” In the fact that
Christ thus describes the purpose for
which He came as that of calling
sinners to repentance, we have an
indication of the part we are to play
in the work of our salvation. He calls;
it is for us to respond, i.e. to obey His
call. The call comes to us, for in the
work of redemption God takes the
initiative. Repentance includes (1) a
state of feeling—godly sorrow on
account of sin; and (2) a course of
action—amendment of evil ways. The
feeling should not stand alone, or it
will uegenerate into barren regret ; it
should be the source from which the


153


CHAP. V.


action springs. Godly sorrow is not
repentance, but “ worketh repentance ”
(2 Cor. vii. 10). The Scriptures lay
more stress upon the action than the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


the latter in calling the nation to
repentance, but much about the
former. ‘Wash you, make you clean,”
ete. (i. 16, 17).


feeling. Thus Isaiah says little about


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 33—39.


A Lesson in Religious Liberty.—From the question here put we learn
incidentally that in the matter of fasting the school of the Baptist and the
sect of the Pharisees were agreed in their general practice. As Jesus told the
Pharisees at a later date, John came in their own ‘‘ way ” of legal righteousness.
But it was a case of extremes meeting; for no two religious parties could be
more remote in some respects than the two just named. But the difference lay
rather in the motives than in the external acts of their religious life. Both did
the same things—fasted, practised ceremonial ablutions, made many prayers—
only they did them with a different mind. John and his disciples performed
their religious duties in simplicity, godly sincerity, and moral earnestness ; the
Pharisees, as a class, did all these works ostentatiously, hypocritically, and as
matters of mechanical routine. Jesus made reply to the question, remarkable
at once for originality, point, and pathos, setting forth in lively parabolic style
the great principles by which the conduct of His disciples could be vindicated,
and by which He desired the conduct of all who bore His name to be regulated.
Jesus does not blame John’s disciples for fasting, but contents Himself with
defending His own disciples for abstaining from fasting. He takes up the
position of one who virtually says, “To fast may be right for you, the followers
of John: not to fast is equally right for My followers.” In His reply He makes
use of three beautiful and suggestive similitudes.

I. The children of the bride-chamber.—His reply is to this effect: “I am
the Bridegroom, as John said; it is right that the children of the bride-chamber
come to Me; and it is also right that, when they have come, they should adapt
their mode of life to their altered circumstances. Therefore they do well not
to fast, for fasting is the expression of sadness; and how should they be sad
in My company! As well might men be sad at a marriage festival. The
days will come when the children of the bride-chamber shall be sad, for the
Bridegroom will not always be with them; and at the dark hour of His
departure it will be natural and seasonable for them to fast, for then they
shall be in a fasting mood—weeping, lamenting, sorrowful, and disconsolate.”
The principle is that men should fast when they are sad, or in a state of mind
akin to sadness—absorbed, preoccupied—as at some great solemn crisis in the
life of an individual or a community, such as that in the history of Peter, when
he was exercised on the great question of the admission of the Gentiles to the
Church, or such as that in the history of the Christian community at Antioch,
when they were about to ordain the first missionaries to the heathen world.
Christ’s doctrine is that fasting in any other circumstances is forced, unnatural,
unreal—a thing which men may be made to do as a matter of form, but which
they do not with their heart and soul. ‘Can ye make the children of the
bride-chamber fast while the bridegroom is with them?” He asked, virtually
asserting that it was impossible.

II. The new patch on the old garment, and the new wine in old skins —
The design of these parables is much the same as that of the first part of His
reply, viz. to enforce the law of congruity in relation to fasting and similar
matters—that is, to show that in all voluntary religious service, where we are


154





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. V.





free to regulate our own conduct, the outward act should be made to correspond
with the inward condition of mind, and that no attempt should be made to
force particular acts or habits on men without reference to that correspondence.
“Tn natural things,” He meant to say, “we observe this law of congruity.
No man putteth a piece of new cloth on an old garment. Neither do men put
new wine into old skins, and that not merely out of regard to propriety, but to
avoid bad consequences. The good cloth would be wasted, the patchwork would
be unseemly and unsatisfactory, and the old skin bottles will burst under the
fermenting force of the new liquor, and the wine will be spilled and lost.”
The old cloth and old bottles in these metaphors represent old ascetic fashions
in religion ; the new cloth and the new wine represent the new joyful life in
Christ, not possessed by those who tenaciously adhered to the old fashions. The
parables were applied primarily to Christ’s own age, but they admit of applica-
tion to all transition epochs ; indeed, they find new illustration in almost every
generation. New wine is always in course of being produced by the eternal
vine of truth, demanding in some particulars of belief and practice new bottles
for its preservation, and receiving for answer an order to be content with the
old ones. Without going the length of denunciation or direct attempt at
suppression, those who stand by the old often oppose the new by the milder
method of disparagement. They eulogise the venerable past, and contrast it
with the present, to the disadvantage of the latter. ‘The old wine is vastly
superior to the new: how mellow, mild, fragrant, wholesome, the one! how .
harsh and fiery the other!” Those who say so are not the worst of men: they
are often the best; the men of taste and feeling, the gentle, the reverent, and
the good, who are themselves excellent samples of the old vintage. Their
opposition forms by far the most formidable obstacle to the public recognition
and toleration of what is new in religious life; for it naturally creates a strong
prejudice against any cause when the saintly disapprove of it. Observe, then,
how Christ answers the honest admirers of the old wine. He concedes the

oint; He admits that their preference is natural. It is as if He had said,
“T do not wonder that you love the old wine of Jewish piety, fruit of a very
ancient vintage. But what then? Do men object to the existence of new
wine, or refuse to have it in their possession, because the old is superior in
flavour? No; they drink the old, but they carefully preserve the new,
knowing that the old will get exhausted, and that the new will mend with
age. Even so should you behave towards the new wine of My kingdom. You
may not straightway desire it, because it is strange and novel; but surely you
might deal more wisely with it than merely to spurn it, or spill and destroy
it!” Too seldom for the Church’s good have lovers of old ways understood
Christ’s wisdom, and lovers of new ways sympathised with His charity. When
will young men and old men, liberals and conservatives, broad Christians and
narrow, learn to bear with one another, yea, to recognise each in the other
the necessary complement of his own one-sidedness ¢— Bruce.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 33—89.


Ver. 33. “Thy disciples eat and
drink.” —The second accusation is still
levelled against the disciples: it is
that not only do they sometimes feast
with publicans, but do not observe
either the Jewish fasts or those prac-


tised by the disciples of John the
Baptist, and do not engage in stated
actions of prayer and fasting. The
form in which the objection is cast
leaves the question open as to whether
the disciples of Jesus were inattentive


155


CHAP. V.


7. oe , =


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


en Sn IEE nnEE II nD SSSDES SSSR?


to rules they had received from Him,
or acted as they did in accordance with
the spirit of His teaching.


Vers. 34, 35. The Present and the
Future—tThe reply of Jesus is virtually
that these devotional actions (though
He mentions fasting only) should
be spontaneous—the expression of
actual feeling—and not the subjects
of legislation and commandment. He
does not speak of fasting as an un-
necessary piece of asceticism, but as
a practice inappropriate for His dis-
ciples at that stage of their religious


life. While He was with them their joy’


was complete, and fasting would be out
of place: a time would come when He
would be taken away from them, and
they would be in the mood for fasting.
[In like manner He did not wmpose
forms of prayer ; but when the disciples,
moved by His example, requested Him
to teach them to pray, He at once
acceded to their desire (xi. 1-4).] The
time of mourning to which Christ
refers must not be limited to the short
period after His death and before His
disciples were assured of His resurrec-
tion. It is to be understood of the
whole period of His separation from
the Church—the time during which,
in the absence of the heavenly Bride-
groom, the Church is exposed to trials
and oppression (cf. xvii. 7). The con-
trast between the thoughts of ver. 34
and ver. 35 is very striking: in the
one Jesus speaks of the present
time as joyous—the Bridegroom rejoic-
ing in the bride; in the other the
shadow of death falls upon the scene,
and He depicts the grief of separation.


Jesus the Bridegroom.—It is worthy
of being noted that Jesus compares
Himself to a bridegroom. He thus
takes up the representation of His
relationship that was made by John
himself, and not unlikely in the
hearing of those very disciples who
were now questioning Him (John
iii, 29). He also, as it were, takes
home to Himself those frequent Old
‘Testament representations which cul-


156


minate in the Forty-fifth Psalm and
the Song of Solomon, and which re-
appear so interestingly in the Epistle
to the Ephesians (v. 22-33) and the
Book of Revelation (xix. 7-9, xxi. 9).
The Church is the bride of Jesus.
Jesus is the Bridegroom of His believ-
ing people. The love between them is
ineffable ; but the holy wooing and
the winning have been all on His side.
—WMorison.


The Messianic Consciousness of Jesus.
—These verses clearly show that
from the very beginning of His minis-
try Jesus (1) realised the fact that
He was the Messiah, (2) that He
identified His coming with that of
Jehovah, the husband of Israel and of
humanity (Hos. ii. 19), and (3) that
even then He foresaw and announced
a death by violence which He was to
suffer.—CGodet.


Vers. 36-39. Garments and Wine-
skins.—By these illustrations our Lord
conveyed a lesson on—

I. The charm of naturalness, and
the law of congruity in religion —
Times of transition are critical. Jesus
teaches that He had not come to patch
up Pharisaism, or garnish Rabbinism,
or pour His doctrines into the rigid
forms of later Judaism. From Him
was to date a new era.

IT. A forced junction of the old and
the new would be injurious to both.—
The new force is disruptive of the old.
Let the law of congruity be observed.
The Christian life needed its own forms
of development.—Fraser.


Ver. 36. “A piece of a new gar-
ment.” —Jesus now contrasts the
spirit of the old dispensation with
that of the new; and suggested as
the conversation had been by the
feast in the house of Matthew, the
figures He employs, of robes and
wine, are appropriate to the occasion.
The figure as St. Luke gives it is
that of tearing off a piece of a new
garment with which to patch an old
one. The injury done is twofold:


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,


CHAP. V.


EN


(1) the new garment is injured, and
(2) the patch does not agree with the
old garment, and gives it an odd look,
so that no one would care to wear it.
St. Matthéw gives it under the form of
the rent in the old garment which has
been repaired in this way being made
worse by the new “unfulled cloth”
shrinking and breaking away from the
material in which it has been inserted.
The point of the figure is that the
Jewish system was now becoming “ old
and ready to vanish away” (Heb.
viii. 13), and Christ was about to
replace it by something new. The
Pharisees had multiplied fasts and
ceremonies, which were like patches
upon the whole system; and even
John the Baptist had nothing better
to suggest, but had followed the same
method in his work of reformation.
Christ did not purpose to repair the
old garment, but to give a new one.
“The whole Pauline system, what
the apostle himself calls his gospel,
the contrast between the two cove-
nants, the mutual exclusion of the
rule of the law and that of grace, the
oldness of the letter and the newness of
of the spirit (Rom. vii. 6), which form
the substance of tke Epistles to the
Romans and the Galatians, are here
contained under the homely image of a
garment patched with a piece of cloth
or of another garment that is new”
(Godet). There is something very won-
derful in the simple way in which these
new and great ideas are thrown out
. by Jesus—in the ease with which they
are suggested—without effort, without
elaboration, and yet containing an
infinite depth of meaning.


Vers. 37, 38. “New wine... old
bottles.”—-From the difference of prin-
ciple between the old dispensation and
the new Jesus passes to the persons
representing the two. For in these
consecutive figures of the robes and
of the wine and wine-skins we have,
as in all the double parables, fresh
ideas suggested. The robes refer to
differing forms of religious life, the
new wine to an inward life, and the


wine-skins to the persons to whom that
life is imparted, Those whom He chose
to receive His teaching and to become
organs of it were “new men”: they
were not those who had grown old ana
stiff in religious ceremonialism, whose
religious life had taken a definite set,
and could not be disturbed without
being shattered. But they were
marked by great receptivity; and if
they had much to learn, they had
nothing to unlearn. They are indeed
“babes,” but to them that is revealed
which has been hidden from “ the wise
and prudent.” The disastrous result
of putting the new wine into old
bottles is illustrated in the later his-
tory of the Church, when “ certain of
the sect of the Pharisees who believed ”
(Acts xv. 5) imported into the Chris-
tian society their former prejudices and
practices, and attempted to compel all
to conform to the ceremonial law of
Moses. The history of this controversy
and of the course followed by the
Judaizing party are a commentary on
the words, ‘The new wine will burst
the bottles, and be spilled, and the
bottles will perish.”


Ver. 39. “No man... desireth
new.’—Jesus here counsels considera-
tion to be shown toward those who
are not able instantly to appreciate
the worth of the new life and principle.
It may be and is better than that
to which they have been accustomed,
but they will need time to become
acquainted with its merits. Often
there is something acrid and restless
in the enthusiasm of the new convert
which is unwelcome to those whose
minds are not like his, in a ferment
with fresh ideas and emotions. Let
him not count those as his enemies,
and enemies to the truth, who cannot
appreciate his fervour. There are
always those who cling to the old
ways, just as there are always those
who strike out new ways. Both are
needed to make up the world—the
conservative and the progressive
parties. After a little the new wine
becomes old—it grows mellow and im-


157


CHAP. VI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





proved in tone, and will get full credit in the picture of the connoisseur—
for the good qualities it possesses. ‘for he saith, The old is good,’ ”
There is a touch of bright humour





CHAPTER VI.
CRITICAL NOTES.


Ver. 1. Second Sabbath after the first.—Or, “second-first Sabbath.” This is an almost
unintelligible phrase. It is omitted in some very ancient MSS., and is relegated to the
margin in the R.V. The fact that itis a difficult phrase is in favour of its genuineness.
It is easy to account for its omission in some MSS,, but not easy to account for its insertion
in others if it were not in the original text. One of the many suggestions as to the phrase
is that it means “the first Sabbath of the second month”: this is the monti Iyar,
corresponding to our May—a time when the corn in that district of Palestine is ripe. His
disciples.—He Himself did not pluck the ears of corn. It was permissible to do this
(Deut. xxiii. 25): the objection here taken was to its being done on the Sabbath.

Ver. 2. Not lawful.—As work of all kinds was prohibited, reaping and threshing corn
was unlawful: plucking the ears was virtually reaping; rubbing them in the hands was
virtually threshing.

Ver, 3. Have ye not read, ete.—There is a touch of irony in the question. “Are ye who
study the Scriptures so devotedly, unacquainted with this?” What David did.—l Sam.
xxi, 1-6.

Ver, 4. The shewbread.—“ Lit. ‘loaves of setting-forth’; ‘bread of the Face,’ 7.e. set
before the presence of God (Lev. xxiv. 5-9). They were twelve unleavened loaves sprinkled
with frankincense set on a little golden table” (Farrar). They might only be eaten by the
priests (Lev. xxiv. 9). The plea of necessity justified the action of David and of the high
priest in setting aside the ceremonial law; so too the hunger of the disciples justified their
plucking and rubbing the ears of corn. Another circumstance in the incident quoted
from the Old Testament made it specially appropriate to the present argument, and
that was that it took place on the Sabbath. From 1 Sam. xxi. 6 it seems that David
arrived on the day when the old bread was taken away and the new bread put in its place.
This was done on the Sabbath (Ley, xxiv. 8).

Ver. 5. Lord of the Sabbath.—‘“‘The reasoning is as follows: There are laws of eternal
obligation for which man was made, and whose authority can never be set aside. There
are others of temporary obligation, made for man, designed for his discipline, till Christ
should come and the shadow give place to the substance. Christ, as the Son of man, the
Messiah, the Author and end of the law, is its Lord, not indeed to destroy, but to make
perfect—to change its observance from the letter to the spirit ” (Speaker's Commentary).

Ver. 6. Right hand.—Evidently a circumstance noted by an eyewitness. Withered.—
Not only paralysed, but dried up. An apocryphal gospel, quoted by St. Jerome, says that
this man was a stonemason, that his hand had been injured by an accident, and that he
appealed to Jesus to heal him, in order that he might be able to work and not have to beg
his bread. Though it is not distinctly stated, the narratives in the Gospels seem to imply
that he had come to the synagogue expecting to be healed by Jesus. :

Ver. 7. Watched Him.—The question as to whether it was lawful to heal or attend te
the sick on the Sabbath was one on which the Jews were divided: the Pharisees held strict
views of the Sabbath, and their opinions had great weight with the people, so that Jesus
ran the risk of losing popularity as a religious teacher if He differed from them.

Ver. 9. I will ask you one thing.—This implies that a question had been put to Him,
The question is given in Matt. xii. 10, “Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath days?” Te
do good, or to do evil.—* He was intending to work a miracle for good: they were secretly
plotting to do harm—their object being, if possible, to put Him to death” (Farrar),

Ver 10. Looking round about upon them all,—St. Mark adds the very vivid touch, “with
anger, being grieved for the hardness of their hearts” (iii. 5).

Ver. 11. Madness.—Lit. “senselessness, wicked folly.” One with another.—St. Mark says
and with the Herodians also (iii. 6). They were willing even to ally themselves with their
enemies to attain their end of destroying Christ.

Ver. 12. Went out.—Z.e. from Capernaum. A mountain.—Rather, “the mountain” (R.V.)—
that is, the mountainous country, the high table-land above the Lake of Gennesaret.


158


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE, CHAP. VL





Prayer to God.—The expression in the original is rather peculiar, but there is no doubt
that this is its meaning. The idea that by the word translated “prayer” is meant a
proseucha or place of prayer is far-fetched and incongruous. The narrative seems to imply
that the prayer had reference to the coming selection of those who were to be set apart by
Christ to do His work.

Ver. 13. Twelve.—There can be no doubt that the number twelve was intended to
correspond to the twelve tribes of Israel. Apostles.—Messengers, persons sent on a mission.

Vers. 14-16.—In this as in all the other catalogues Peter is first, Philip fifth, James the
son of Alpheus is ninth; so that the names of the apostles are given in groups of four:
all give Judas Iscariot as the last of the list. Simon.—Also called Peter and Cephas—the
one being the Greek, the other the Aramaic for “rock”: the name given by anticipation
(John i. 42), formally conferred when he was chosen apostle (Mark iii. 16). Andrew.—The
name probably from a Greek word, meaning “manly.” James.—Same name as Jacob:
usually called James the Elder, to distinguish him from the other James: the first of the
twelve to suffer martyrdom (Acts xii. 2). John.—The last survivor of the twelve: the
name Boanerges—‘ Sons of Thunder”—conferred on him and his brother (Mark iii. 17):
his father was Zebedee, mother Salome: in John xix. 25 it is probable that the sister of the
mother of Jesus refers to Salome; if so, he and his brother were cousins of our Lord.
Philip.—Greek name: the first summoned by Christ to follow Him (John i, 43). These
first five apostles were all of Bethsaida. Bartholomew.—J.e. son of Tolmai: probably to
be identified with Nathanael, as from John xxi. 2 Nathanael appears to have been one of
the twelve, and is named in conjunction with Philip (John i. 45), as Bartholomew is in all the
lists of apostles.

Ver. 15. Matthew.—The writer of the first Gospel: in his own list he enters his name
as “Matthew the publican,” in reference to his former occupation. Thomas.—A Hebrew
name meaning “the twin,” the Greek for which is Didymus (John xx. 24): frequently
mentioned in St. John’s Gospel. James the son of Alpheus.—Called James “the Less,”
or the Younger (Mark xy, 40). The name Alpheus appears in another form in St. John’s
Gospel—as Clopas (John xix. 25): of him we know nothing except that he was the husband
of Mary the sister of the Virgin Mary, and that James and Jude were his sons. Simon
called Zelotes.—J.e. the Zealot: the Zealots were a sect of fanatical Jews, noted for their intem-
perate zeal in maintaining the Jewish law. By St. Matthew he is called the Canaanite or
Cananzan, another form of the name “ zealot,” from Hebr. kineah, “ zeal.”

Ver. 16. Judas the brother of James.—This apostle has three names: Judas (brother or
son) of James; Lebbeus, from Hebr. lebh, “beart”; and Thaddeus, from Hebr. thad,
“bosom ”: either a son or a grandson of the above-mentioned Alphzus: author of Epistle
of Jude. Judas Iscariot.—Probably a man of Kerioth, a city of the tribe of Judah (Josh.
xv. 25): in St. John’s Gospel he is described as son of Simon or (R.V.) of Simon Iscariot
(John vi. 71, xiii. 26). 1£ this Simon were the apostle, he and Judas would be father and son.

Ver. 17. Came down.—JZe. from the mountain mentioned in ver. 12. The plain.—The
word can mean a level space on the mountain-side. Out of all Judea.— St. Matthew adds
Galilee (which was to a great extent; Greek), Decapolis, and Perea: St. Mark also mentions
Idumea, Thus there were Jews, Greeks, Phcenicians, and Arabs among our Lord’s
hearers” (Farrar).

Ver. 19. To touch Him,—Cf. viii. 44; Matt. xiv. 36; Mark v.30. —

Vers. 20-49.—Though various opinions have been held on the subject, the balance of pro-
babilities seems in favour of the supposition that the discourse commonly known as the
Sermon on the Mount. recorded by St. Matthew, is given here ina shorter form. It is pro-
bable that St. Luke, in placing it after the choice of the twelve apostles, follows chronological
order more exactly than St. Matthew, who places it before that event. A strong argument in
favour of the identity of the two discourses is to be found in the fact that both evangelists
mention the healing of the centurion’s servant immediately after the delivery of the sermon
(Matt. viii. 5; Luke vii 1). It is true that the scene seems to be differently described in the
two narratives: St. Matthew speaks of Christ going up into a mountain (or rather, “ the
mountain,” é.e. the mountainous region above the Lake of Gennesaret), and St. Luke of His
coming down and standing “ona, level place” (R.V.). But there is nothing to forbid us
to suppose that Jesus came down from one of the higher peaks where He had been
engaged in prayer, and took up His stand where He could best be seen and heard—the place
He chose being still on the mountain-side.

Ver. 20. Blessed be ye poor.—In St. Luke the beatitudes and woes are addressed to the
persons, and not uttered concerning them. Bt. Matthew adds “in spirit ”: there is every
reason to suppose that St. Luke refers to literal poverty, it being among those afflicted with
it that Christ found most numerous adherents. Of course spiritual qualities of humility
and meekness are presupposed as springing from and promoted by poverty. The “poor
are spoken of frequently in the Psalms in the sense of humble and trustful servants of God.
A great deal has been made of the supposed Ebionitism in St. Luke’s Gospel as indicated


159


4


CHAP. vL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


here and in such passages as i. 53, xii. 15-34, xvi. 9-25. But any such tendency is
highly improbable: it is utterly inconsistent with the Pauline spirit which may be
recognised in the Gospel, and is by no means necessarily implied in the passages referred to.

Ver. 22. Separate you.—J.¢. excommunication or expulsion from the synagogue. Thus
early is the separation between Judaism and Christianity foretold, Your name,—‘ Hither
vour collective name as Christians (cf. 1 Pet. iv. 14-16), or your individual name”
(Alford).

Ver. 23. In the like manner, etc.—‘ Elijah and his contemporaries (1 Kings xix. 10) ; Hanani
imprisoned by Asa (2 Chron. xvi. 10); Micaiah imprisoned (1 Kings xxii. 27); Zechariah
stoned by Joash (2 Chron. xxiv. 20, 21); Urijah slain by Jehoiakim (Jer. xxvi. 23) ; Jeremiah
imprisoned, smitten, and put in the stocks (Jer, xxxvii., xxxvili.) ; Isaiah (according to tradi-
tion) sawn asunder, etc.” (farrar).

Vers. 24-26.—This section is peculiar to St. Luke. Notice that these four woes are in all
respects the antitheses of the four preceding beatitudes.

Ver. 24. Consolation.—Cf. xvi. 25. This is a warning addressed to the disciples themselves.

Ver. 27.—Even in the Old Testament checks had been put upon the spirit of enmity.
See Exod. xxiii.4; Prov. xxv. 21. We find the teaching of this passage very beautifully
reproduced in Rom. xii. 17, 19-21.

Ver. 28. Pray for them, etc.—St. Luke records two great examples of obedience to this
precept—in the case of Christ (xxiii. 34), and of the proto-martyr Stephen (Acts vii. 60).

Ver. 29. Him that smiteth thee, ete.—That we are to act according to the spirit and not
merely according to the letter of this rule is evident from our Lord’s own procedure in
circumstances of the kind (John xviii. 22, 23). Cloke... coat.—Cloak is the loose outer
dress, the coat the inner and more indispensable article of dress. St. Luke’s order is more
logical than St. Matthew’s.

Ver. 32. What thank have ye !—What claim to recompense from God ?

Ver. 35. Hoping for nothing again.—R.V. “never despairing,” and with the marginal
note, “Some ancient authorities read despairing of no man.” The rendering of the A.V.
is, however, as good as we can get. Notice that the precepts “love,” “do good,” “lend
hoping for nothing again,” correspond to vers. 32, 33, and 34 respectively.

Ver. 36.—The best MSS. omit “therefore”: it is omitted in R.V.

Ver. 37. Judge not.—Je. in a harsh, censorious spirit. Cf. with the teaching of the
whole verse, Matt. xviii. 21-35,

Ver. 38. Good measure.—The figure is evidently taken from measuring corn, Bosom.—The
loose folds above the girdle served as a pocket.

Ver. 39. Ditch.—R.V. “ pit.”

Ver. 40. Every one that is perfect.—Rather, “every one when he is perfected” (R.V.),
i.é. no disciple on passing through the full course of training rises above the teacher from
whom he has learned, The figure was evidently one frequently used by Jesus, and is
employed to illustrate different aspects of truth. Cf. Matt. x. 25; John xiii. 16, xv. 20.
The general idea of vers. 39, 40, is: “The blind cannot lead the blind better than he can
guide himself: the scholar will not be better than his teacher: the judgment which one
sinful man passes on another can never raise the standard of moral excellence in the
world” (Speaker's Commentary).

Ver. 41.—Notice the two different words “behold” and “ perceive ”—R.V. “ behold” and
“consider.” As it were, he sees at a glance the defect in another, but the most careful
observation does not reveal to him his own defects. Mote.—A dry twig or stalk, as dis-
tinguished from a beam of wood.

Ver. 48, Founded upon a rock.—A better reading is “ well builded” (R.V.). The reading
followed by the A.V. may have been taken from the parallel passage in Matt. vii. 25. The
point of the figure is often missed: it is not that rock is a goud 1oundation, and earth or
sand (Matt. vii. 26) a bad (for sand may be a good foundation), but that the one man took
pains to get a good foundation, while the other did not, or built at haphazard.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—11.


The Pharisees’ Sabbath and Christ’s—We have here two Sabbath incidents,
in the first of which the disciples are the transgressors of the Sabbatic tradition ;
in the second, Christ’s own action is brought into question. The scene of the
first is in the fields, that of the second is the synagogue. In the one, Sabbath
observance is set aside at the call of personal needs; in the other, at the call
of another’s calamity. So the two correspond to the old Puritan principle that
the Sabbath law allowed of “ works of necessity and of mercy.”


160


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. VI.
I


I. The Sabbath and personal needs.—The disciples, as they and their Master
traversed some field-path through the corn, gathered a few ears, as the merciful
provision of the law allowed, and began to eat the rubbed-out grains to relieve
their hunger. Moses had not forbidden such gleaning, but casuistry had decided
that such action was virtually reaping and winnowing, and was therefore work
of a kind that violated the Sabbath. Our Lord does not question the authority
of the tradition, nor ask where Moses had forbidden what His disciples were
doing. Still less does He touch the sanctity of the Jewish Sabbath. He accepts
His questioners’ position, for the time, and gives them a perfect answer on
their own ground. He quotes an incident in which ceremonial obligations
give way before higher law. It is that of David and his followers eating the
shewbread, which was tabooed to all but the priests, and perhaps the incident
is chosen with some reference to the parallel between Himself, the true King,
now unrecognised and hunted, with His humble followers, and the fugitive
outlaw with his band. This shows that even a Divine prohibition which relates
to mere ceremonial matter melts, like wax, before even bodily necessities. It
may reasonably be doubted whether all Christian communities have learned
the sweep of that principle yet, or so judge of the relative importance of keeping
up their appointed forms of worship, and of feeding their hungry brother.
To this Christ adds an assertion of His power over the Sabbath, as enjoined
upon Israel. His is the authority which imposed it. It is plastic in His hands.
The whole order of which it is a part has its highest purpose in witnessing
of Him. He brings the true “rest.”

II. The Sabbath and works of beneficence.—In His former answer Jesus
had appealed to Scripture to bear out His teaching that Sabbath ol servance
must bend to personal necessities. Here He appeals to the natural sense of
compassion to confirm the principle that it must give way to the duty of relieving
others. The principle is a wide one: the charitable succour of men’s needs,
of whatever kind, is congruous with the true design of the day of rest. Have
the Churches laid that lesson to heart? On the whole, it is to be observed
that our Lord here distinctly recognises the obligation of the Sabbath, that
He claims power over it, that He permits the pressure of individual necessities
and of others’ need of help to modify the manner of its observance, and that He
leaves to the spiritual insight of His followers the application of these principles.
The cure which follows is done in a singular fashion. Without a request from
the sufferer or any one else, He heals him by a word. His command has a
promise in it, and He gives the power to do what He bids the mando. We
get strength to obey in the act of obedience. But, also, the manner in which
the miracle was wrought had a special reason in the very cavils of the Pharisees.
Not even they could accuse Him of breaking any Sabbath law by such a cure.
What had He done? Told the man to put out his hand. Surely that was not
unlawful. What had the man done? Stretched it forth. Surely that broke
no subtle Rabbinical precept. So they were foiled at every turn, driven off
the field of argument, and baffled in their attempt to find ground for laying
an information against Him. Their hearts were not touched by His gentle
wisdom or healing power. All that their contact with Jesus did was to drive
them to intenser hostility, and to send them away to plot His death. That
is what comes of making religion a round of outward observances. The Pharisea
is always blind as an owl to the light of God and true goodness, keen-sighted
as a hawk for trivial breaches of his cobweb regulations, and cruel as a vulture
to tear with beak and claw. The race is not extinct. We all carry one inside,
and need God’s help to cast him out.—Maclaren.


& 161


OHAP. VL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 1—11.


Vers. 1-11.

I. The Sabbath.—How did our Lord
spend His Sabbaths? In regular
attendance at the synagogue services,
public preaching, private ministrations
of mercy to the sick and suffering.
How different the Sabbaths of the
Pharisees! They had added to the
fourth commandment many childish
and burdensome rules.

II. A Sabbath incident in the corn-
fields —1. The charge of Sabbath-
breaking. 2. Our Lord’s reply.

III. A Sabbath incident in the
synagogue.—l. A new charge. 2. A
new reply. Christ gives us two simple
tests. What is necessary may be done.
A work of mercy may be done.—
W. Taylor.


Ver. 1. ‘“ Plucked the ears of corn.” —
The incidental mention of the hunger
of the disciples, which they were
seeking to satisfy by plucking and
eating the ripe corn, is very affect-
ing (Matt. xii. 1). It was on the plea
of necessity that Jesus justified their
so acting on the Sabbath day. Probably
to most, if not to all of them, this
degree of poverty was a new experience,
since they had forsaken all to follow
Jesus. Two of them at least, James
and John, seem to have belonged to
one of the higher strata of society-—
they had had servants, and were on
terms of intimacy with the high priest ;
Matthew had followed a lucrative
calling ; and the other apostles had
been, though perhaps poor, not in desti-
tute circumstances. But doubtless the
sacrifices they made in obeying the
command of Jesus were counted but
light, and the hardships they occasion-
ally had to endure but trivial, in
comparison with the blessedness of
association with Him. No life can
be called destitute in which there is
true fellowship with Christ.


Ver. 2. “ Not lawful to do.”—The
strict observance of the Sabbath had


162


become the marked characteristic of
the Jews in the time of their exile.
After their return it had become
interwoven with national feeling; so
that the measure of freedom which
Jesus took in connection with the
observance of the day gave great
offence both in Judza and in Galilee.
The vast number of rules and the
hair-splitting casuistry associated by
the Jews with Sabbath observance are
well known: they made life almost
intolerable. A devout Jew was afraid
to lift his finger, for fear of breaking
some Rabbinical precept. “A woman
must not go out with any ribbons
about her, unless they were sewed to
her dress. A false tooth must not be
worn. A person with the toothache
might not rinse his mouth with vinegar,
but he might hold it in his mouth and
swallow it. No one might write down
two letters of the alphabet. The sick
might not send for a physician, A
person with lumbago might not rub
or foment the affected part. A tailor
must not go out with his needle on
Friday night, lest he should forget it,
and so break the Sabbath by carrying
it about. A cock must not wear a
piece of ribbon round its leg on the
Sabbath, for this would be to carry
something ! ete., etc.” (Farrar). The
very idea of the purpose of the Sabbath
had been lost. God had given it as
a boon to man, and it had been
made into a burden. And upon
an observance of these fantastic and
self-imposed rules devotees thought
they could build up a holiness which
would justify them in the sight of
God.


Vers. 3, 4. The Authority of the
Scriptures.—In all questions of moral
and spiritual principles Christ treats
the word of God as the supreme
authoritative guide for man, and from
it now He confutes His opponents, as
in the desert He had by its. aid over-
thrown the tempter.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. VI.





“Have ye not read ?”—There are
different ways of reading: (1) that
which results merely in acquaintance
with the, text, and (2) that which
penetrates to the true significance of
the record. The Pharisees had read
the history of their great national hero,
David, but they had not grasped the
principle which underlay and justified
his action and that of the high priest
on this occasion. Jesus does not dis-
cuss the petty school question as to
whether plucking the ears of corn and
rubbing them out were virtually the
same as reaping and threshing, but
settles the dispute by laying down the
great principle that the word of God
which prescribed ceremonial laws laid
greater stress upon moral duties than
upon them, and taught.that mercy
was better than sacrifice. The bread
consecrated to God in the holy tent was
not profaned when given to relieve the
hunger of His children. He implied,
too, that Scripture to be of use must
be interpreted by Scripture, in order
that its true spirit and teaching might
be learned. A single text of God’s
word is not therefore necessarily
authoritative, but the general strain
of Scripture teaches principles that
areso. In accordance with the spirit
of the history in 1 Sam. xxi., which
Christ here quotes, was the action
of Ethelwold, Bishop of Winchester.
“Ina time of famine he sold all the
rich vessels and ornaments of the
church to relieve the poor with bread,
and said ‘there was no reason that the
dead temples of God should be sump-
tuously furnished, and the living
temples suffer poverty.’”


Ver. 5. “Lord also of the Sabbath.”
Jesus vindicates the conduct—of the
disciples on two grounds: (1) that
there were cccasions when the ordinary
rulesof Sabbath observance might with-
out blame be set aside; and (2) that
He, as Son of man, had power to
modify those very rules. His decisions
were to be taken as authoritative,
and the same weight attached to them
as to the law concerning the Sabbath


given through Moses. ‘Since the
Sabbath was an ordinance instituted
for the use and benefit of man, the
Son of man, who has taken upon Him
full and completed manhood, the great
representative and head of humanity,
has this institution under His own
power” (Alford). This teaching is
illustrated and expanded in Rom.
xiv. Dead Vise Cols: dis 10, ul (ee Christ
did not abolish the Sabbath, just as
He did not abolish fasting, but He
changed it from being an external
ordinance observed in a rigid and
servile manner, as it had become
among the Jews, and made it a means
of grace. Not because of a command-
ment binding us to certain outward
conduct, but because of an inward
spiritual need, do we, therefore, keep
the day holy. To do good upon the
Sabbath, and not merely to abstain
from work, is the best way of observing
the day. An indication of the lordship
over the Sabbath which Christ claims
is given in the change of the day of
rest from the last to the first day
of the week. Under the guidance of
His Spirit, if not at His command,
given on some occasion after His
rising from the dead (cf. Acts i. 3),
His followers made this change.


“ Lord of the Sabbath.”—This title
teaches us—

J. That there is still a Sabbath day
for us to observe.

Il. That we should look to our
Lord’s teaching and practice for the
due observance of the Sabbath.—
W. Taylor.


Vers. 6-11. The Withered Hand.
—The man with the withered hand is
a silent but steady example of faith.
There are two things in his conduct
which cast a special lustre upon it—
the one more external, the other more
internal and spiritual.

J. He obeyed God rather than man.
—By his prompt obedience he takes
the side of Jesus against the Pharisees,
and submits himself entirely to His
direction. His readiness to go with Him


163


CHAP. VL


in a matter of external obedience was
the proof of that instinctive and deep-
lying trust in Christ which made him
a fit subject for His healing.

II. He obeyed where obedience was
an act of pure trust.—The first com-
mand, ‘“ Rise up,” tested the courage
of his faith; the second command,
“Stretch forth thine hand,” tested the
inner, deeper faith of the spiritual
nature. Had he not been completely
reliant upon Christ, he would at this
point have doubted. But he implicitly
obeyed, and in obeying was healed.
It is an impressive illustration of the
way of life. There is none that casts
a clearer light on the foolish puzzles
men make to themselves out of the
doctrines of grace. God never bids us
of our own strength to believe. It is
Jehovah-Jesus who commands. Is
it for any one of us to say, “I can-
not ” ?—Laidlaw.


Ver. 6. Irritation against Jesus.—
The incident here related marks the
final stage in the irritation of the
Pharisees against Jesus: the result
of the miracle was that they ‘com-
muned one with another what they
might do to Jesus.” The parallel
passage in St. Mark (ili. 6) says
“they took counsel against Him, how
they might destroy Him.” In the
section immediately preceding this St.
Luke records several stages in the grow-
ing enmity of the Pharisees: 1. The
accusation of blasphemy (v.21). 2. The
murmuring at favour being shown to
pullicans and sinners (v. 30). 3. The
fault found with the disciples for pluck-
ing the ears of corn on a Sabbath
(vi. 1-6). A sign of increasing intensity
of feeling is given in ver. 7. Jesus
was now watched by His enemies, in
order that an accusation might be
brought against Him. They were pre-
pared to take undue advantage, and
if necessary to lay a trap for Him.


Ver. 7. ‘‘ Whether He would heal.”—
As mentioned in an earlier note, heal-
ing the sick, or even doing anything
to alleviate suffering, on the Sabbath,


164


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


was proscribed by the more rigid of the
Pharisees. St. Matthew says that they
asked Jesus whether it were lawful or
not to heal on the Sabbath. This is
not inconsisteat with St. Luke’s narra-
tive, which, indeed, implies that Christ
spoke in answer to some such question.


Ver. 8. ‘He knew their thoughts.” —
That He was being exposed to espion-
age, and that they were beginning to
form plans for putting Him to death.


Ver. 9. “I will ask you one thing”
—Jesus makes His adversaries decide
the question they had themselves asked,
and He so states it that they could
give but one answer, and that in
approval of healing on the Sabbath.
He ideatifies omitting to do good with
committing evil: not to relieve pain was
to prolong or virtually to inflict pain.
He states the matter in the most start-
ling manner: “not to heal is to kill”
(cf. Prov. xxiv. 11, 12). And doubt-
less He implied that their machinations
against Himself were known to Him:
while He on that Sabbath day was
intent upon healing, His adversaries
were thinking how best to compass His
death. Who could doubt as to which
of them was the better employed on
that day? The Pharisees were thus
caught in the snare they had laid for
Him, and were unable to reply. If
the question were asked, “Why not
postpone the work of healing to to-
morrow ?” the answer would not be far
to seek: “The preseat only is ours:
to-morrow may never come ” (cf. Prov.


iii, 27, 28).


Ver. 10. “ Looking round about.” —
The heart of Jesus, as St. Mark tells
us, was filled with grief and anger—
with grief because of their unbelief,
and with anger because that unbelief
sprang from malice and culpable pre-
judice. These feelings appeared in the
glance He cast upon His silenced
adversaries,


“* Stretch forth.” —With the command
the promise of ability to obey it was


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. VI.


_——— oo SSSSSSSSSSSSs—SSsSsSsSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSes


implied, if there were but faith in
the heart of the hearer. T the re-
markable command, to stretch forth
a withere® hand, we have an illus-
tration of such seemingly unreasonable
calls as these: “ Prophesy upon these
bones, and say unto them, O ye dry
bones, hear the word of the Lord”
(Ezek. xxxvii. 4); “Incline your ear,
and come unto Me: hear, and your
soul shall live” (Isa. lv. 3); “ Awake,
thou that sleepest, and arise from
the dead, and Christ shall give thee
light” (Eph. v. 14). It was by a
sheer act of will that Christ healed
the man: He did nothing—did not
even touch the withered hand. So
that His enemies could not fasten
upon any outward action of His which
could be construed into a breach of
the Sabbath. The stretching out of


the hand was a proof that the miracle
had heen already wrought,


Ver. 11. “ Madness.”.—The word
implies senselessness—the frenzy of
obstinate prejudice. It admirably
characterises the state of ignorant
hatred which is disturbed in the fixed
condition of its own  infallibility
(2 Tim. iii. 9).—Farrar.


Causes of their Huatred.—Various
causes contributed to inflame the
Pharisees with this blind hatred:
1. Jesus had broken through their
traditions. 2. He had put them to
silence and shame in the presence of
the people. 3. Though they were
enraged at His action, He had avoided
doing any overt act on which they
could found a charge against Him.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 12—19.


The Choice of the Twelve.—It is probable that the selection of a limited
number to be His close and constant companions had become a necessity to
Christ, in consequence of His very success in gaining disciples. It was impossible
that all who believed could continue henceforth to follow Him, in the literal
sense, whithersoever He might go: the greater number could now only be
occasional followers. But it was His wish that certain selected men should be
with Him at all times and in all places—His travelling companions in all His
wanderings, witnessing all His work, and ministering to His daily needs. They
were, however, to be more than travelling companions or menial servants.
They were to be, in the meantime, students of Christian doctrine, and occasional
fellow-labourers in the work of the kingdom, and eventually Christ’s chosen
trained agents for propagating the faith after He Himself had left the earth.
The number of the apostolic company is significant. A larger number of
eligible men could easily have been found in a circle of disciples whick after-
wards supplied seventy auxiliaries for evangelistic work ; and a smaller number
might have served ali the present or prospective purposes of the apostleship.
The number twelve happily expressed in figures what Jesus claimed to be, and
what He had come to do, and thus furnished a support to the faith and a
stimulus to the devotion of His followers. It significantly hinted that Jesus
was the Divine Messianic King of Israel, come to set up the kingdom whose
advent was foretold by prophets in glowing language, suggested by the palmy
days of Israel’s history, when the theocratic community existed in its integrity,
and all the tribes of the chosen nation were united under the royal house of
David. In a worldly point of view the twelve were a very insignificant company
indeed—a band of poor, illiterate Galilean provincials, utterly devoid of social
consequence, not likely to be chosen by one having supreme regard to prudential
considerations. Why did Jesus choose such men? Was He guided by feelings
of antagonism to those possessing social advantages, or of partiality for men
of His own class? No; His choice was made in true wisdom. If He chose


165


+


CHAP. VI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


Galileans mainly, it was not from provincial prejudice against those of the
south ; if, as some think, He chose two or even four of His own kindred, it was
not from nepotism; if He chose rude, unlearned, humble men, it was not because
He was animated by any petty jealousy of knowledge, culture, or good birth.
If any rabbi, rich man, or ruler had been willing to yield himself unreservedly
to the service of the kingdom, no objection would have been taken to him on
account of his acquirements, possessions, or titles. But such men would not
condescend so far, and therefore the despised One did not get an opportunity of
showing His willingness to accept as disciples and choose for apostles such as
they were. It mattered little, except in the eyes of contemporary prejudice,
what the social position or even the previous history of the twelve had been,
provided they were spiritually qualified for the work to which they were called.
What tells ultimately is, not what is without a man, but what is within. If
it be thought that a number of apostles were undistinguished either by high
endowment or by a great career, and were in fact all but useless, the wisdom
of Christ’s choice of them is virtually impugned. The following considerations
may serve to modify this opinion :—

J. That some of the apostles were comparatively obscure, inferior men
cannot be denied; but even the obscurest of them may have been most useful
as witnesses for Him with whom they had companied from the beginning.—
It does not take a great man to make a good witness, and to be witnesses of
Christian facts was the main business of the apostles. That even the humblest
of them rendered important service in that capacity we need not doubt, though
nothing is said of them in the apsotolic annals. It is not to be expected that
a history so fragmentary and so brief as that given by St. Luke should mention
any but the principal actors, especially when we reflect how few of the characters
that appear on the stage at any particular crisis in human affairs are pro-
minently noticed even in histories which go elaborately into detail. The purpose
of history is served by recording the words and deeds of the representative men,
and many are allowed to drop into oblivion who did nobly in their day. The
less distinguished members of the apostolic band are entitled to the benefit of
this reflection.

II. Three eminent men, or even two (Peter and John), out of twelve are a
good proportion—there being few societies in which superior excellence bears
such a high ratio to respectable mediocrity. Perhaps the number of “ pillars”
was as great as was desirable. Far from regretting that all were not Peters
and Johns, it is rather a matter to be thankful for that there were diversities
of gifts among the first preachers of the gospel. As a general rule it is not
good when all are leaders. Little men are needed as well as great men; for
human nature is one-sided, and little men have their peculiar virtues and gifts,
and can do some things better than their more celebrated brethren.

III. We must remember how little we know concerning any of the apostles.
—It is the fashion of biographers in our day, writing for a morbidly or idly
curious public, to enter into the minutest particulars of outward event or
personal peculiarity regarding their heroes. Of this fond, idolatrous minuteness
there is no trace in the evangelic histories. The writers of the Gospels were
not afflicted with the biographic mania. Moreover, the apostles were not their
theme. Christ was their hero; and their sole desire was to tell what they knew
of Him. They gazed steadfastly at the Sun of righteousness, and in His
effulgence they lost sight of the attendant stars. Whether they were stars of the
first magnitude, or of the second, or of the third made little difference.— Bruce.


166


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. VI.


rrr D


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 12—19.


=
Vers. 12-49. The Busy Christ.
I. A night of prayer.
II. A morning of work.—Calling,
choosing, healing, teaching.— W. Taylor.


Vers. 12-16. The Choice of the
Apostles—Note the difference be-
tween discipleship and apostleship. He
called to Him the disciples, and of
them He chose twelve to be apostles.
A disciple is a learner; an apostle
is an emissary. The one is still in
the school; the other has left it to
become a teacher and an envoy. The
night between discipleship and apostle-
ship was so critical that our Lord
devoted the whole of it to prayer.
These men were to be nearest to the
person—to form the innermost circle
—of the Saviour. From that choice
sprang the little volume of the New
Testament, words of eternal life ; from
it the real Christianity of Christendom ;
from it every word and work, during
these eighteen centuries, of piety, of
purity, of charity; from it the great
multitude which no man can number.
Well might that be a night of prayer
upon which was to dawn the ordina-
tion, or the consecration, of the twelve
apostles. Was there not matter for
His night-long intercession at the
throne of grace for the disciples about
to become apostles, henceforth to be
entrusted with this latest and largest
interpretation of the mind, and the
will, and the heart of God to men ?—
Vaughan.


The New Organisation.—This is all
we are told of the planting of that
germ of which the upgrowth is the
Church of Christ. The organisation
thus introduced was just enough
to make of the disciples one body.
Henceforth they could speak of them-
selves as “we”; but as yet they
were only pupils, chosen to be about
their Master’s person, entrusted with
special powers for the good of those


among whom they ministered, but
with no authority over the rest of the
disciples.— Latham.


Ver. 12. “Into a@ mountain to
pray.”—High mountain-peaks are in
the Bible consecrated as places of com-
munion with God. Almost all. the
secrets of God have been revealed on
mountain-tops. Jesus prayed on this
mountain for the disciples whom He-
was now to choose. He asked God to
grant them to Him. Well has this been
called the vigil before the laying of the
foundation-stone of the Church—this
night through which our Lord watched
and prayed. We can guess the con-
tents of this prayer from that which our
Lord offered as our High Priest (John
xvi.). He who prayed thus in the
days of His flesh sits now on the right
hand of the Majesty on high, and
blesses His Church, both as High
Priest and King, with gifts and offices
(Eph. iv. 11).


A Crisis in the Ministry of Jesus.
—St. Luke indicates in the most im-
pressive manner that the choice of the
twelve apostles marks a critical time
in the ministry of Jesus. He had
spoken of a new order of things, and
had incurred the enmity of those who
were devoted to the old order. He
now regards it necessary to organise
His followers, and to found a new
society based upon faith in Himself
and devotion to the interests of God’s
kingdom upon earth. The calling of
the twelve marks the beginning of
the spiritual Israel, in a separate and
distinctive form. The choice of the
twelve and the institution of the sacra-
ments were the only definite acts of
organisation which Christ judged it
necessary to perform.


The Apostles divinely chosen.—Great
stress is laid by St. Luke upon the
night of prayer and communion with


167


CHAP. VI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


—  — — ——————————————————————— 00 VO OO


God which preceded the choice of the
twelve, and by this he would have us
to understand both the importance of
the occasion and also the fact that these
individuals were selected under the
special direction of God Himself.


The Laying of the Foundation-stone of
the Church.—Thus then it would appear
that our Redeemer prepared Himself
by nocturnal prayer, and then in the
morning installed the twelve apostles.
If we consider that the election of this
body of men, in whose hearts the first
germs of truth were to be deposited,
depended upon a careful selection of
persons, we shall then be able to form
an idea of that momentous act; it
was th. moment in which was laid the
foundation-stone of the Church. Only
as the discerner of all rearts was it
possible for our Lord to lay the founda-
tion of such a body of closely united
minds, which might exist and represent
the whole spiritual creation, that was
to be called into existence. In His
own person all was concentrate in
one holy unity ; but as the ray of light
divides itself into its various colours,
so in like manner went forth the one
light which emanated from Christ into
the hearts of the twelve in various
modified degrees of brightness.—
Olshausen.


Labourers sent forth by God.—As
Jesus had told His disciples to pray
to God to send forth labourers to
gather in His harvest (Matt. ix. 38),
so now does He Himself commit the
matter of those to be chosen as
labourers in prayer to God.


Great Importance of this Choice.—
If the passage before us teaches any-
thing, it teaches us that the send-
ing forth of His apostles was in our
Lord’s judgment a matter of great
importance: He does not at all treat
it as though it belonged to the sub-
ordinate details of His work,—JZiddon.


Ver. 13. “ Of them He chose twelve.”
It is a striking fact that the whole


168


of the twelve were chosen by our Lord
near the beginning of His ministry.
He did not begin with a small number,
to be afterwards enlarged; He com-
pleted the college of apostles at once.
1. This shows us how mature His
own mind was as to His work, and as
to the men best fitted to aid in it.
2. This plan had the advantage, too,
of securing a united testimony and an
intelligent co-operation all through.—
blaikie.


Little More is Heard of These Men
Afterwards. —So little is saint-worship
countenanced by the practice of the
early Church, that we hear little more
of any of these men—of some, indeed,
nothing whatever. Two things are
noticeable of them as a body :—

I. Their variety in education and
acquirements.

II. How few they seem for the task
assigned to them.— Markby.


“ Apostles.’—The special title con-
ferred upon the twelve, that of those
“sent out,” derives its dignity from the
fact that those who bear it are in a
sense representatives of Him who sends
them. They are not so much messen-
gers as ambassadors. The name is
used elsewhere in the New Testament
in a general sense, and applied to per-
sons who were not of the twelve (Gal.
i, 19; Acts xiv. 14; Heb. iii. 1), but
it is only of the twelve that Christ, so
far as we know, used it.


Not all Equally Intimate with Jesus.
—It is a very striking fact that all
the apostles were not on equal terms
of intimacy with Jesus: Peter, James,
and John were on several occasions
honoured above the others in being
taken into closer fellowship with the
Lord (viii. 51, ix. 28; Matt. xxvi. 37).
“The disciples thus surrounded our
Lord in wider and still wider expand-
ing circles; nearest to Him were the
three, then came the other nine, after
them the seventy, and finally the mul-
titude of His other disciples. Undeni-
able, then, as is the difference which


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. VI.





existed between the disciples of Christ,
yet this does not imply that there
existed any more intimate initiation for
those standing nearest to Him. The
secret, or the mystery of Christ, at
once the highest and the simplest truth,
was to be preached from the house-tops.
It is not to be doubted, however, that
some penetrated infinitely deeper into
this mystery than the others, and hence
became far more fitted to move in
more intimate proximity to our Lord”


(Olshausen).


Characteristics of the Apostles.—
None of those chosen seem to have
been of high social rank. James and
John were still fishermen, though, as
pointed out in a preceding note (ver. 1),
they were evidently “better off” than
their fellow-apostles. Nor do the
twelve seem to have been distinguished
by intellectual gifts, or learning of the
kind acquired in the schools (Acts iv. 13).
Their moral and spiritual faculties and
attainments seem rather to have been
called into being, and cultivated by
association with Jesus, than to have
belonged to them when they were first
chosen to be apostles. But they were
men of simple, unsophisticated charac-
ters, and devoid of those inveterate pre-
judices which blinded the eyes of scribes
and Pharisees and hardened their
hearts. They loved their Master and
believed in Him, and had religious as-
pirations which He alone could satisfy.
The sense of duty was strong in them ;
and they conscientiously desired to
do what was right. ‘They had also
the excellent quality of persistence, or
holding-out. Other men had also
enrolled themselves as Jesus’ disciples,
and had given Him up ; but the twelve
had held on. No mere adventurers,
or time-servers, or self-seekers would
have stayed with Jesus.”


The Men chosen.—1. Christ chooses
simple-minded yet already measurably
prepared men, 2. Few yet very diverse
men. 3. Some prominent to go with
several less noticeable men.—Lange


The Apostolic Office.

I. They were sent to do a given
work.

Il. They were to be witnesses—as
to what their Master had been, and
had done, and had suffered, while they
were with Him. They carried out
their mission (1) by their words—they
preached Christ ; (2) by their work—
they built up the Church, the temple
of redeemed souls ; (3) by their suffer-
ings—they died for Christ.—Liddon.


Vers. 17, 18. “A great multitude
of people.’—Three classes of persons
were now about Jesus: (1) occasional
hearers (the “multitude of people”
from all parts); (2) permanent dis-
ciples (“‘ the company of His disciples”) ;
and (3) the apostles. The first
represented mankind as summoned
to enter the kingdom of God; the
second the Church, or the body of
believers ; and the third the Christian
ministry.—Godet.


A Characteristic Scene.—The whole
scene is a highly characteristic one:
we have—

J. The company of sinners—of
various nations, oppressed by various
evils—ignorance, disease, and Satanic
power—but desiring and seeking re-
demption from Christ.

II. The Saviour—moved with com-
passion, and able to heal and to
deliver.


Ver. 19. “ Power came forth...
healed them all.”—There is something
unusually grand in this touch of
description, giving to the reader the
impression of a more than usual
exuberance of His majesty and grace
in this succession of healings, which
made itself felt among all the vast
multitude.—Brown.


Miracles a Seal to the Message from
God.—Miracles preceded and followed
the Sermon on the Mount. The sermon
was like an epistle sent from God:
the miracles were its seals, impressed
with the Divine image and super-
scription.

169


Biah


* CHAP. VI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


——





MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 20—49.


The Sermon on the Mount as given in St. Matthew’s Gospel may be taken
as setting forth (1) the character of the citizens of the kingdom of heaven
(v. 3-16); (2) the new law that is given to them (v. 17-48), and the new life
which they live, with its duties, aims, dangers, and responsibilities (vi., vii.).
A like general scheme underlies the sermon as reported by St. Luke. In the
fuller report of Christ’s words as given in the first Gospel, the tone is more
polemical than in St. Luke—as Christ contrasts the spirituality of the right-
eousness which He commends to His disciples with the external and artificial
righteousness of scribes and Pharisees. (For a full analysis of the Sermon on
the Mount in St. Matthew’s Gospel, see Westcott, Introduction to the Study of
the Gospels, p. 386).

I. The dispositions of those who are inclined to enter the kingdom of heaven,
and of those who shut themselves out of it.—Four beatitudes are announced to
the former, four woes uttered against the latter (vers. 20-26). 1. Beatitudes.
Those that are in poverty, and live hard, laborious lives, and are crushed down
by affliction, if they are under the influence of the spirit of religion, are likely
to abound in that humility and meekness which qualify men to be citizens of
the kingdom of heaven. The rich and prosperous are apt to be proud and
haughty, and harsh in temper. Doubtless the mass of those now listening to
Christ belonged to the former class. The beatitudes do not belong to them
in virtue of their earthly poverty and misfortunes, but in virtue of their
piety. For these were not simply poor men and women, but poor men and
women seeking blessings from the Saviour, and thereby confessing their own
insufficiency and their reliance upon Him. (So that the gloss in St. Matthew’s
report of the first beatitude, ‘‘ poor in spirit,” is not in conflict with the words
here.) The evil circumstances of their lives become naturally under God’s
blessing a discipline to prepare them for receiving an infinite reward. Their
blessedness is partly in the present (ver. 20)—they possess the kingdom of
heaven, they are enrolled as citizens of it, and have a right to all its privileges ;
and partly in the future (vers. 21, 23)—their present misery will be exchanged
for happy outward conditions, their griefs will be exchanged for unending joys,
the only misfortunes they will know will be persecution for a time of a kind
like that endured by God’s true prophets in all ages, to be followed by “a great
reward in heaven.” In view of what is in store for them they may well be
pronounced “ blessed,” in spite of all in their present lot that seems sordid and
unhappy. 2. Woes. These correspond exactly to the foregoing beatitudes:
over against the “poor” aze set “the rich,” over against “the hungry” are
“the full,” over against “those that weep” are ‘those that laugh,” over against
those that are hated by the world are those that are loved by the world. The
words ‘for ye have received your consolation” show us what we are to
understand by “the rich”: they are those who find all their satisfaction in
the present life. It is not mere riches that are cursed—just as in the preceding
section it was not mere poverty that was blessed. Men like Joseph of Arimathea
and Nicodemus, who were rich, were not disqualified for being disciples of Jesus.
But as a matter of fact the wealthy and those of high rank, as a class, set
themselves against Jesus, and therefore shut themselves out of the kingdom of
heaven. The woes now uttered were amply fulfilled in the sufferings that
accompanied the overthrow of Jerusalem and the fall of the Jewish state
a generation later, and have no doubt reference also to a reversal of lot in
a future state (cf. xvi. 25), A similar passage is found in Jas. v. 1/7.

II. A proclamation of the new law by which the society Christ founds is to


170








HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. VI.





be governed, and of the spirit by which it is animated (vers. 27-45).—The new
law or principle by which Christ would have the society He founds to be
directed and animated is that of charity or love, and He sets it forth in concrete
form (vers. 27-30), and then as an abstract rule. 1. Practical manifestations
of charity (vers. 27-30). It is to be more than merely not rendering evil for
evil: it is to be a rendering good for evil (cf. Rom. xii. 21), or an overcoming
evil by good. To every fresh exhibition of malice, a stronger and more intense
exhibition of love is to be opposed. ‘Do good,” “bless,” “pray for,” are
ascending degrees of love in its outward manifestations—just as the words
“hate you,” “curse you,” “despitefully use you,” mark increasing degrees of
maliciousness. It is to be the source of beneficent actions, and under its influence
the Christian ceases, if need be, to insist upon his rights (vers. 29, 30). Both
to do good unceasingly and to bear wrong unmurmuringly are commended to
him. 2. The golden rule (ver. 31). “As ye would that men,” ete. In its
negative form, “Do not to others what you would have others abstain from
doing to you,” the rule has been found in more than one system of morality
outside the Christian ; but in none does it have the prominent place that Christ
gives it—in none is it commended to men by an example comparable with His.
Further, 3. Christ lays stress upon the disinterestedness of this virtue as
compared with ordinary affection (vers. 32-35 a). Ordinary love is quenched
by want of sympathy, and naturally seeks a return of kindred feeling. But
there is no stain of selfishness or alloy of worldly-wise calculation in the love
which Christ commanded and exemplified. 4. He describes the great example
of this disinterested love in the Divine love which is shown even to the unthank-
ful and the evil (vers. 35 6, 36). The reward won by manifesting this love is not
some external recompense, but it consists in the love becoming purer and more
intense, and in the possessor of it sharing the blessedness of Him who is love
itself. 5. The effects of this love as manifested towards men: it leads to the
formation of merciful judgments concerning the sinful (ver. 37); to generosity
and helpfulness towards all, which God will bountifully reward (ver. 38); to
ability to guide the erring and correct the faulty,—actions which the proud,
unloving Pharisees were incapable of performing (vers. 39-42). It is only from
a nature that is itself good that these good results can proceed. A proud man
cannot teach humility, a selfish man cannot teach charity, any more than a
thorn can yield figs or a bramble bush grapes (vers. 43, 44). If we are to teach
others holiness, we must be holy ourselves : it was the holiness of Jesus that gave
Him pre-eminence as a teacher, and His disciples must be like Him if they
would continue His work (ver. 45).

III. The necessity for sincerity and thoroughness in discipleship, and the
disasters incurred by the opposite faults (vers. 46-49).—To hear and not to
do the sayings of Christ is to give them intellectual acceptance, but not to
allow them to penetrate and govern the whole being—conscience, will, feelings,
and conduct—in short, all that constitutes one’s true personality. Our spiritual
life is an erection we set up; and if it be not well built, it will fall before the
assault of temptation or trial, and will not stand the final test by which the
Divine Judge will bring to light the value of our work (cf. 1 Cor. iii, 12-15).


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 20—49.


Ver. 20. The Qualifications for the awakening in our hearts, which have
Kingdom of Heaven—poverty, hunger, grown weary under the pressure of
etc.,—we do not possess of ourselves, worldly things, the longing for spiritual
but Christ imparts them to us by food. This longing shall in very truth


171


CHAP, VI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,





be satisfied. One of the traditional
sayings of Christ preserved by Clement
is, “¢ Will, and thou shalt be able.”


Spiritual Poverty.—Spiritual poverty,
a heart that feels its need, is the first
thing that makes us fit for the kingdom
of God. He who does not have this first
qualification cannot have those that
follow. ‘‘Theve are many,” Augustine
says, ‘‘ who would rather give all their
goods to the poor than themselves be-
come poor in the sight of God.” The
source of true humility is found only in
Him “ who, though He was rich, yet for
our sakes became poor.”


“‘ Blessed be ye poor.”—This is in-
deed an admirably sweet, friendly be-
ginning of His doctrine and preaching.
For He does not proceed like Moses...
with command, threatening and terri-
fying, but in the friendliest possible
way with pure, enticing, alluring, and
amiable promises.— Luther.


The Poor inherit the Kingdum.—St.
James seems to give a paraphrase of
this beatitude when he speaks of
“ the poor of this world, rich in faith,
and heirs of the kingdom which God
hath promised to them that love Him ”
(ii. 5). As asimple matter of fact, the
poor seem to have been the class that
was most forward to ieceive the Saviour,
and in which He found the most
devoted of His disciples (cf. also
1 Cor. i. 26-29).


Ver. 21. “ Ye that hunger now.”—An
anticipation of this beatitude is to be
found in the song of Mary: ‘“ Me hath
filled the hungry with good things”
(i. 53), CE. also” Ps. cevit. (9%) “For
He satisfieth the longing soul, and
filleth the hungry soul with goodness.”


“ Ye that weep now.”—In the eye of
Heaven blessedness begins at the point
which, in human estimation, is reckoned
the extreme of misery.


Ver. 22. “ Shall hate you.”—In the
manifestation of hatred towards the


172


followers of Jesus a climax is observ-
able. 1. The feeling of dislike. 2. A
breaking off of intercourse. 3, Mali-
cious slanders. 4. Excommunication.
Cf. John ix. 22, 34, xii. 42, xvi. 2.


name.” —I.e. the name of
Christian. St. Peter alludes to these
words in 1 Pet. iv. 14, 16, and St.
James in ii. 7, as in ver. 5 of the same
chapter he has alluded to ver. 20 of this.
“¢Malefic’ or ‘execrable supersti-
tion’ was the favourite description of
Christianity among the Pagans, and
Christians were charged with incendi-
arism, cannibalism, and every infamy ”
(farrar).


“ Your


Ver. 23. “ Rejoice ye in that day.”-—
A very striking fulfilment of this com-
mand, anda statement of the ground on
which the joy of the apostles was based,
are given in Acts v. 41: “ Rejoicing
that they were counted worthy to suffer
shame for Hisname.” In several other
passages in the New Testament “ glory-
ing in tribulation” is commended as a
Christian duty, and various beneficial
results are described as flowing from
patient submission to suffering for the
sake of Christ. See Heb. xi. 26;
Rom. v. 3; Jas.i. 2, 3; Col. i. 24.


“Reward in heaven.’—An indirect
hint that they were not to expect too
great a reward for their faithfulness in
the present life.


“Did their fathers,” etc.— ‘If the
empress,” said Chrysostom, ‘‘ causes me
to be sawn asunder, then let me be
sawn asunder, for that was the fate
of the prophet Isaiah; if she casts me
into the sea, I will think of Jonah; if
she casts me into the furnace of fire,
I think of the three holy children; if
she throws me to the wild beasts, I
will think of Daniel in the lions’ den ;
if she cuts off my head, I have still
St. John as my companion; if she
causes me to be stoned, what else
happened to Stephen ?”


“ The prophets.” —It is especially no


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP, VI.


SSS ee ee ee ee ee ees a eee


ticeable how the Saviour at once places
His newly chosen apostles in the same
rank with the prophets of the Old
Testament, and in the demand that
they should be ready for His name’s
sake to suffer shame shows thesublimest
self-consciousness. It scarcely needs
pointing out how completely the idea
that they were to suffer in such
society, surrounded by such “a cloud
of witnesses,” was adapted to strengthen
the courage and the spiritual might of
the apostles.— Lange.


Ver. 24. “* Woe unto you.”—In this
passage, asin Matt. xxiv. 19, the words
perhaps imply commiseration rather
than anger: “Alas! for you.” In
Matt. xxii. 13-16 the same phrase is
used in denunciation of evil-doers.


“ Rich.”-—Not all the rich, but those
who “receive their consolation” in
the world—that is, who are so com-
pletely occupied with their worldly
possessions that they forget the life
to come. The meaning is—riches are
so far from making a man happy that
they often become the means of his
destruction. In any other point of
view the rich are not excluded from
the kingdom of heaven, provided they
do not become snares for themselves,
or fix their hope on the earth, so
as to shut against them the kingdom
of heaven. This is finely illustrated
by Augustine, who, in order to show
that riches are not in themselves a
hindrance to the children of God, re-
minds his readers that poor Lazarus
was received into the bosom of rich
Abraham.—Calvin.


“ Received your consolation.” —“ For
ye, who trust in your riches, and
accounting them sufficient for your
happiness, neglect the spiritual trea-
sures which I offer you, may be assured
that you have received all your en-
joyment in this world, and have no
ground for expecting any in the world
to come.” Cf, chap. xvi. 25.


Ver. 25. “ Full.” —Those who possess


all that the heart can desire, and do
not hunger and thirst after righteous-
ness. The danger in which they stand
is that of losing all that they possess
at present, and thus of being destitute
at once of both earthly and heavenly
goods. See again an illustration in
the fate of the rich man in the parable,
who had been accustomed to ‘ fare
sumptuously every day,” and who
found himself both excluded from the
heavenly banquet and stripped of those
luxuries in which he had placed all
his delight.


* Laugh.” —Senseless, frivolous, un-
godly mirth is rebuked here as in
Eccles. ii. 2, vii. 6; Prov. xiv. 13. Yet,
on the other hand, the Christian is
described as ‘sorrowful, yet always
rejoicing” (2 Cor. vi. 10), and receives
exhortations to maintain this spirit of
holy gladness (cf. Phil. iv. 4).


Ver. 26. “ Speak well of you.”—Cf.
Jas. iv. 4: “Know ye not that the
friendship of the world is enmity with
God?” John xv. 19: “If ye were of
the world, the world would love his
own.”


“ False prophets.” —“ Universal praise
from the world is a stigma for the
Saviour’s disciples, since it brings them
into the suspicion (1) of unfaithfulness;
(2) of characterlessness; (3) of the
lust of pleasing. False prophets can
ever reckon upon loud applause” (Van
Oosterzee). Cf. Mic. ii, 11: “If aman
walking in wind and falsehood do
lie, saying, I will prophesy unto thee
of wine and of strong drink: he shall
even be the prophet of this people”
(R.V.). ;


Ver. 27. “ Love your enemies.” —The
word here used generally denotes
“complacency in the character” of
the one loved, as distinguished from
personal affection; but the sense in
which it is here employed is that of
maintaining kindly feelings and con-
duct towards another in spite of his
enmity. The connection between this


373


CHAP. VI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


i nnn ee EE EEEEEEEnSE Eee


precept and the foregoing words is well
brought out by Meyer: “ Yet although
I utter against those these woes, yet
I enjoin on you not hatred but love
towards your enemies. It is therefore
no accidental antithesis.”


“ Do good,” etc.—A climax is notice-
able in the precepts which describe the
manner in which love to enemies is
to be displayed. 1. In deeds—“ do
good.” 2. In words—‘“ bless.” 3. In
prayers for their welfare—‘ pray for
them.”


A New Departure.—Although it
cannot be denied that love to enemies
is in a certain sense required even by
Jewish and heathen moralists, it must
yet be remembered that the thought
of requiting acts of enmity with devout
intercession could only aris? in the
heart of Him who has Himself prayed
for the evil-doers.—Lange.


Vers. 27-38. Christ's Law of Love.
—A seemingly easy but profoundly
difficult section. We must keep in
mind —

I. That the address is given to
Christ’s own followers.—It can neither
be understood nor practised by any


others. The contrast is between true
disciples and sinners who will do
nothing but what will bring an


immediate reward from men.

II. It is to be obeyed in the
spirit, and not in the letter.—Christ
gives us here some examples of how
the true spirit of Christianity is seen.
Had He intended these examples to be
practised by His followers in literal
obedience on all occasions, He would
not have been content with merely
giving instances. He would have gone
over the whole range of possible
circumstances, and shown us how to
act in every case. But this is im-
possible, and contrary to the’ very
spirit and essence of Christianity.—
Hastings.


The Law of Love proclaimed.
I. The extent of love (vers. 27-30).


{re


II. The love
(ver. 31).

IfI. The Christian’s standard of
love (vers. 32-36).

IV. Love's reward (vers. 37, 38).—
W. Taylor.


golden rule of


Ver. 28. “ Pray for them.”—Many
imagine what is here commanded to be
impossible. But Christ never com-
mands impossibilities; but He _ pre-
seribes such kind of perfection as was
attained by David in the case of Saul,
and by Abraham and by Stephen the
martyr in praying for his murderers,
and by St. Paul in wishing to be ac-
cursed for his persecutors (Rom. ix. 3).
—dJerome.


Ver. 29. “Turn to him the other
also.”
I. Do not return blow for blow.
II. Bear the blow in silence.
III. Lovingly lay thyself open to
receive another blow.


Public Rights.—This precept does not
require or permit any one to surrender
public rights, which are not his own
“eloke” or ‘“ coat,” much less Christian
principles and Christian truth, for
which we are to contend earnestly
(Jude 3), and of which we are not to
divest ourselves; or to allow any one
to strip us, for then we should be naked
indeed ; nor allow any one, as far as in
us lies, to strip others, and to rob
Christ.— Wordsworth.


Ver. 30. “Give to every man”—
The promise is made to us by Christ
that He will give us whatever we ask
for (John xiv. 14). Yet it is not
always literally fulfilled. We do not
receive what would be hurtful for us,
even if we ask for it; and are often
constrained to confess thankfully that
our disappointment is better than our
wish. ‘So in his humble sphere should
the Christian giver act. To give every-
thing to every one—the sword to the
madman, the alms to the impostor,
the criminal request to the temptress
—would be to act as the enemy of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


CHAP. VI.





others and of ourselves. Ours should
be a higher and deeper charity, flowing
from those inner springs of love which
are the sources of outward actions
sometimes widely divergent, whence
may arise both the timely concession
and the timely refusal” (Alford).


“Ask them not again.”—We must
remember that we ought not to quibble
about words, as if a good man were
not permitted to recover what is his
own, when God gives him the lawful
means. We are only enjoined to exer-
cise patience, that we may not be
unduly distressed by the loss of our
property, but calmly wait till the Lord
Himself shall call the robbers to
account.—C'alvin.


“ Asketh of thee... ask them not
again.” —It is to be noted that in this
verse two Greek words are translated
“ask”: the first of them means to ask
as a favour, the second to demand as a
right.


Ver. 31. The Golden Rule.

I. We must consider how we should
like other people to treat us, were
they in our circumstances and we in
theirs.

Il. It is not what others really do
to us, but what we wish them to
do, that should be our rule.

II. That which we wish others to
do to us must be lawful and reason-
able,

The excellence of the rule is evident
from its reasonableness, and its intelli-
gibility, and from the fact that it is
readily applicable to all persons in all
circumstances. The Saviour gathers
up His detailed instructions into “a
little bundle which every man can put
into his bosom and easily carry about
with him” (Luther). We all love our-
selyes, and therefore we can all know
the love our neighbour requires from
us. The natural man loves himself,
and that love blinds him to the wants
of his neighbours: the Christian loves
himself, but that love enlightens him
as to what is due to his neighbour.


Vers. 32-34. “ For if ye love them,” ete.
—Our Lord means to say that in all
these things nothing has been done for
the love of God, and therefore no
thanks are due. The world’s view of
returning love for love is well put by
Hesiod : ‘‘ Those who love will be loved
in return, and those who visit will be
visited in return; he who gives will
receive gifts, and he who does not give,
will receive nothing. One gives willingly
to the giver; but no one to be sure
gives to him who refuses to give.” In
the same way Socrates teaches that it
is allowable to cherish a grudge at the
good fortune of your enemy, but that
envy only consists in grudging the
good fortune of a friend. Plato speaks
of it as impossible to love an enemy.
Such is the wisdom of the heathen.


Vers. 35, 36. “Children of the
Highest.” —Our Father in heaven more
than any one else meets with the in-
gratitude of men, and it should not
depress His children on earth to have
to experience it also. The great re-
ward which the Lord of love promises
to the children of God consists chiefly
in this, that they taste the blessedness
of being able to love. ‘To give is more
blessed than to receive.” It is sweet
to be loved from the heart, but it is
much sweeter and inexpressibly blessed
to love with the whole heart. One is
more blessed in the love which one feels
than in the love which one inspires.


Vers. 36, 38. The Christian’s Duty
as Man to Man.

I. The pattern of mercy, of justice,
of forbearance and forgiveness, of
generosity, which we ought to take.—
This is the example of Almighty God.
“Be ye therefore merciful,” because
“the Highest is kind,” ete.

Il. The rule of God’s government
and judgment in matters between man
and man.—‘ With the same measure,”
etc. Words well known and familiar,
but some of the most awful. words in
the Bible. For (1) we feel they must
be true, but (2) we cannot see or guess
how they will be carried out.—Church.


175


CHAP. VI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





Ver. 37. “Judge not.”—1. We can
only go by appearances, 2. We can
never be sure of the motive which has
prompted the action in question. 3. We
cannot fully estimate the circumstances
in which the man was placed whose
conduct we arraign. 4. We are only
too liable to be influenced by our
prejudices, and by considerations of
self-interest, and are to a correspond-
ing extent disqualified to act as judges.


Vers. 39, 40. Blind Leaders of Blind.
Note :—

I. The presumption of the leaders.

II. The delusion of those who trust
themselves to their guidance.

III. The inevitable fate which be-
falls both

Ver. 40 explains why the fate is
inevitable: the disciple, even when
perfected, when he has learned his
whole lesson, can know no more than
his teacher, and the very care with
which he follows will ensure his falling
into the mistakes his master makes.


Vers. 41, 42. The Literal and the
Figurative Beam.—In the physical re-
gion a beam in the eye does not sharpen
its sight : in morals the case is different.
Those who are corrupt in mind are
very quick in detecting corruption in
others, even in cases where innocence
would discover nothing amiss. The
man with a beam in his eye has two
faults: 1. He does not know the beam
to be there. 2. He assumes airs of
moral superiority, and carries himself
as a judge instead of a brother.


Correcting the Faults of Others.

I. It is a delicate operation to
correct the faults of other men.—It
may be likened to the feat of taking
a chip of wood out of an inflamed eye.
A clumsy operator may easily make
things worse. The case supposed is
one of visible and undeniable fault.
Still it is a delicate task to judge of
it: it isa difficult operation to correct
or remove it.

II. Self-ignorance and _ self-conceit
incapacitate one for performing this


176


operation.—Most accurate and pun-
gent moral strictures often proceed
from men who are quite aware that
their own lives will not bear close in-
spection. Christ strongly disapproves
of such conduct.

III. An honest Christian reserves
his strictest judgment for himself.—


Fraser.


Ver. 42. “ Let me pull out the mote.”
—A subtle form of harsh judgment
of others is that which assumes the
appearance of solicitude for their im-
provement. Our Lord teaches that
all honest desire to help in the re-
formation of our neighbour must be
preceded by earnest efforts at amending
our own conduct. If we have grave
faults of our own undetected and un-
conquered, we are incapable either of
judging or helping our brethren. Such
efforts will be hypocritical, for they
pretend to come from genuine zeal for
righteousness and care for another’s
good, whereas their real root is simply
censorious exaggeration of a neigh-
bour’s faults; they imply that the
person affected with such a tender care
for another’s eyes has his own in good
condition. A blind guide is bad enough,
but a blind oculistis a still more ridicu-
lous anomaly. Note that the result of
clearing our own vision is beautifully
put, not as being ability to see the
faults of our fellows, but ability to cure
them. It is only the experience of the
pain of casting out a darling evil, and
the consciousness of God’s pitying mercy
as given to us, that make the eye keen
enough, and the hand steady and gentle
enough, to pull out the mote.—Wae-
laren.


Vers. 43-45. Good and Bad Fruit.—
Christ here speaks of the inner nature
—the heart—of man and of its outward
manifestations, and asserts that in all
cases the inner is the maker of the
outward. A good heart will infallibly
reveal itself in holiness of word and
deed: in like manner an evil heart
will disclose itself, in spite of all hypo-
critical attempts to conceal the true


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. Vi.


a ee


state of matters. We have here there-
fore—

I. A law which is bound up with the
nature of things, and which we cannot
control ; and—

II. A test of character of the most


stringent yet most reasonable kind.


Ver. 46. “ Why call ye Me, Lord ?”
etc.—Acknowledgment of Christ’s au-
thority is to be accompanied by obe-
dience to His commandments.


Four Classes of Men may be described
by their Relation to Christ.

I. There are those who neither call
Him Lord, nor do the things which He
says.

II. There are those who call Him
Lord, but do not the things which He
says.

III. There are those who do not call
Him Lord, but do the things which
He says.

IV. There are those who both call
Him Lord and do the things which He
says.


Vers. 47-49. The Wise and the Foolish
Hearers.—The point of the contrast
between the two men in the parable is
not, as often supposed, in the selection
made of a foundation on which to build.
The contrast is that between two men,
one of whom makes the foundation
a matter of deliberate consideration,
while the other never takes a moment’s
thought about a foundation, but pro-
ceeds to build at haphazard, on the
surface, just where he happens to be.
St. Luke brings this out clearly by
saying that the latter built “without
a foundation.” The one builder is
characterised by considerateness and
thoroughness, the other by inconsider-
ateness and superficiality. Two points
of difference between the two builders
are clearly hinted at :—

I. The wise builder has a prudent
regard to the future.—He anticipates
the coming of storms, and he aims at
being well provided against them. The
foolish builder, on the contrary, thinks
only of the present. If all is well


to-day, he recks not of to-morrow, and
of the storms it may bring.

II. The wise builder does not look
merely to appearances.—The question
with him is not, What will look well 2
but, What will stand, being founded
on the rock? The foolish builder, on
the other hand, cares for appearances
only. His house looks as well as
another’s, so far as what is above
ground is conceriel; and as for what
is below ground, that, in his esteem,
goes for nothing.

The man who has regard to appear-
ances only never considers the future :
he acts from impulse, imitation, and
fashion, and the use of religion as a
stay in temptation and trouble is not
in all his thoughts. With the genuine
disciple religion is an affair of reason
and conscience—of reason looking well
before and after, and of conscience
realising seriously moral responsibility.
The spurious, too, look only to what
is seen, the outward act; the genuine
look to what is not seen, the hidden
foundation of inward disposition, the
heart-motive, out of which flow the
issues of life. The outward acts of
both may be the same, but the motive
of the one is love of goodness, that of
the other is vanity. While we can on
paper discriminate between these two
classes, itis a difficult and delicate task
to discern and judge between them
in real life. We can only judge by
appearances, and are apt to think
better of the pretender than of the
genuine man, for the former makes
appearances his study. False disciples
often gain golden opinions, when true
disciples, with their faults all on the
surface, are of little account.

The elements decide as to the merits
of the two builders. By these are
meant times of severe trial, the judg-
ment days which overtake men even
in this world occasionally, and in which
many fair edifices of religious profession
go down. The forms in which the trial
may come are very diverse. There are
trials by outward calamities, by reli-
gious doubt, by sinful desires—trials in
business, by commercial crises and the


177


a


CHAP, VII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





like—trials by tribulations, such as
overtake professors of religion in evil
times. The thing to be laid to heart
is that trial, in one form or another, is
to be expected. It will come, and may
come suddenly.— Bruce.


The Wise Builder and the Foolish.—
An admonition for all who read Christ’s
words as much as for those who
originally heardthem. The peroration
of His sermon employs a double illus-
tration, which must have told with
graphic power on an audience accus-
tomed to the sudden tempests and
sweeping floods of the climate of
Judea.

I. The two builders.—To the first
is likened the obedient hearer of the
words of Christ: Those who follow
Him are believers, as He is their
Saviour—disciples, as He is their
Teacher, ‘To the second is likened the
disobedient hearer of the words of
Christ. He listens, and seems to honour
and approve, yet does not keep or do
the word. How frequent are such
builders in every Church!


II. The day of trial—In fair
weather the two houses are equally
safe. The day of storm reveals the
difference. In the Day of Judgment
all hollow discipleship will be exposed.
How great the fall! How piteous the
ruin !—Fraser.


The Two Houses, and their Fates.—
These words apply to all the subjects
of the kingdom, and not to teachers
only. Obedience is the only safety.
We are all builders. The houses we
build are our characters. The under-
ground work is the main thing in esti-
mating stability. No house is stronger
than its foundation. Real building on
Christ is practical obedience to His
commandments. Only such a life is
firm whatever storm comes. There
are lives which look like true Chris-
tian lives, and are not. One little
“not ” expresses the awful contrariety
in the experience of two builders whose
houses it may be stood side by side for
years. So the sermon ends, burning
these two pictures into our imagination.
—WMacelaren.





CHAPTER VII.
CRITICAL NOTES.


Ver, 1. In the audience.—Lit. “in the ears of the people ” (R.V.).


Ver. 2. Servant.—Je. slave.
with him.” This is peculiar to St. Luke.
(Matt. viii. 6).


Who was dear unto him,—Or, “ who was in much esteem
Sick,—“ Sick of the palsy, grievously tormented’ ’
Ready to die.—Rather, “at the point of death ” (R.V.).
Ver. 3, He sent unto Him the elders of the Jews.—Omit “ the ” (R.V.).


St. Matthew repre-


sents the centurion as coming to Jesus; the discrepancy may be accounted for on the
principle gui facit per aliwm, facit per se, The mission of the elders (elders, no doubt, of the
synagogue built by the centurion) is peculiar to St. Luke.

Ver, 4. Instantly.—JZ.e. “ urgently,” “ earnestly ”’ (R.V.).

Ver. 5. Built us a synagogue.—Not necessarily the only synagogue in the town, but the


synagogue to which the speakers belonged.


In the ruins of Tel Hum, which is perhaps to


be identified with Capernaum, the remains of two synagogues are to be seen, one of


them apparently belonging to the time of Herod.


quently mentioned by Josephus.


Generosity of this kind is fre-


It is almost certain from this verse and from Matt.


viii. 11, 12 that this centurion, though favourably disposed towards the Jewish people and


their religion, was not a proselyte.


“The existence at this time of the persons who are


called in Rabbinical writings Proselytes of the Gate is very doubtful” (Speaker's


Commentary).


Ver. 7. Say in a word.—It is interesting to notice that Jesus had already wrought a
miracle of this kind; by His word, spoken at a distance, the son of the nobleman (or


“courtier ”) at Capernaum had been healed (John iv. 46-54).


The two miracles are quite


distinct events, though some critics have endeavoured to prove that they are one and the


same.


178


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. VIL
a ee a Ee eee ee SS


Ver. 8. For I also, ete.—“ Being myself under authority, I know what it is to obey; having
soldiers under me, I know how they obey my commands. I know, then, from my own ex-
perience, that the powers of disease which are under Thy command will obey Thy word ”
(Speaker's Commentary).

Ver. 9. Marvelled.—The only other time when Jesus is said to have been astonished is in
Mark vi. 6, when He marvelled because of wnbelief.

Ver. 10. That had been sick.—Omitted from the best MSS.; omitted in R.V.

Ver. 11. The day after.—A better reading, followed by the R.V., is “soon afterwards.”
There is just the difference of a single letter between the two phrases in the original.
Nain.—This is the only place in the Bible where the village is mentioned. It has been
identified with the small village of Nein, at the foot of the Lesser Hermon. The name means
“lovely.” It is twenty-five miles distant from Capernaum.

Ver. 12. Carried out.—Places of burial were outside the towns, to avoid ceremonial
defilement.

Ver. 13. The Lord.—This title for Jesus is much more frequently found in the third and
fourth Gospels than in the first and second, and is perhaps an indication of their having
been written when Christianity was somewhat widespread.

Ver. 14, The bier.—An open coffin.

Ver. 15. He delivered.—This is closely connected with what is said in ver. 13, “He had
compassion on her.” Cf, 1 Kings xvii. 23 ; 2 Kings iv. 36.

Ver. 16. There came a fear on all.—Rather, ‘‘ fear took hold on all” (R.V.).

Ver. 17. Judwa.—‘ It is evident that the miracle of Nain, as being a greater marvel of
power than any which Jesus had previously exhibited, raised His fame to the highest pitch.
His name was spread abroad, not only in the immediate neighbourhood of the town in which
the miracle was wrought, but throughout Judza also. It was upon this that news of our
Lord’s wonder-working power reached the Baptist in his prison” (Speaker’s Commentary).
A comparison has often been drawn between the miracles of raising the dead which are
recorded in the Gospels. The daughter of Jairus was newly dead, the widow’s son was being
borne to the grave, while Lazarus had been dead four days and his body was in the grave,
at the time of the working of the respective miracles by which they were recalled to life.

Ver. 19.—The message sent by John the Baptist to Jesus has been the subject of much
discussion. Though in form questions, his words are virtually an appeal to Christ to declare
Himself and to hasten His kingdom. The fact that John was dissatisfied with the character
of the work in which Jesus was engaged and wished to suggest a new departure
indicates a defective faith. In view of the words in ver. 23 we can scarcely doubt that
some measure of blame attached to the Baptist for failing to appreciate the work of Christ
at its true value. Still, this was but a temporary lapse from faith. John’s was not a fickle
and wavering character, as Christ Himself here declares (ver. 24). The depression of spirits
caused by his imprisonment must be taken into account in extenuation of his doubts and
fears. He that should come.—T.e. the expected Messiah, a kind of title (cf. Heb. x. 37).

Ver. 21.—Omit “ same,” which should have been in italics, as there is no word in the original
corresponding to it. Plagues,— Lit. scourges.

Ver. 22.—The description given of the works done by Christ is taken from Isa. 1xi. 1,
xxxv. 5, 6, with the exception of the detail, ‘the dead are raised.” This last had special
significance in view of the raising of the widow's son from the dead, and was perhaps
suggested by that miracle. Christ’s reply is virtually that He is the Messiah, and is engaged
in the work which it had been foretold that the Messiah would do.

Ver. 23. Offended.—J.e. caused to stumble (see R.V.).

Ver. 24.—Depreciatory thoughts of the Baptist might have been excited in the minds of
those present by the words of Christ, and therefore our Lord proceeds to set the character
and work of His forerunner in their true light and to lay stress upon that in them which
was great and unique. The question in this verse might be taken to mean, “It was not to
see some trifling thing, such as the reeds, that you went out into the wilderness,” The
expression “shaken by the wind,” however, seems to indicate that the words are metaphorical
—that the stern, unbending character of the Baptist is suggested by contrast with the reeds.

Ver. 25. Soft raiment.—Contrast with this the Baptist’s actual dress (Matt. iii, 4).

Ver. 26. More than a prophet.—Namely, an actual, personal herald and forerunner; the
angel or messenger of Mal. iii. 1, and so the only prophet who had himself been announced
by prophecy. :

Ver. 27. Before Thy face.—In Mal. iii, 1 it is Jehovah who speaks, and His words are,
“ Bebold, I will send My messenger, and he shall prepare the way before Me.” Here, as well
as in Matt. xi. 10 and Mark i. 2, we have the quotation given us, “before Thee, before Thy
face.” In other words, that which is said by Jehovah of Himself is applied by Christ to
Himself—a very striking indication of Christ’s eternal and co-equal Godhead. k

Ver. 28. A greater prophet.—The best MSS. omit “prophet”; omitted in R.V. It is
probably a gloss explaining and limiting the use of “ greater,” @.e, as a prophet. He that is


179


CHAP. VII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE,





least.——‘‘ Rather, ‘ he that is less,’ i.e. inferior to John, in gifts and power, yet being ‘in the
kingdom’ is in a higher state. He that holds but a small place in the Christian Church is
greater as regards his office than he who prepared the way for its founding. This is said
not of the personal merits but of the official position of the two” (Speaker's Commentary).

Vers. 29 and 30 are evidently a parenthetical description of the impression produced by our
Lord’s words upon those who heard them, and not a continuation of His discourse. This
seems to have been understood at a very early time, as we can see from the insertion of the
gloss in ver. 31, “ And the Lord said,” which was intended to indicate our Lord’s resumption
of His discourse.

Ver. 29. Justified God.—Z.e. declared their belief in the wisdomn of God's procedure,
or acknowledged and commended the purpose of God in calling them to repentance by John.

Ver. 30. Rejected.— Rather, “ frustrated,” or ‘“‘ made of none effect.” Against themselves.
—Rather, “for themselves” (R.V.), or, “ with reference to themselves.”

Ver. 31. And the Lord said.—These words are absent from all the best MSS., and are
rejected by modern editors. See above, Itis possible that they may have got into the text
from a Lectionary; but even if this were so, the historical character of vers. 29, 30 is
sufficiently marked to distinguish them from Christ’s own words.

Vers. 31-35.—The general meaning of this passage may be given as follows: “ Those who
pipe are the Jews condemning the asceticism of John, and complaining that he will not
respond to their demand of a more lax mode of life. Those who mourn are the same Jews
complaining of our Lord as not exhibiting the severity of life befitting a prophet. But
in both cases alike wisdom is justified of her children ; the foolish children are discontented
with both; the children of wisdom acknowledge the Divine wisdom manifest in both, their
different modes of life befitting their different missions. The simile is taken from children
imitating in games a marriage or a funeral, with the accompaniments of merry or mournful
music ” (Speaker's Commentary).

Ver. 34. Eating and drinking.—A reference to our Lord’s practice of attending entertain-
ments and feasts, e.g. the marriage at Cana, the feast in the house of Levi, etc. This
incident is not identical with that recorded in Matt. xxvi. 6,7; Mark xiv. 3, and John xii. 3—
the anointing at Bethany in the house of Simon the Leper. “The two occurrences have
little in common but the name of the host (Simon) and the anointing. In this case the
woman was ‘a sinner,’ showing her penitence, in the other a pious, loving disciple, preparing
Him for burial; heve the feet are anointed, there the head ; here the objection arose from the
woman's character, there from the waste; here the host objects, there Judas, while the
lessons our Lord deduces are altogether different ” (Popular Commentary).

Ver. 36. One of the Pharisees.—The invitation given by one of the Pharisees to Jesus
would seem to belong to an early period of His ministry, before the enmity of that party
against our Lord had grown intense, A certain coldness or ungraciousness seems to mark
the conduct of this Pharisee in spite of his proffer of hospitality, as shown in the omission
of acts of courtesy ordinarily rendered by host to guest. He may not have made up his
mind about the Divine mission of Jesus, and may have given the invitation with a view of
forming a definite opinion on the matter after intercourse with Him. Sat down.—Lit,
“reclined.” The guests lay on couches with their heads towards the table in the centre
and their feet towards the side of the room. This gave opportunity for the anointing of the
feet that took place on this occasion.

Ver. 37. A woman, ete.—A better reading (followed by the R. V.) is, “and, behold, a woman
which was in the city, a sinner.” This lays greater stress upon her notoriety as a person
of abandoned character. There is no ground whatever for identifying her with Mary
Magdalene, as is done in the heading of this chapter and in Christian art. Mary Magdalene
was delivered by Jesus from the state of demoniacal possession; but there is no reason for
believing that there was any connection between that state and a vicious life. In Hastern
houses, even at the present time, it is not uncommon for strangers to enter at the hour of
meals, and to take part in conversation with the guests at table. Alabaster box.—Rather,
“alabaster cruse” (R.V.), or “ flask.”

Ver. 38. His feet.—The sandals were put off on entering the room, and so the feet were
bare. Her purpose, doubtless, was to anoint His feet; but her tears began to fall ere she
began her task, and so she first wiped away her tears from His feet with her hair, then
kissed His feet and anointed them. Weeping.—No doubt at the contrast between His
holiness and her sinfulness. Kissed.—Lit. “kissed earnestly.”

Ver. 39. If He were a prophet.—The question as to whether Jesus was a prophet sent from
God was evidently pressing upon the mind of Simon. He decides it in the negative; he
was sure a prophet would in virtue of his supernatural insight have known “ who and what
manner of woman it was that touched him,” and that he would instinctively have repelled
a sinner.

Ver, 40. I have somewhat, etc.—A courteous mode of bespeaking attention. Master.—
Ie. Teacher, or Rabbi.


180





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE, CHAP. VII.
a ra ne ee


Ver. 41. Five hundred pence . . . fifty.—About £15 12s. 6d. and £1 Lis. 3d. of our money.
_ Ver. 42, Frankly forgave.—There is only one word in the original-——“ remitted,” but it
involves the idea of free grace and favour.


Ver, 44, Turned.—The woman was standing behind Him. Water for My feet.—The feet
defiled on dusty roads, being only partially covered with sandals. It was customary to bring
water to wash the feet of guests: see John xiii. 5.

Vers. 44-46.—Observe the contrasts between the commonplace courtesies Simon had omitted
and the extraordinary acts of reverence and devotion the woman had done: water and towel
contrasted with her tears and her hair, the kiss of welcome and the kisses lavished by her


on His feet, anointing-oil for the head and the precious ointment she poured upon His
eet.


Ver. 47. For she loved much.—‘ Not, because she loved much, as though her love was
the cause of her forgiveness, This sense is directly opposed to the parable (ver. 42), which
represents the debtors as unable to pay, and the forgiveness as free; to the next clause, which
plainly makes the forgiveness the ground of the love, not the reverse; and also to ver. 50,
which represents faith, not love, as the antecedent of forgiveness, on the side of the person
forgiven. The clause is to be explained: ‘since she loved much,’ é.e. her sins which are
many are forgiven (as you may conclude from your own judgment, that much forgiveness
produces much love), since she loved much (as these manifestations indicate)” (Popular
Commentary).

Ver. 48. Thy sins are forgiven.Her faith had virtually secured forgiveness, but her
conscience still needed assurance of the fact, and this assurance Christ now gives.

Ver, 49. Forgiveth sins also.— Rather, “‘ even forgiveth sins ” (R.V.).


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—11.


The Faith of the Centurion.—That upon which the Son of God fastened as
worthy of admiration was not the centurion’s benevolence, nor his perseverance,
but his faith. And so speaks the whole New Testament, giving a special
dignity to faith. By faith we are justified. By faith man removes mountains
of difficulty. As the divinest attribute in the heart of God is love, so the
mightiest, because the most human, principle in the breast of man is faith:
love is heaven, faith is that which appropriates heaven. Faith is that which,
when probabilities are equal, ventures on God’s side, and on the side of right,
on the guarantee of a something within which makes the thing seem true
because loved.

I. The faith which was commended.—1l. First evidence of its existence—his
tenderness to his servant. Of course this good act might have existed separate
from religion. But we are forbidden to view it so, when we remember that he
was a spiritually-minded man. Morality is not religion, but it is ennobled and
made more delicate by religion. Instinct may make a man kind to his servant
as to his horse or dog. But the moment faith comes, dealing as it does with things
infinite, it throws something of its own infinitude on the persons loved by the
man of faith; it raises them. Consequently you find the centurion “ building
a synagogue,” “caring for our (i.e. the Jewish) nation,” as the repository of the
truth—tending his servants. And this last approximated his moral goodness to
the Christian standard ; for therein does Christianity differ from mere religious-
ness, that it is not a worship of the high, but a lifting up of the low—not hero-
worship, but Divine condescension. 2. His humility. “ Lord, I am not worthy
that Thou shouldest enter under my roof.” Christ calls this faith. How is
humility the result of, or rather identical with, faith? Faith is trust. Trust
is dependence on another ; the spirit which is opposite to independence or trust
in self. Hence where the spirit of proud independence is, faith is not. There
was no servility in this, but true freedom. The centurion chose his master.
He was not fawning on the emperor at Rome, nor courting the immoral ruler
at Ozsarea, who, had titles and places to give away; but he bent in lowliest
homage of heart before the Holy One. His freedom was the freedom of


181





CHAP. VII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





uncoerced and voluntary dependence, the freedom and humility of faith. 3. His
oelief in an invisible living will. ‘Say in a word.” He asked not the presence
of Christ, but simply an exertion of His will. He looked not like a physician
to the operation of unerring laws, or the result of the contact of matter with
matter. He believed in Him who is the Life indeed. He felt that the Cause
of causes is a person. Hence he could trust the living Will out of sight.
This is the highest form of faith. Through his own profession he had reached
this truth. Trained in obedience to military law, accustomed to render prompt
submission to those-above him, and to exact it from those below him, he read
law everywhere ; and law to him meant nothing unless it meant the expression
of a personal will. }

II. The causes of Christ’s astonishment.—1. The centurion was a Gentile;
therefore unlikely to know revealed truth. 2. A soldier, and therefore exposed
to a recklessness, idleness, and sensuality which are the temptations of that
profession. But he turned his loss to glorious gain. There are spirits which
are crushed by difficulties: others would gain strength from them. The greatest
men have been those who have cut their way to success through difficulties.
And such have been the greatest triumphs of art and science; such, too, of
religion. Moses, Elijah, Abraham, the Baptist, the giants of both Testaments,
were not men nurtured in the hothouse of religious advantages. Many a man
would have done good if he had not had a superabundance of the means of
doing it. Religious privileges are necessary especially for the feeble, as crutches
are necessary ; but, like crutches, they often enfeeble the strong. For every
advantage which facilitates performance, and supersedes toil, a corresponding
price is paid in loss. The place of religious might is not the place of religious
privileges. But where amid manifold disadvantages the soul is thrown upon
itself, a few kindred spirits, and God, there grow up those heroes of faith like
the centurion, whose firm conviction wins admiration even from the Son of
God Himself.

III. This incident testifies to the perfect humanity of Christ.—The Saviour
“marvelled”: that wonder was no fictitious semblance of admiration. It was
genuine wonder. He had not expected to find such faith. The Son of God
increased in wisdom as in stature. He knew more at thirty than at twenty.
In all matters of eternal truth His knowledge was absolute. But it would seem
that in matters of earthly fact, which are modified by time and space, His know-
ledge was like ours, more or less dependent on experience. Now we forget this—
we are shocked at the thought of the partial ignorance of Christ, as if it were
irreverence to think it: we shrink from believing that He really felt the
force of temptation; or that the forsakenness on the cross and the momentary
doubt have parallels in our human life. In other words, we make that Divine
life a mere mimic representation of griefs that were not real, and surprises that
were feigned, and sorrows that were theatrical. But thus we lose the Saviour.
For if we lose Him as a brother, we cannot feel Him as a Saviour.—Robertson.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 1—16.


Vers. 1-10. The Centurion of Great
Faith—The character of the man
comes out in his affection for his slave,
his reverence for such religious light as
he had already attained, his modesty
and reticence. Jesus marvelled at his
faith. It delighted the heart of the


182


Son of man with a rare joy. He
gave it the palm over all such faith
as He had already met with, and re-
sponded to it even beyond the soldier’s
expectation. Wherein consisted the
greatness of the faith so signally
praised ?


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,


CHAP, VII.





I. It was great when we consider
the man in whom it was found.— How
favourably he contrasts with those who
saw many miracles, and yet did not
believe. This stranger’s faith was
based on the report of others. He had
not been present at any of the healings
done in the city.

II. It was great in its view of
Christ’s power.— His argument is one
from less to more. Though it be not
all the truth, it goes to the heart of
the truth about the power of Christ.
It puts the crown of the universe on
His head, and the sceptre of universal
dominion into His hand. In so think-
ing and speaking faith acts just as it
ought.

III. It was great in its sole depend-
ence upon Christ and His will.—It
needed no help from sight or sense.
It made nothing of difficulty or distance.
In this it was unparalleled in the
experience of Jesus.

IV. It was great in its self-for-
getting humbleness.—There was not
a vestige of desire for honour to himself.
Indeed, there was the fullest expres-
sion of the opposite. Most striking
humility! Men said, “ He is worthy.”
He says, “Iam unworthy.” He would
have the Lord get all the honour,
and the thing be so done as to keep
himself out of sight altogether. How
hard it is to be simple, unconscious,
and humble in our faith! But this
is faith’s true mark : None but Christ!
—Laidlaw.


Strong Faith rewarded.
I. The centurion of Capernaum.—
a. A good man. 06. A good master.
Il. The centurion’s humility.
III. The centurion’s faith.
IV. The centurion’s reward.—
Watson.


Vers. 1-16. Power and Compassion.—
Why are these two incidents recorded ?
The first, because of the centurion’s
faith; the second, because of the
Saviour’s pity.

I. Where was the faith?—It was


in the obedience. Obedience is faith.
The centurion knew—felt that Jesus
was a captain who had but to issue the
word, and be obeyed. There is no faith
that is not surrender, no faith that
does not say, ‘‘ Bid me do this, Lord,
and I will do it.”

II. The meeting of the Prince of life
and of the victim of death_—_Jesus and
His followers stood aside to let the pro-
cession pass. But when He saw the
twice-bereaved woman, “‘ He had com-
passion on her.” He said, “‘ Weep not.”
He restored the young man to life,
and to his mother. It is a little
anecdote. It has its “moral.” “TI
am the resurrection and the life.”
Natural death is not the worst calamity.
To be ‘“‘ dead in sins” is worse. And
Christ has power over spiritual death
aswell. His power over physical death
is only an illustration of His greater
power.—Hastings.


Healing the Sick ; Raising the Dead.

I. The dying slave healed.—1. The
good soldier. 2. The soldier’s slave.
3. The soldier’s friends. 4. The
soldier’s faith. 5, The soldier’s reward.

II. The dead son raised.—l. The
dead son. 2. The weeping mother.
3. The loving Saviour.—W. Taylor.


Ver. 1. “ Entered into Capernaum.”
—The miracle recorded in this section
was one of those ‘mighty works
done in Capernaum” (Matt. xi. 23)
which failed to produce repentance.
The unbelief of the inhabitants of
that city, as Christ solemnly declared,
rendered them more guilty than the
people of Sodom. ‘Three lessons may
be drawn from this: 1. That it is
foolishness to think that faith would
necessarily have been excited in us,
or would be stronger than it is, if we
had been witnesses of Christ’s life and
miracles. 2. That we may shudder at
the sins of others and at the punishment
they may have incurred, and yet be
far more guilty ourselves. (3) Accord-
ing to the measure of light against
which we have sinned will be our
punishment.


183


CHAP. VII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,





Ver. 2. ‘Servant who was dear unto
him.”—Luke thus anticipates a doubt
which might have arisen in the mind
of the reader ; for we know that slaves
were not held in such estimation as
to make their masters so solicitous
about their life, unless by extraordinary
industry, or fidelity, or some other
_virtue, they had secured their favour.
By this statement Luke means that
this was not a low or ordinary slave,
but a faithful servant, distinguished
by many excellencies, and very highly
esteemed by his master; and that this
was the reason why he was so anxious
about his life, and recommended him
so earnestly.—Calwin.


Master and Slave.—This mutual
affection of master and slave is very
touching, especially when we consider
the brutality that so often marked
the slavery of the ancients. We
may safely conclude that the piety,
love, faith, and humility that were so
prominent in the character of the
centurion had been a good influence
upon one who had been for long in
daily intercourse with him, and had
called forth all the better qualities
of the slave. Surely the same holy
influence should produce like effects in
our own society more frequently than
it appears to do.


Master and Man.—The whole mass
of men may be classed in two divisions :
(1) we are employers of others, or
(2) we are employed by others. The
first may learn—

I. To exercise considerateness and
kindliness to those who work for
them,

II. The employed may learn to
earn respect and attachment by faith-
ful service —no eye-service, no slipshod
work—-to be loyal, faithful, and true.
The employer is not to regard his
workman as a mere machine, to be
used up and tossed aside; the employed
is not to regard his master as a blood-
sucker, to be watched and guarded
against, lest he should suck blood too
freely. Let us adorn our stations,


184


remembering our common origin, our
common salvation, our common re-
sponsibility.—Hiley.


Ver. 3. “Sent... the elders of
the Jews.” —The respect manifested by
the ceuturion towards Jesus is empha-
tically marked. 1. Hechose the most
honourable persons, and those whom
he was accustomed to reverence, to
convey his message tothe Lord. 2. He
sent a second deputation composed of
his own personal friends (ver. 6). A
false humility often leads a man to be
guilty of real disrespect : true humility
is punctilious in the matter of doing
honour to the superior.


Ver. 4. “ Besought Him instantly”
(i.e. earnestly).—The duty of making
intercession for others is commended
to us by what is here told of the
earnestness with which these elders
besought Christ to grant the boon
desired by the centurion.


Imperfect Faith effectual. — These
elders, although they were not without
faith, had, nevertheless, less faith than
he who sent them (ver. 9). Yet do
they not entreat in vain for him.—
Gerlach.


Ver. 5. “ He loveth our nation.”—
Before Christ healed his servant the
centurion had been healed by the Lord.
This was itself a miracle. One who
belonged to the military profession,
and who had crossed the sea with a
band of soldiers, for the purpose of ac-
customing the Jews to endure the yoke
of Roman tyranny, submits willingly,
and yields obedience to the God of
Israel.—Calvin.


Blessings won by the Centurion.
—The centurion was attracted by
the Jewish religion. The religion of
heathen Rome had failed (as well it
might!) to supply the wants of such
a spirit as his. He had been guided
to embrace the purest system of all
which existed in his day; and “the
Father of inercies and God of all com-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. VII.


a”


fort” left him not without further
light, but first guided him to the
knowledge, and now brought him into
the very presence of Him who is the
Light itself.—Burgon.


Ver. 6. ‘‘ Then Jesus went with them.”
—It is noticeable that on another occa-
sion Jesus had a similar request offered
to him. A certain nobleman besought
him to come and heal his son who was
at the point of death (John iv. 46, 47).
Jesus did not go, but spoke the word by
which the child was healed. His action
in abstaining to go to the bedside of the
nobleman’s son, and in acceding to the
request to come to heal the centurion’s
slave, may have some special signifi-
cance in it. The greater faith of the
centurion may explain our Lord’s
procedure. In the case of the noble-
man His course of action was calculated
to strengthen weak faith.


“ Trouble not Thyself.” See note on
viii. 49. The phrase here used might
be translated, ‘‘ Don’t worry yourself,”
and is closely akin to that kind of
colloquial expressions which we describe
as ‘“‘slang.” In the two cases where
we find it in this Gospel, it is used by
plain, ordinary people, by the servants
of Jairus, and by the centurion, a man
who possibly had risen from the ranks.
To say that such a slang use of the
word is unworthy of the New Testa-
ment is only to say that the evangelists
were bound to polish up the diction of
servants and soldiers, instead of report-
ing it in the most lifelike way possible.
—R. Winterbotham.


“ Not worthy.” —As one who not only
contrasted his own sinfulness with the
perfect holiness of Jesus, and who
regarded Jesus as a superior being,
but who remembered that he was
himself somewhat of an alien to the
race to which Jesus belonged, and to
whom He so largely confined Himself.


Yet counted worthy.—Counting him-
self unworthy that Christ should enter
into his doors, he was counted worthy


that Christ should enter into his heart.
—Augustine.


Ver. 7. “Say in a word.”—If the
Lord Jesus had been a mere creature,
could He have suffered such views of
Himself to pass uncorrected? But in-
stead of this—as on every other
occasion—the more exalted were men’s
views of Him, ever the more grateful
it was to His spirit.— Brown.


Two Reasons why Christ need not
Come.—The centurion gave two reasons
why Christ need not take the trouble of
entering his house: the first was based
upon his own wnworthiness to receive so
great a guest; the second was based
upon the power which he believed that
Christ possessed—it was needless for
Him to come in person, He had but
to speak the word and the servant
would be healed.


Ver. 8. “J also am a man set under
authority.” —The faith of the centurion
was childlike in its character, but
essentially true in the spiritual insight
it manifested. He argues from the
less to the greater. “Though I am only
a subordinate officer, with limited
powers ’ (‘‘set under authority”), “I
can yet give commands to servants and
be obeyed. Much more art Thou able to
send an angel to heal my servant, or
to bid the disease depart.” He had
learned from his own life as a soldier
a true idea of the Divine government
of the world, and saw in the power
entrusted to him as an officer an emblem
of the power which God exercises over
the world. As truly as he could exe-
cute fis will, did God, as he believed,
who is the source of all power, carry
into effect beneficent purposes towards
mankind.


“ Do this,” eéte—Oh that I could be
but such a servant to mine heavenly
Master! Alas! every one of His
commands says, “ Do this,” and I do it
not: every one of His inhibitions says,
“Do it not,” and I do it. He says,
“Go from the world,” and I run to it:
He says, ‘Come to Me,” and I run


185


CHAP. VII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


sD


from Him. Woe to me! this is not
service, but enmity. How can I look
for favour while I return rebellion ?
—FHall.


Ver 9. The Nature of Faith.—This is
the first time that faith is mentioned in
this Gospel ; and it is in accordance with
the purpose of St. Luke to lay special
emphasis upon the manifestation of this
virtue by one who was outside the circle
of the chosen people—it was an e.rnest
of the acceptance of the Saviour by the
nations of the world. Faith is to be
distinguished from “sight” or know-
ledge: it is a moral quality rather
than an intellectual faculty—a laying
hold of that which is unseen—a ven-
turing to believe upon evidence which
satisfies the heart rather than con-
vinees the reason. It is produced by
love, and not by argument.


Spontaneous and Intense Faith.—This
was the greatest exhibition of faith
which had as yet come under the
observation of Christ. Two things
distinguish it and give it special
value.

I. Its spontaneousness.—It had
sprung up without special cultiva-
tion: God’s dealings with the Jewish
people had been of such a marked
character that it was comparatively
easy for one of that nation to have
faith in Him, but the centurion had
been born and brought up in heathen
society.

Il. Its intensity.—The centurion
did not, as the Jews so often did,
demand a sign to convince him of
Christ’s power : he was fully persuaded
that Jesus could with a word perform
this mighty deed, whether He chose to
exercise His power or not.


“In Israel.” —The name is a signifi-
cant one (“ He who striveth with God”) :
it was given to the patriarch Jacob in
memorial of the faith which gave him
power over the angel and enabled him
to prevail. With the prevailing un-
belief of the Jewish people the strong

186


faith of their great ancestor is, there-
fore, tacitly contrasted. By a heathen,
and not by a son of Abraham, is
faith shown in all its strength and
beauty. ‘¢ Christ found in the oleaster
what He had not found in the olive”
Augustine).


Humility pleasing to God.—As
haughtiness is an abomination unto
the Lord, so humility is pleasing
to Him. ‘ Though the Lord be high,
yet hath He respect unto the lowly:
but the proud He knoweth afar off”
(Ps. exxxviii. 6).


Roman Soldiers mentioned in the New
Testament.—Everything connected with
the centurion is remarkable—for a
master to have such love to his slave, for
a Roman to show such humility, for a
heathen to show such reverence to the
religion of an alien and subject people.
It is interesting to notice that in the
New Testament we have various other
instances of piety and goodness in
the cases of Roman soldiers. There
was the centurion at the cross, who
confessed that Jesus was the Son of
God (Mark xv. 39); Cornelius, dis-
tinguished by his prayers and alms-
giving (Acts x. 1, 2); and Julius, who
treated Paul courteously and interfered
to preserve his life (¢bid. xxvii. 3,
42, 43). Probably, it has been re-
marked, these cases prove that, in the
general decay of morals at this time,
the Roman army, by its order and
discipline, tended to foster some of
the primitive virtues which had dis-
tinguished the nation at an earlier
period.


Ver. 10. “ They that were sent.”—
From a comparison of the various
narratives of this miracle, it would
appear that, after sending two depu-
tations, one of Jewish elders and one
of his own friends, the centurion
himself came and deprecated any
further trouble being taken by Jesus
than His merely speaking the word.
If this be the case, this verse would


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. VII.


a


imply that he remained with Jesus:
“they that were sent returned to the
house, and found the servant whole.”
This perhaps gives us another indica-
tion of the centurion’s faith.


Intercession.—If{ the prayers of an
earthly master prevailed so much with
the Son of God for the recovery of a
servant, how shall the intercession of
the Son of God prevail with His Father
in heaven for us that are His impotent


children and servants upon earth !—
Hall.


The Power of Christ.—The power of
Christ to heal bodily sickness by a word
may well be taken as a pledge of His
power to heal the soul. ‘So also He
rebukes the diseases of the soul, and
they are gone. Oh, if we did but believe
this, and put Him to it! For faith
doth, in a manner, command Him—as
He doth all other things” (Leighton).


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 11—18.


The Compassionate Lord of Life.—Observe—

I. The meeting of the two processions.—Jesus is coming up to the city,
with a considerable crowd following, and meets the funeral coming out of the
gate. Face to face stand the Prince of life with His attendants and the
waiters on death. The dead man, dead in his youth, and when most needed,
the lonely mother, the sympathising or gossiping crowd—these show the ravages
of death, the sorrow that shadows all human love and every home, and the
unavailing, though well-meant, consolation which men can give. That pro-
cession is going one way, and He and His the other. They come in contact,
and His power arrests the march, sends the dead back living, and the mourner
glad. That meeting may stand for a symbol of His whole coming and work.
Why this widow should have been chosen out of all the mourners that laid
their dead to rest that day we do not know. The reasons for the distribution
of His gifts are generally beyond us.

II. Christ's unasked pity.—The sight of the extreme grief of the poor mother,
whom He knew to be reduced to utter loneliness, and probably to poverty, by
the death of her only bread-winner and object of love, went straight to Christ’s
heart. Misery appealed to Him even if it was dumb. His perfect manhood
was perfectly compassionate, and was hindered from the freest flow of pity by
no selfishness. One great glory of this miracle is spontaneousness. Neither
request nor faith precedes it. How should they? Death was a final and
inexorable evil, and none of the three recorded raisings from the dead was in
answer to prayers or belief in His power. The last thing that could have
occurred to that weeping mother was that this Stranger, whom she was too
much absorbed to notice, could give her back her son. But if there was no
prayer, there was sorrow and there was need; and sorrow which He could
soothe, and need which He could supply, never made their moan in His hearing
in vain. Most of His miracles had some measure of faith in some persons
concerned as a precedent condition. But that was a condition established for
our sakes, not for His. His love and power were tied to no one manner of
working, and unasked, untrusted, probably unobserved, He feels the impulse
of pity, which is love turned towards misery, and the impulse moves His all-
powerful will. While ordinarily He is still wont to be found of those that seek
Him, He still finds and blesses some who seek Him not.

III. Christ the compassionate immediately becomes the consoler.—Very
beautiful is it that the soothing words “ Weep not” are said before the miracle,
as if He would not wait even for a moment before seeking to calm the sorrow.
But words which are impotent on other lips, and only make tears run faster,


187


+


CHAP. VII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





are of sovereign power when He speaks them. Nothing is emptier than the
usual well-meant attempts to comfort. What is the use of telling not to weep
when all the cause of weeping remains? But if we know that He is with us in
trouble, and can hear His whisper of comfort, the sharpness of pain is lulled,
though the wound remain. He comforted the widowed heart by the utterance
of His sympathy before He gave her back her dead, and therein He reveals
Himself to all as the compassionate, and therefore the Consoler even of sorrows
that will last as long as life. His ‘“‘ Weep not” is not rebuke nor a vain
attempt to stop the expression without touching the source of grief, but is a
specimen of His continual work, and a prophecy of the time when “ there shall
be no more sorrow, nor crying.”

IV. To compassion and comforting succeeds the stupendous act of life-
giving.—Christ’s look and word to the mother showed His heart, if not His
purpose, and so the bearers halt in silent obedience and expectation. Jesus
spake two words—“ Young man, arise”—as if waking him from sleep, and the
young man “sat up.” How bewildered he would be, finding himself there on
the bier, in the blazing light, and with this crowd around him! He “ began
to speak”—some confused exclamations, probably, like those of a suddenly
awakened man, not knowing where he was or how he came there. Like the
other cases of resurrection, this one suggests many questions—Was return to
life a kindness to the young man? how did the experience during death fit in
with that of earth? and others which might be raised but not answered. As
to the first of these, no doubt, this and all the cases are presented as done out of
compassion for the mourners; but we cannot suppose that that motive is
irreconcilable with regard for the persons raised, and we may be assured that
the gain to the mother was not attained by loss to the son. Probably the
restoration of his bodily life was the beginning of his spiritual life.

The whole incident may be regarded as a revelation of Christ’s power, or as
a revelation of death’s impotence, Christ stands forth as the Prince and Giver
of life. His word is enough. Wherever that dead man was, he heard and
obeyed. ‘The ease with which the miracle is done contrasts with the effort of
Elijah and Elisha in their analogous acts. The assumption of authority by
Christ is of a piece with all His tone. The whole is His proclamation that He
is “Lord both of the dead and living.” It is prophetic too, for it foreshadows
the day when they that are in the graves shall hear the voice of the Son of God.
The miracle also teaches the impotence of death, which is but His servant, and
vanishes at His bidding. It demonstrates the partial operation of death, as
affecting not the person, but only the body. It shows that when a man dies he
is not ended, but that personality, consciousness, and all that make the man are
wholly unaffected thereby. ‘ He gave him to his mother.” Who can paint that
reunion? May we not venture to see in Christ’s action here some dim forecast
of the future, when, amid the joy of heaven, we too may hope to be reunited to
our dear ones, lost awhile. Surely He who brought this young man back from
the dead to soothe a widow’s sorrow, and found joy in giving him back to a
mother’s arms, will do the like with us, and let lonely and yearning hearts clasp
again their beloved.—Maclaren.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 11—17.


Vers. 11-17. At the Gate of Nain.— I. A friend needed.
In this most touching story we see II. A friend found.—He offers to
Jesus as a true friend. From a true the widow pity, comfort, help.
friend we expect compassion, comfort, III. A friend still needed and still
help. near.—Jesus is the same. Heaven


188


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. VII.


SSS aS aT Soames eemiceeo  e e


has made no change in His friendship.
He by His spirit still raises the
spiritually dead, and by His mighty
word will yet raise the physically dead.
—~-Spence.


Vers. 11-15.
I. The compassion of Jesus.
Il. The pains taken by Jesus in all
that He did.
III. The power shown by Jesus.—
Brown.


The Lord of Life.

I. Two crowds (vers. 11, 12).—
In the midst of the one a dead man.
In the midst of the other the Life of
the world. In the first death in its
hardest, cruelest form; for the dead
man was just entering on man’s life,
and his only real mourner was his
widowed mother.

II. The meeting.—The pity of Jesus
—pity of sight, of speech, of touch, a
whole body of pity. The power of
Jesus—power brought forth by pity.
A true picture this of the Saviour.—
Lindsay.


I. The Saviour’s tender sympathy.

II. The Saviour’s words of power.

III. The Saviour’s spreading fame.
—W. Taylor.


The Divine Consoler.
J. The widow mourning.
II. The widow comforted.—By (1) a
word of coinpassion; (2) a word of
power.— Watson.


Ver. 1l. The Beauty of the Narra-
tive-—The exquisite literary skill of
St. Luke is nowhere more clearly
manifested than in telling of this in-
cident ; it and the walk to Emmaus
will stand comparison with the master-
pieces of literary style in any language.
Abundant particulars are given which
serve to call up a very vivid picture :
the city, the gate, the multitude that
followed Jesus, the long funeral pro-
cession that met them, the open bier,
the man’s age and circumstances, his
mother’s condition, the feeling mani-


fested by Christ, His actions and words,
His gestures, the eager attention of
the bystanders, the astonishment at
the miracle, and the excited comments
passed upon it, are all touched upon.
Yet there is no wearisome elaboration of
details and no height of colouring. The
story is told without using adjectives—
the great resource to which modern
word-painters betake themselves. So
far from St. Luke’s work being of the
word-painting order, it is simply a
clear conception of the whole scene
with all its details, expressed in a
perfectly simple, natural manner.


Ver. 12. “The only son.”—The
special circumstances of this bereave:
ment are carefully noted: 1. The
man was young. 2. He was an
only son. 3. His mother was a
widow. In several places in Scripture
grief for an only son is taken as the
very type of grief—as an expression
of the keenest distress the soul can
feel. “O daughter of My people, gird
thee with sackcloth, and wallow thyself
in ashes: make thee mourning, as for
an only son, most bitter lamentation”
(Jer. vi. 26). Cf. also Zech. xii, 10;
Amos vii. 10. Indeed, to a Jewish
mind this form of bereavement was
specially grievous, since it was regarded
as often a direct punishment for sin.

“And she was a_ widow.”—S8t.
Luke has told us the sum of her
misery in a few words. The mother
was a widow, with no further hope of
having children; nor with any upon
whom she might look in the place of
him that was dead. To him alone she
had given suck. He alone made her
home cheerful. All that is sweet and
precious to a mother, was he alone to
her! A young man (ver. 14)—that
is in the flower of his age ; just ripen-
ing into manhood ; just entering upon
the time of marriage; the scion of his
race; the branch of succession; the
sight of his mother’s eyes; the staff of
her declining years.—G'regory of Vyssa.


Ver. 13. “ Had compassion.”—In


189


OHAP. VII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





some cases Christ wrought a miracle
when asked by a sufferer, in some
cases when asked by their friends,
and in some cases, as here, of His
own accord. No request was pre-
sented to Him-—the only appeal
was that of the sorrow which filled
the mother’s heart, and touched the
spectators with sympathy. What com-
fort there is in this thought—that our
needs, our helplessness, our grief, speak
louder than our prayers and fill the
heart of Christ with compassion. Some
sought blessings from the Saviour ; but
this was a case in which He sought
out the sufferer, with the purpose of
stanching her sorrow. The purpose
for which Christ wrought miracles is
often unwisely said to have been to
attest His mission by displaying the
Divine power which He _ possessed.
But clearly this was not His motive on
the present occasion: His one idea was
to do good—to comfort the sorrowful.


“ Weep not.”—He felt authorised to
administer consolation; in the unex-
pected, almost accidental, meeting with
the funeral procession, He recognised
a signal given Him by the Father to
put forth His power to comfort human
sorrow and to overcome death.


This Case a Special Appeal to Christ's
Pity.—It is not wonderful that Christ
had compassion in sorrow like this.
Could He forget, as He looked at this
weeping mother, that He was Himself
the son of a widow, and the stay of
her widowhood ? or fail to foresee the
day, only some months distant, the
noon of which would see His own
mother’s heart pierced with the sword
as she stood by His dolorous cross, of
which the eve should weep over her
as she followed His body to its rocky
grave? But forasmuch as He Himself
must die that dead men may live,
and forasmuch as His mother was soon
to weep over His grave that all
mourning mothers might thenceforth
weep less bitterly, therefore He went
forward to this widow, and with a
voice in which there must have


190


trembled a strange tenderness said
unto her, ‘“‘ Weep not !”—Dykes.


An Authoritative Summons.—Here is
something quite unusual. A man at
once compassionate and wise does not
try to check natural grief. He rather
endeavours to find some consideration
that will abate and moderate it. But
here is no argument, no consolatory
words; only a simple, weighty, authori-
tative summons, “ Weep not!” This
arouses attention, stirs expectation of
something to come.—Laidlaw.


Ver. 14. “ Touched the bier.”—The
gesture of touching the bier was a very
significant one : it was symbolical of His
power to arrest with His finger the
triumph of death, and revealed almost
unconsciously the majesty with which
He wasclothed. “ Life had met death,
wherefore the bier stopped.”


“ Young man, I say to thee.”—By
this word Christ proved the truth of
the saying of Paul, that ‘God calleth
those things which are not as though
they were” (Rom. iv. 17). He addresses
the dead man, and makes Himself be
heard, so that death is changed into
life. We have here: (1) a striking
emblem of the future resurrection, as
Ezekiel is commanded to say, “O ye
dry bones, hear the word of the Lord”
(xxxvil. 4); and (2) we are taught
in what manner Christ quickens us
spiritually by faith. It is when He
infuses into His word a secret power,
so that it enters into dead souls, as
He Himself declares, “The hour
cometh, when the dead shall hear the
voice of the Son of God, and they who
hear shall live” (John v. 25).—
Calvin.


Sleep and Death.—In sleep as in
death there is a sundering of the con-
nection between soul and body, though
in the one case it is but temporary, while
in the other it is permanent. Yet just
as the sound of the human voice is suffi-
cient to restore the connection in the
case of one buried in sleep, so the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. VII.





Saviour’s word avails to restore con-
nection, even in the case of the dead.
—Godet.


The Lord of Life and DeathThere
is incomparable majesty in the phrase,
“TI say unto thee.” He to whom
it was addressed seemed to have
passed away beyond the reach of the
human voice; no lamentations of his
mother and friends could reach his
ear. Yet the Saviour spoke as one
whose words resounded through the
world of the grave and could give
commands which even the dead must
hear and obey. ‘“ The Lord of life and
death speaks with command. No finite
power could have said so without pre-
sumption or with success. That is the
voice that shall one day call up our
vanished bodies from those elements in
which they are resolved, and raise them
out of their dust. Neither sea, nor
death, nor hell can offer to detain their
dead when He charges them to be
delivered” (Halt).


The Compassionate Heart, Mouth, Feet,
and Hand.—Here was a conspiration of
all parts to mercy : the heart had com-
passion, the mouth said “‘ Weep not,” the
feet went to the bier, the hand touched
it, the power of the Deity raised the
dead.—tid.


Ver. 15. “Sat up and began to
speak.” —The return of life is marked
by movement and speech: the rigid
corpse resumed its vital functions, the
mute tongue was loosened. The young
man thus restored by the creative
power of Christ became as it were His
possession—he belonged by the gift of
life for a second time to the Saviour.
But Christ gives him over to his mother.


A Spiritual Resurrection also.—The
feeling of sympathy expressed by
our Saviour for the mother is put
forth as the motive which created the
resolution in Jesus to raise up the
person reposing on the bier. But this
does not exclude the idea of this action
having a reference also to the resusci-


tated person. Man asa sentient being
can never be only a means, as would
here be the case were we to regard
the joy of the mother as the only
object of the raising of the youth from
the dead. Her joy, on the contrary, is
only the immediate but more unessen-
tial result of this action, recognisable
by those who were present; the secret
result of this resuscitation was the
spiritual raising up of the youth to a
more exalted state of existence, through
which only the joy of the mother
assumed a true and everlasting char-
acter.— Olshausen.


Ver. 16. “ Fear.”—This effect is
often mentioned in connection with the
miracles of Jesus. Cf. v. 26, viii. 37;
Mark iv. 41. It is the natural shrink-
ing of sinful human nature from the
evident presence of the power of an
all-holy God. Like feeling is recorded
in the case of almost all appearances
of angels recorded in Holy Scripture.
Cf. also Simon Peter’s words and action
in v. 8.


‘* Prophet.” The use of this name
in connection with the work wrought
by Jesus indicates the true idea of the
prophetic office. The prophet is not a
mere predictor of future events: he is
the representative of God and spokes-
man for God; he brings benefits from
God to man, and proofs of the Divine
interposition in the government of the
world.


“Visited His people.”—After a long
interval of silence and apparent in-
activity (cf. i. 68, 69). The miracle
now wrought reminded the people of
those of Elijah and Elisha. Yet there
was a notable difference between the
two. For though these prophets raised
the dead, they did so laboriously ; Jesus
immediately and with a word: they
confessedly as servants and creatures,
by a power not their own; Jesus by
that inherent “virtue which went out
of Him” in every cure which He
wrought. “ Elijah, it is true, raises the
dead ; but he is obliged to stretch him-

191


.


CHAP, VII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





self several times upon the body of the
child whom he raises, he struggles, he
feels his limited power, he is agitated ;
it is very evident that he invokes
another power to help him, that he
recalls from the kingdom of death a
soul that is not altogether subject to
his word, and that he is not himself
the controller of death and of life.
Jesus Christ raises the dead in the
same way that He does the most
ordinary of actions: He speaks with
authority to those who are plunged in
an eternal sleep ; and it is very evident
that He is the God of the dead as of the
living, never more tranquil than when
He does the greatest deeds” (Massillon).


The Three Miracles of raising the
Dead.—The comparison of the three


miracles of raising the dead (referred to
above in the Critical Notes), as illustrat-
ing various degrees of spiritual deadness
from which Christ can awaken the soul,
has often been made by theolder writers.
It is strikingly expressed by Downe:
“Tf I be dead within doors (If I have
sinned in my heart), why suscitavit in
domo, Christ gave a resurrection to the
ruler’s daughter within doors, in the
house. If I be dead in the gate (If I
have sinned in the gates of my soul),
in my eyes, or ears, or hands in actual
sins, why suscitavit in portd, Christ
gave a resurrection to the young man
at the gate of Nain. If I be dead in
the grave (in customary and habitual
sins), why suscitavit in sepulchro, Christ
gave a resurrection to Lazarus in the
grave too.”


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 18—35.


John’s Doubt of Jesus, and Jesus’ Praise of John.—In the first. part of this
paragraph we have an account of the faltering faith of the great witness, and
of Christ’s gentle treatment of the waverer ; in the second, the witness.of Christ
to John, exuberant in recognition, notwithstanding his momentary hesitation.

I. John’s doubts.—It is quite improbable that this message was sent for the
sake of strengthening his disciples’ faith in Jesus as Messiah, or as a hint to
Jesus to declare Himself. The question is John’s. The answer is sent to him;
it is he who is to ponder the things which the messenger saw, and to answer his
own question thereby. It would have been wiser if commentators, instead of
trying to save John’s credit at the cost of straining the narrative, had recognised
the psychological truth of the plain story of his wavering conviction, and had
learned its lessons of self-distrust. There is only one Man with whom it was
always high-water; all others have ebbs and flows in their religious life and
in their grasp of truth. John seems to have wondered if after all he had been
premature in his recognition of Jesus as Messiah. Perhaps this Jesus was but
a precursor, as he himself was, of the Messiah. Evidently he continues firm
in the conviction of Christ’s being sent from God; but he is puzzled by the
contrariety between Jesus’ deeds and his own expectations. He asks, “‘ Art Thou
He that cometh,’—a well-known name for the Messiah,—“ or are we to expect
another?” and it should be noted that the word for “ another” means not merely
a second, but a different kind of person, who should present the aspects of the
Messiah as revealed in prophecy, and as embodied in John’s own preaching,
which Jesus had left unfulfilled. We may well take to heart the lesson of the
fluctuations possible to the firmest faith, and pray to be enabled to hold fast that
we have. We may learn, too, the danger to right conceptions of Christ, of
separating the two elements of mercy and judgment in His character and work.
John was wrong in stumbling at the gentleness, just as many to-day, who go
to the opposite extreme, are wrong in stumbling at the judicial side of His work.
Both halves are needed to make the full-orbed character. Our Lord does not
answer Yes or No. To do so might have stilled, but would not have removed,


192


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.  cuar. vn








John’s misconception. A more thorough cure is needed. So Christ attacks it
in its roots by referring him back for answer to the very deeds which had excited
his doubt. He points to prophetic writings which foretell the character of His
work. It is as if He had said, “Have you forgotten that the very prophets
whose words have fed your hopes, and now seem to minister to your doubts, have
said this and this about the Messiah ?” It is not Christ’s work which is wanting
in conformity to the Divine idea; it is John’s conceptions of that idea that need
enlarging. A wide principle is taught us here. The very points in Christ’s work
which may occasion difficulty will, when we stand at the right point of view,
become evidences of His claims. What were stumbling-blocks become stepping-
stones. Further, we are taught here that what Christ does is the best answer
to the question who He is. Still He is doing these works among us. We look
for no second Christ, but we look for that same Jesus to come the second time
to be the Judge of the world of which He is the Saviour. The benediction on
him who finds none occasion of stumbling in Christ is at once a beatitude and
a warning. It rebukes in the yentlest fashion John’s temper, which found
difficulty in even the perfect personality of Jesus, and made that which should
have been the “ sure foundation” of his spirit a stone of stumbling. Our Lord
knows that “there is none occasion of stumbling in Him,” and that whoever
finds any brings it or makes it. He knows and warns us that all blessedness
lies for us in recognising Him for what He is—God’s sure foundation of our
hopes, our peace, our thoughts, our lives.

I. The witness of Christ t» John.—Such a eulogium at such a time is a
wonderful instance of loving forbearance with a true-hearted follower’s weakness,
and of a desire, which, in a man, we should call magnanimous, to shield John’s
character from depreciation on account of his message. The world praises a
man to his face, and speaks of his faults behind his back. Christ does the
opposite. ‘‘ When the messengers were departed,” He begins to speak of John.
1. He praises John’s great personal character. he recalls the scenes of popular
enthusiasm when all Israel streamed out to see and hear him. A small man
could not have made such an upheaval. What had given him such attractive
power? His heroic firmness, and his manifest indifference to material ease.
John was the same man then as they had known him to be 2. Our Lord
next speaks of John’s great office. He was a prophet. The dim recognition
that God spoke in his fiery words had drawn the crowds, weary of teachers
in whose endless jangle and jargon of casuistry was no inspiration. The
voice of a man who gets his message at first hand from God has a ring in it
which even dull ears detect as something genuine. 3. Jesus goes on to declare
that John is more than a prophet, because He is His messenger before His face—
that is, immediately preceding Himself. Nearness to Jesus makes greatness.
The closer the relation to Him, the higher the honour. 4. Next we have the
limitations of the forerunner and his relative inferiority to the least in the
kingdom of heaven. Another standard of greatness is here from that of the
world. In Christ’s eyes greatness is nearness to Him and understanding of Him
and His work. Neither natural faculty nor worth is in question, but simply
relation to the kingdom and the King. He who had only to preach of Him who
should come after him, and had but a partial apprehension of Christ and His
work, stood on a lower level than the least who has to look to a Christ who has
. come and has opened the gates of the kingdom to the humblest believer. The
truths which were hid from ages, and but visible as in morning twilight to John.
are clear as day to us. What a place, then, does Christ claim! Our relation to
Him determines greatness. To recognise Him is to bein the kingdom of heaven,
Union with Him brings the fulfilment of the ideal of human nature; and this
is life, to know and trust Him, the King.—WMaclaren.


ra) 193


CHAP. VII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 18—35.


Vers. 18-35. The Messengers of John.
—The King’s forerunner was in per-
plexity, because Christ did not set up
an earthly kingdom.

I. The message of the servant to
the King.—1. When, and why sent ?
2. How answered.

II. The testimony of the King to
the servant.—!|. His character strong,
self-denying. 2. His office. 3. His
position. 4. His work. These words
were a sort of funeral sermon for the
Baptist.—Spence.


Ver. 19. Christ the Great Counsellor.
—John was in perplexity, and sent to
Christ to ask about his doubts. So
should we carry our perplexities
straight to Jesus. Jesus understands
all, and understands us all. Tell Jesus
then. Leave all in His hands, that
He may manage, unravel, clear it up
for us. It is not easy. The taking it
to Jesus is easy. Leaving it is the
hardest part. But faith not only takes
to Jesus, but leaves with Him. Thus
only do we find peace.—Miller.


John’s Misconception of Christ's Work.
—The Baptist had heard in his prison
of the works of Christ, and was per-
plexed by them, since they were not of
the kind he had expected them to be.
He had spoken of the Coming One as
having a fan in His hand with which
to purge His threshing-floor, and of
the axe being laid at the root of the
tree. Nothing Christ had vet done
corresponded with these anticipations
and prophecies. His preconceived
ideas hindered him from understanding
Christ’s procedure. This is still a most
fruitful cause of spiritual ignorance
and misconception. Those whose minds
are under the influence of prejudice
fail to understand the truth, since they
seek not so much to be instructed as to
justify the beliefs and opinions which
they at present hold. John for the
time occupied the position of those
scribes and Pharisees who approached


194


Christ as critics and not as learners.
The question revealed a measure of
impatience. ‘‘It seemed, no doubt,
hard to him that his Master should let
him lie so long in prison for his fidelity
—useless to his Master’s cause, and a
comparative stranger to His proceed-
ings—after having been honoured to
announce and introduce Him to His
work to the people. And since the
wonders He wrought seemed only to
increase in glory as He advanced, and
it could not but be easy for Him who
preached deliverance to the captives,
and the opening of the prison to them
that were bound, to put it into the
heart of Herod to set him at liberty,
or to effect his liberty in spite of
Herod, he at length determines to see
if, through a message from the prison
by his disciples, he cannot get Jesus
to speak out His mind, and at least set
his own at rest” (Brown).


“He that should come,” etc.—The
Jews expected more than one Divine
messenger—Hlijah, “that prophet”
(Deut. xviii. 15), and the Messiah.


Alternations of Mood.—These alterna-
tions of moods of wonderful elevation
and of sudden and deep depression
are to be traced in all the men of the
Old Testament—raised for a moment
above themselves, but not being trans-
formed in spirit, they quickly fall
back to their natural level.—@odet.


Loss of Faith—The temporary loss
of a bright faith. It was natural, but
unnecessary. Do not many Christian
people get more despairing over the
loss of a few pounds, or over a little
pain, than John did in his great trials 2
And yet how unnecessary was John’s —
doubt. Jesus was indeed the Messiah.
John’s active work was now done. So
needless, too, is all anxiety of Christian
people in their times of darkness. The
true way is never to doubt Jesus.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. VII.





Though there are clouds, the sun
shines behind them undimmed.— Miller.


Ver. 21. “He cured many of their
infirmities.”"—The mistake into which
John had fallen was in not seeing that
the beneficent works done by Christ
were precisely those ascribed to Him
by the prophets who foresaw His
coming. Cf. Isa. xxxv. 4-6, li. 1


Ver. 22. “ Tell John what things ye
have seen.” —The reply to John was a
significant narrative of what Jesus had
been heard and seen to say and do,
and not a bare “ Yes” or “No.” The
legend of Tarquinius Superbus and
the messenger from Sextus supplies us
with a similar mode of reply. ‘‘ Sextus
sent a messenger to his father for
further instructions. On his arrival
it happened that the king was walking
in his garden. To the inquiries of the
envoy the king made no reply, but
continued striking off the heads of the
tallest poppies with his stick, and then
bade the messenger relate to his son
what he had seen him do. Sextus
comprehended his father’s meaning.
On false charges he either banished or
put to death all the principal men of
the city,” etc.


Christ's Miracles Emblematical.—The
works of bodily healing, beneficent
as they were in themselves, were also
emblematical of Christ’s power to heal
the souls of men—to give spiritual
sight, vigour, cleansing, etc., to those
blinded, weakened, and defiled by error
and sin. It is therefore appropriate
for the spiritual side of His work to
be mentioned in connection with these
miracles: ‘‘to the poor the gospel [or
good tidings] is preached.” There can
scarcely be said to be a climax in the
works enumerated; but the last of
them is that which is specially charac-
teristic of the Messiah (according to
Isa. lxi. 1). “That which made this
feature in our Lord’s ministry so
remarkable was the contemptuous
manner in which the Jewish doctors
had been wont to treat the humbler


sort of people (cf. John vii. 49,
ix. 34) By ‘poverty,’ however,
doubtless the same thing is intended
in this as in other places in the
Gospel—namely, that condition of
heart which is usually found to belong
to persons endued with a very slender
portion of this world’s goods” (Burgon).


Ver. 23. “* Blessed is he,” etc.—Rara
felicitas.— Bengel.


Christ an Occasion of Stumbling—
The same prophet to whose predic-
tions Christ had just referred had fore-
told that some would find occasion of
stumbling in Him. “And He shall
be for a sanctuary ; but for a stone of
stumbling and for a rock of offence to
both the houses of Israel, for a gin
and for a snare to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem” (Isa. viii. 14). Jesus warns
both John and those who now hear
Him of this danger.


The Difference between the Spirit of
the Old Testament and of the New.—
It is a striking argument for the great
difference between the Old and the
New Testament that even the greatest
of the prophets can, at the beginning,
accommodate himself only with difii-
culty to the Saviour’s way of working.
Among all those lofty and brilliant
expectations which had been excited
by the prophetic word, the meek, still
spirit of the gospel could only gradu-
ally break a way for itself. John must
continually take secret offence against
Jesus before he had become in spirit a
disciple of the best Master.—Lange.


Vers. 24-27. “‘ Began to speak unto
the people.”—Jesus replies to the
thoughts of the crowd. They might
imagine from St. John’s message and
the words in which it was delivered
that the Baptist wavered in his faith,
and that his imprisonment had shaken
his constancy. Our Lord, therefore,
reminds them of what John was, how
he had acted, and how they themselves
had behaved to him. “ What went ye
out for to see? Not an inconstant


195


CHAP. VII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





and vacillating man; not a reed
shaken by the wind; but a man of
inflexible resolution and invincible
courage. What went ye out into the
wilderness to see? Not a man of
effeminate temper; not . sycophant
who would flatter a1 y for hope of gain.
No; his rigorous fare, his simple garb,
the very place in which you found
him, refute this notion. If he had
been such, he would have been in the
court, and not in the desert. But
what went ye out for to see? A
prophet; yea, I say unto you, and
more than a prophet: and He then
refers to their own Scripture for the
true character and office of John.—
Wordsworth.


“What went ye out... to see?” —
There is a climax in the words (1) a
reed, (2) a man, (3) a prophet. It
was something great and wonderful
in the person and mission of John
the Baptist that drew the multitudes
to him ; but it was a spiritual and not
a worldly greatness. Worldly great-
ness does not come into conflict with
the opinions of the world, but bows
before them: it seeks to dazzle the
eye, and to impress the imagination
of spectators.


Ver. 26. “ Much more than a pro-
phet.”—John’s superiority consists in
the facts, (1) that he was himself the
subject of prophecy (Mal. iii. 1);
(2) that he both saw and pointed out
the fulfilment of his predictions ;
(3) that he was “the porter” who
opened the door for the Shepherd of
the sheep (John x. 3).


Ver. 27. “I send My messenger.” —
The exceptional greatness of John arose
from his connection with Christ, the
true source of all spiritual greatness.


Ver. 28. “ Born of women.”—As
distinguished from those who are born
of God—born again of water and of
the Spirit (John i. 12, 13, iii, 5;
Tit. iii. 5),

The Old Order and the New.—“ The

196


old order of things and the new are
divided from each other by such a
deep gulf that he who is least in the
latter occupies a higher place than
John himself. The most feeble disciple
has a more spiritual insight into Divine
things than had the forerunner. He
enjoys in Jesus the privilege of sonship,
while John is still only a servant.
The humblest believer is one with that
Son whom John announced” (Godet).
This reflection is not given to depre-
ciate the Baptist, but to explain and
excuse his laps? from faith or his
being offended in Christ.


Ver. 30. ‘Rejected the counsel of
God.” —T.e. rejected for themselves the
counsel of God. Men cannot over-
throw God’s purpose, but they can
defeat it or make it of none effect in
their own case.


Unbelief, a Thwarting God's Purpose.

I. I remark, first, that the sole
purpose which God has in view in
speaking to us men is our blessing.
—I need not point out to you that
“counsel” here does not mean advice,
but intention. In regard of the
manner immediately in hand, God’s
purpose or counsel in sending the fore-
runner was, first of all, to produce in
the minds of the people a true con-
sciousness of their own sinfulness and
need of cleansing, and so to prepare
the way for the coming of the Messiah,
who should bring the inward gift which
they needed, and so secure their salva-
tion. The intention was, first, to bring
to repentance, but that is a prepara-
tion for bringing to them full forgive-
ness and cleansing. Now, by the
gospel, which, as I say, thus has one


single design in the Divine mind, I


mean, what I think the New Testa-
ment means, the whole body of truths
which underlie and flow from the fact
of Christ’s death, resurrection, and
ascension, which are these in brief:
man’s sin, man’s helplessness, the in-
carnation of the Son of God, the
death of Christ as the sacrifice for the
world’s sin; faith, as the hand by


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. VII.





which we grasp the blessing, and the
gift of a Divine Spirit which follows
upon our faith, and bestows upon us
sonship and likeness to God, purity of
life and character, and heaven at last.
That, as I take it, is in the barest
~ outline what is meant by the gospel of
Jesus Christ. God meant His word to
save your soul. Has it done so? It
is a question that any man can answer
if he will be honest with himself. We
shall never understand the universality
of Christianity until we have appre-
ciated the individuality of its message
to each of us. God does not lose thee
in the crowd: do not thou lose thyself
in it, nor fail to apprehend that thow
art personally meant by its broadest
declarations, Then, further, God is
verily seeking to accomplish this pur-
pose even now, by my lips, in so far
as I am true to my Master and my
message.

II. Secondly, this single Divine pur-
pose, or “ counsel,” may be thwarted.—
“They frustrated the counsel of God.”
Of all the mysteries of this inexplicable
world, the deepest of all is, that, given
en infinite will and a creature, the
creature can thwart the Infinite. Now
I said that there was only one thought
in the Divine heart when God sent His
Son, and that was to save you and
me and all of us. But that thought
cannot but be frustrated, and made of
none effect, as far as the individual is
concerned, by unbelief. For there is
no way by which any human being
can become participant of the spiritual
blessings which are included in that
great word “salvation,” except by
simple trust in Jesus Christ. How
can any man get any good out of a
medicine if he locks his teeth and
will not take it? How can any truth
that I refuse to believe produce any
effect upon me? And so I remind
you that the thwarting of God’s
counsel is the awful prerogative of un-
belief. Then note that, in accordance
with the context, you do not need to
put yourselves to much effort in order
to bring to naught God’s gracious in-
tention about you. “They thwarted


the counsel of God, being not baptized
of him.” They did not do anything.
They simply did nothing. And that
was enough. ‘There is no need for
violent antagonism to the counsel.
Fold your hands in your lap, and the
gift will not comeinto them. Further,
the people that are in most danger of
frustrating God’s gracious purpose are
not men and women steeped to the
eyebrows in the stagnant pool of sen-
suous sin, but the clean, respectable,
church-and-chapel-going, sermon-hear-
ing, doctrine-criticising Pharisees.

III. Lastly, this thwarting brings
self-inflicted harm.—A little skiff of
a boat comes athwart the bows of a
powerful steamer. What will become
of the skiff, do you think? You can
thwart God’s purpose about yourself,
but the great purpose goes on and
on. And ‘“ who hath hardened himself
against Him and prospered”? You
can thwart the purpose, but it is kick-
ing against the pricks. Consider what
you lose when you will have nothing
to do with that Divine counsel of
salvation! Consider not only what
you lose, but what you bring upon
yourself, how you bind your sin upon
your hearts.— Maclaren.


Vers. 31-34. Children at Play.—
The bearing of their contemporaries
towards the Baptist and Christ had
been childish and petulant. The ascetic
life of the first had offended them ;
the gracious social deportment of Jesus
was equally unwelcome. The illustra-
tion employed gives point to Christ’s
comparison, The generation which
surrounded our Saviour were like ill-
humoured children who would neither
play at marriage nor funeral. Nothing
pleased them. Though a pleasant com-
parison, it was a sharp rebuke. To
be childlike is good: it is evil to be
childish. This childish unreason often
repeats itself. Put the matter as you
will, many will find fault with Christ
and Christianity. The gospel is too
hard or too easy. Prejudice can always
find some objection. Christians also
are complained of. They are too un-


197


<


CHAP. VII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





social or too social, too gloomy or too
happy, too cautious or too bold. Be
not disconcerted or discouraged by such
criticisms. Bear yourselves as becomes
disciples of the criticised Christ.—
Fraser.


The Humour of the Illustration.—
As we scrutinise these words the
humour of our Lord breaks out like
rippling light over the page. Broadly
regarded, how delicious is the taking
down of the Rabbis and other digni-
taries of the synagogue by the likening
them to a parcel of little children! It
could not fail to be infra dig. to these
super-exalted representatives of official
Judaism to have their conduct illus-
trated and reprimanded by the eapri-
cious changeableness of children.—
Grosart.


Ver. 31. “ Whereunto then shall I
liken ?”-—The double question seems
to imply a difficulty in finding an
appropriate figure to represent the
unbelief and waywardness which found
excuses for rejecting two messengers
from God whose modes of procedure
differed so widely from each other as
did those of Jesus and John the Baptist.
Conduct so unreasonable and perverse
can scarcely find any SG, in the
ordinary actions of men: only the
folly and peevishness of children can
supply an adequate simile for it.
“You were angry with John because
he would not dance to your piping,
and with me because I will not weep
to your dirge. Yet the children of
wisdom, the truly wise, approve all
the various methods of Divine wisdom,
and profit by them, and press into
the kingdom of heaven.”


Severity and Graciousness.—John the
Baptist is regarded as a type of the
law, which brought men to Christ, and
prepared His way accordingly. There
were natures which neither the severity
of the law nor the graciousness of the
gospel could win over. Yet had Christ
(Wisdom) His faithful children—His
trae disciples—under either dispensa-
tion.—Burgon.


198


Remarkable Circumstances in con-
nection with John.—A number of very
remarkable facts concerning John the
Baptist are given in the Gospels, which
no inventor of legendary matter would
have thought of fabricating. 1. One
would have expected the ministry of
the Baptist to come to an end when
Christ began His; but as a matter of
fact both continued for some time
the same work of preaching and
baptizing. 2. After the declaration
of John (John iii. 25-36) one would
have thought that all his disciples
would have immediately attached
themselves to Christ; but they kept
separate for some time, and only after
the death of John seem, as a body,
to have joined Christ. 3. It is remark-
able that Jesus sent no message to
Jonn during His imprisonment, and
that this reply to the question put
by the Baptist should have contained
no personal matter. 4. And even when
tidings are brought to Jesus of John’s
violent death He utters not a word
upon the subject.—Brown.


Ver. 35. “ Wisdom is justified of all
her children.” —Oar Lord’s saying grows
naturally out of the comparison which
He has just made, The children sitting
in the world’s market-place suggest
to Him another sort of children, the
children of Wisdom. Wisdom is repre-
sented as a parent; a certain number
of human beings are children of
Wisdom ; and children, as a rule, may
be expected to understand their parents,
and to do them justice, when the world
at large finds fault with them. A
child, it may be presumed, is more or
less like his parent. He has a sym-
pathy with him, arising out of common
character and mental constitution,
which enables him to understand what
his parent means. Heisfamiliar, from
long association and habit, with his
parent’s ways of looking at things.
He is in the secret of his parent’s
mind. He ean anticipate with con-
fidence where to others all is dark or
meaningless. Then, our Lord says,
if Wisdom is misunderstood by men at


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. VII.





large, there is no such misunderstand-
ing in Wisdom’s family circle; there,
at least, the dull and ill-natured world
is shut out, while bright and loving
faces gaze upon the parent’s counte-
nance with a certainty that all is


well. The true children of the eternal
Wisdom were not even in those days
shocked because John the Baptist
came as an ascetic, or because the Son
of man came “ eating and drinking.” —
Liddon.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 36—50.


The Pharisees Mistake——The picture of this sinful woman, with Christ and
the Pharisee on either hand, is another of those instances which show the Gospel
to be a book for all time. The two ways of dealing with sin are still to be met
with—the hard repulsion of formal righteousness, and the sympathy of Divine
love. Sympathy has wonderful eyes, but nothing is so blind as spiritual pride.
Let us look at the mistake this Pharisee made—

I. As it regarded Christ.—He could not read Christ’s nature, and undervalued
at. He imagined that Christ’s accessibility to this woman arose from want of
knowledge, when it came from the greatness of His compassion. The for-
bearance of Christ had its source, not in ignorance, but in the deep, far-reaching
vision of infinite Love, which wills not the death of any sinner, but that he
should turn and live, and which made Him ready not only to rescue the lost
and wipe away their tears, but to pour out His own soul unto the death to save
them. But every man reads another by the heart in his own bosom; and the
hard, self-righteous Pharisee is utterly unable to comprehend Him who does not
break the bruised reed, and who has a joy greater than all the angels of heaven
over one sinner that repenteth. ‘As the heavens are high above the earth, so
are God’s thoughts higher than man’s thoughts.” He mistook also Christ's
way of rescuing from sin. If it entered into the Pharisee’s thought at all to
rescue from sin, it would be by keeping the sinner back from him, thanking
God, and even feeling a selfish kind of thankfulness, that he was not like him.
The sinner must be made fully sensible of his exclusion from the sympathy of
all good men, and no door of access can be opened till purity is restored. Any
other way would seem encouragement to transgression. Christ’s way is the
very reverse of this. His way was to come from an infinite height into this
world, that He might be near sinners, able to touch them and ready to he
touched. It was to take their nature upon Him in the very likeness of sinful
flesh, that they might feel Him closer still, and that “He might not be
ashamed to call them brethren.” It was “‘to become sin for them, though
He knew no sin ”—that He might bear it, first by pity, then by sacrifice, and
at last by pardon. And now He carries out His plan in one of its applications
when He draws the sinner near Him, and suffers her to clasp His feet that she
may feel she is in contact with God’s infinite and saving mercy.

II. As it regarded the woman.—Zhe Pharisee thought that as a sinner she was
to be despised. He saw only what was repulsive in her, and had he confined
his view to the sin his feeling had right with it. But he included the sinner.
It was a look of pride without any pity; and pride, above all spiritual pride,
without pity is as cold and blind as the polar ice. Such pride could not see a
human soul with infinite destinies, though degraded, a precious gem incrusted
with miry clay, yet capable of reflecting the brightest rays of the Divine glory.
Surely we ought to feel that in every fellow-man, however degraded, there is
a kindred and immortal nature which can never be cut off in this world from
the possibility of the highest rise. Should not the thought of this community
of nature melt our hearts when we look upon poor outcast humanity ? and shall
we ever think ourselves more pure than the Son of God, and seek to shake


199


CHAP. VII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





ourselves free from its touch? The Pharisee did not see that a new life had
entered into the woman's heart. A man who is so blind as not to perceive the
deep capacity of the old nature will not discover the dawning tokens of the new.
Was it nothing to find her pressing close to Christ, clinging to His feet, bathing
them with weeping? The outward signs were before him, if he had known
how to read them, of the greatest change that can befall a human soul. These
sobs and tears, and this irrepressible emotion, are the cries of the new creature
in Christ Jesus, which must find its way to Him who is its life and joy.
Penitence was there, too deep for words, the broken and contrite heart which
God will not despise, a loathing of sin which this Pharisee cannot understand,
and a glowing love that made his frown forgotten in the irresistible attraction
to a Saviour’s feet.

III. As it regarded himself.—7he Pharisee showed that he did not know his
own heart. Had he been better acquainted with it, he would have found
sufficient there for dissatisfaction. If not committing the sins which he
condemned, he might have known that he had the seeds of them in his nature.
If he was keeping them down by inward struggle, this should have made him
lenient ; and if cherishing the love of them, he was a publican wearing a cloak.
Every unrenewed heart has the fire of corruption smouldering, though it may
not show the flame. The grace of God alone can extinguish the fire of any one
sin, and even then the man is a brand plucked from the burning, ready to be
rexindled, and therefore bound to humility. The man who is saved from sin
by love is softened by the love which saves him; but the man who is kept
from sin only by pride is made more hard. He may be as near the sin in his
real heart as ever, but he maintains a false outward character, and builds an
unsafe barrier in his nature against open sin by being very severe upon sinners.
This is the reason why a mere external reformation brings in vanity and pride
and all uncharitableness, sins which, if not so disreputatle in the sight of men,
are as hateful in the view of God. He did not see that in condemning this
woman he wus rejecting the salvation of Christ. Tf he could have established
his point that it was unworthy of the Saviour to hold intercourse with sinners,
what hope would there have been for him? Publican and Pharisee, open
transgressor and moral formalist, can only enter heaven by the same gate of
free unconditional mercy. Nay, had the Pharisee seen it, he was further from
the kingdom of God than she with all her sins about her, and it was not so
wonderful that Christ should permit this poor woman to touch His feet as that
He should sit down as a guest at the Pharisee’s table. This, too, was in the
way of His work, to bring in a contrite sinner with Him, and touch, if it might
be, the hard, self-righteous heart. If the Pharisee had known himself and who
it was that spoke to him, he would have taken his place beside her he despised.
“Lord, I am not worthy that Thou shouldest come under my roof.” He would
have rejoiced in her reception as the ground of hope for himself, and as a proof
that Christ is “able to save to the uttermost all that come unto God through
Him.” Let us trust that he learned this lesson. —Ker.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 36—50.


Ver. 36-50. ‘ In the house of Simon.”
—The love in religion makes it valu-
able. Religion without love is value-
less. In this guest-chamber of Simon’s
we see—

I. Awant of love.
(2) In the reception.


200





(1) In the host.


II. An abundance of love.—On the
part of one who was no guest. How
does she show her love? (1) Openly,
(2) humbly, (3) generously.

III. The reason of love.—She had
been forgiven. Forgiveness produces
love.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


IV. The reward of love.—The
assurance of forgiveness. The remis-
sion of sins. The gift of peace.—Spence.


Three Portraits.

I. The penitent sinner.—l. Her
sorrow. 2. Her faith. 3. Her love.

II. The proud Pharisee.

III. The Divine Saviour.—~ Stock.





Forgiveness and Love.—Let those
who cry out that there is no origin-
ality in the Gospels find a parallel
to this story in any of the religions
or philosophies of the world. Pardon
for a notorious sinner was an unheard-
of thing, and is so still outside of the


Bible. Even the Pharisees of Christ’s
day did not believe in it. But this
was Christ’s very mission. All need


forgiveness ; and if we think we have
been forgiven little, it only shows our
little sense of sin.—Hastings.


The Greater the Forgiveness, the
Greater the Love.— That Jesus called
the sinful because He expected con-
verts from that class to make the best
citizens, we learn from this parable
viewed in connection with its historical
setting. On this occasion also He was
on His defence for His sympathetic
relations with social reprobates, and
the gist of His apology was-—the
greater the forgiveness, the greater
the love, and therefore the better the
citizen, the test of good citizenship
being devotion. Christianity believes
in the possibility of the last becoming
first, of the greatest sinner becoming
the greatest saint. Jesus hints at this,
“To whom little is forgiven, the same
loveth little,” suggesting the correlative
doctrine, that to whom much is for-
given, the same loveth much; in other
words, that from among the children
of passion, prone to err, may come,
when their energies are properly
directed, the most devoted and effective
citizens and servants of the Divine
kingdom. It seems a bold and
hazardous assertion, but it is one,
nevertheless, which the history of the
Church has fully justified.—Bruce.


OHAP. VII.


Forgiveness the Cause and Measure
of Love.

I. The outpouring of love which
has grasped forgiveness.

Il. The snarl of self-righteousness
which has never been down into the
depths.

III. The vindication, by forgiving
love, of forgiven love.—Maclaren.


Ver. 36. Wisdom justified of her
Children.—The incident related in
this section is an illustration of the
truth of the principle laid down in
ver. 35. ‘“ But wisdom is justified of
all her children.” It tells of one who
was attracted by the graciousness of
Christ, which gave offence to many of
the Pharisees, and whose penitence
was rewarded by the forgiveness of
her sins.


“ One of the Pharisees desired Him.”
—-The state of this Pharisee’s feelings
towards Christ is revealed in ver. 39.
There was a conflict in his mind
between reverence for Jesus as a pos-
sible prophet and prejudice against
Him on account of some of His modes
of procedure. He seems, too, to have
receivel some benefit from Christ
(ver. 42), and to have loved Him on
that account, though his love was far
from ardent (ver. 47). Probably his
character and conduct are painted too
black in popular sermons upon this
incident. Jesus speaks to him in such
a friendly manner that we can scarcely
believe that Simon cherished any male-
volent feelings towards Him.


“ He went into the Pharisee’s house.”
—The action of Jesus in acceding to
the request to eat with the Pharisee is
an illustration of the method followed
by Him, as contrasted with that fol-
lowed by the Baptist (ver. 34). We
often read of His receiving invitations
of this kind, but never of His refusing.
He showed the same genial, kindly
willingness to enter into social inter-
course with Pharisees, as in the case
of publicans and sinners.

201


<


CHAP, VII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





Ver. 37. “A sinner.”—The special
sin of inchastity is implied in the
designation. ‘She was a sinner; up
to this time (in Pharisaic language)
she had been so; and she was still
a sinner before the eyes of the world,
although before God the sanctifying
change had already begun to take
place, through repentance, forgiveness,
and love in return for forgiveness ”


(Stier).


A Typical Case of Penitence.—Her
name is not given, so she may be
thought of as a typical case of peni-
tence: each one who reads the story
may think of himself or herself as
standing in her place. She came to
anoint Jesus in token of her grati-
tude to Him as her Saviour. Love
does not need to be instructed how to
express itself; it is skilful in finding
out appropriate methods. Cf. xvii. 15,
xix. 35-37,


Ver. 38. “Stood at His feet...
weeping.” —As she stood behind Jesus
her tears began to flow, perhaps in-
voluntarily; they bedewed His feet;
with her hair dishevelled in token of
grief she wiped His feet, and finding
she was not repulsed, she kissed them
over and over again (ver. 45), and
anointed them with the ointment she
had brought. ‘Her eyes, which once
longed after earthly joys, now shed
forth penitential tears ; her hair, which
she once displayed for idle ornament,
is now used to wipe the feet of Christ ;
her lips, which once uttered vain things,
now kiss those holy feet; the costly
ointment, with which she once per-
fumed her body, is now offered to God”
(Wordsworth). See Rom. vi. 19, “As
ye have yielded your members servants
to uncleanness, so now yield your mem-
bers servants to righteousness unto
holiness.”





Why she came to Christ.—The pur-
pose of her coming was (1) to show her
love for Christ ; (2) to testify her sorrow
for sin; and (3) to obtain forgiveness.
Her penitence was public, as her sin


202


had been. Others sought bodily health
from Christ; but we do not read of
another who came to obtain from Him
pardon of sin. Hers was a striking
example of faith, love, and penitence,
and she received a special reward. It
would appear from a comparison of
this chapter with Matt. xi, that Jesus
had just issued the gracious invitation,
“Come unto Me, all ye that labour
and are heavy laden, . . . and ye shall
find rest unto your souls ” (vers. 28, 29).
Perhaps it was these words that gave
her courage to act as she did.


Public Acknowledgment of Penitence.
—<A public acknowledgment of repent-
ance and faith in Christ in some cases,
as in this, is a trying ordeal: there is
(1) the opposition of evil associates
to be overcome—their solicitations,
attempts to dissuade, and their mockery
to be resisted ; and (2) the contempt
and distrust of those who have been
upright and virtuous to be encountered,
and their confidence to be won. This
latter trial is the harder to be borne.


A Theme for Artists and Poets—The
scene so exquisitely described by St.
Luke has inspired both painters and
poets, and given them a subject ex-
celling most others in human and reli-
gious interest. The sonnet by Hartley
Coleridge is well known :


“She sat and wept beside His feet. The
weight

Of sin oppressed her heart; for all the
blame


And the poor malice of the worldly shame
To her were past, extinct, and out of date :
Only the sin remained—the leprous state.
She would be melted by the heat of love,
By fires far fiercer than are blown to prove
And purge the silver ore adulterate.

She sat and wept, and with her untressed


hair

Still wiped the feet she was so blest to
touch ;

And He wiped off the soiling of despair

From her sweet soul, because she loved so
much.”


Dante G. Rossetti, who was both
a poet and a painter, has taken the
same subject and handled it with great
power, though he follows the opinion


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. VII.


SiR armmceermeeres ee a ne ne


that the woman was Mary Magdalene.
In the drawing by which he has illus-
trated the incident, Mary has left a
procession of revellers, and is ascending
by a sudden impulse the steps of the
house where she sees Christ. Her
lover has followed her, and is trying
to turn her back. The poet represents
her as saying :
“Oh, loose me! Seest thou not my Bride-
groom’s face
That draws me to Him? For His feet
my kiss,
My hair, my tears He craves to-day:
and oh!
What words can tell what other day and


place
Shall see me clasp those blood-stained
feet of His?
He needs me, calls me, loves me: let
me go!”


Nature of Repentance.—Repentance
as exemplified by this woman is char-
acterised (1) by deep grief and self-
loathing ; (2) by wisdom in applying
to the true source of forgiveness ; (3)
by love to the Saviour; and (4) by
courage in braving the scorn of others
and in overcoming false shame.


Ver. 39. “Jf He were a prophet.” —
An ordinary prophet might be un-
acquainted with the previous character
and conduct of the woman; but such
a prophet as the people took Jesus to
be, and as He gave Himself out to be,
could not. So far Simon was right in
his surmise. To Simon it appeared
clear (1) that such a prophet would
have known, and (2) would have re-
pulsed, one so sinful. He made three
mistakes : (1) he imagined that the holy
must necessarily shun all intercourse
with the sinful; (2) that this woman
was still “a sinner”; and (3) that he
himself was holy. The attitude he took
up was that described in Isa. lxv. 5,
“* Stand by thyself: come not near to
me; for I am holier than thou”—an
attitude and language hateful to God
“as smoke in the nostrils.” The Phari-
see, in fact, mentally put the Lord into
this dilemma—either He does not know
the true character of this woman, in
which case He lacks that discernment


of spirits which pertains to a true pro-
phet ; or, if He knows, and yet endures
her touch, and is willing to accept a
service at such hands, He lacks that
holiness which is no less the note of a
prophet of God: such, therefore, in
either case He cannot be” (Zrench.)


“Which touched Him.”—Touching
—this is all that the Pharisee fixes
on: his offence is merely technical and
ceremonial.— Alford.


A Third Alternative—The Pharisee
omitted a third alternative—viz. that
Jesus both knew what the woman was
or had been, and permitted her action ;
and that it was possible for Him to
justify His procedure.


Vers. 40-43. Important Truths and
Warnings. —This parable and the nar-
rative in which it is found contain
truths which we are very apt to neg-
lect, and suggest warning of which we
stand in constant need.

I. For observe, first, that flagrant
sinners are much more likely to dis-
cover that they are sinners than
moralists and ritualists.

II. Observe, secondly, that the much
and the little of sin are for the most
part measures of conscience, not of
iniquity.

III. Observe, thirdly, that Christ
does not teach us to run into sin,
but to hate hypocrisy—the worst of
sins.

IV. Finally, Christ specially warns
us against forming those hard judg-
ments of our brethren which of all
men the “unco guid” are most apt to
form.—Coz.


Ver. 40. “I have somewhat to say
unto thee.”—Christ adopts the same
mode of rebuke as that made use of by
Nathan to David. He tells an apo-
logue, and asks a question which leads
to Simon’s pronouncing judgment
against himself (cf. 2 Sam. xii. 1-7).
Jesus ‘‘ answers ” him—.e. answers his
thoughts, which were revealed by his
very looks.


208


CHAP, VII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


NN


Ver. 41. “ Five hundred pence and
... fifty.” —We must beware of under-
standing by the two debtors persons
who differed from each other in posi-
tive sinfulness—the one, say, with five
hundred accumulated offences, the other
with but fifty. They were persons
with differing consciousness of sin—
the one of whom knew that his guilt
was very heinous, the other having no
such impression of himself. As a
matter of fact it often happens that
the debtor owing five hundred pence
is in outward conduct more blameless
than the other; for those who strive
to serve God faithfully have an acuter
sense of thei: sinfulness than others
who make no such endeavour. In
the present case the debtor owing the
five hundred pence (the woman) was
more guilty than the one owing fifty
(Simon). Sense of guilt is a feeling
we may all experience: our actual
guilt or the number of our offences is
known only to God.


The Aim of the Parable.—The aim
of the parable was (1) to explain the
strange behaviour of the woman, (2) to
turn the tables on the fault-finder, (3)
to defend the course of conduct which
excited the Pharisee’s sensoriousness.


Ver. 42. “Frankly forgave them
both.’ —Forgiveness is the fres gift
of God. It is not the woman’s love
that wins forgiveness; but that love
springs from the consciousness of
having been forgiven.


Ver. 43. “I suppose.”—There is a
touch of superciliousness in Simon’s
reply, “I suppose.” His phrase implies
that he thought the question one easily
answered, and did not perceive how the
decision he gave condemned himself,
In like manner there is a strain of
sarcasm in the words of Jesus—“ Thou
hast rightly judged.” It is a phrase
used by Socrates when he has en-
tangled his adversary in discussion.


Vers. 44-46. “JZ entered into thine
howse.”—Christ contrasts the love
manifested by the penitent woman


204


with the coldaess and discourtesy of
him who thought himself her superior.
In the one case there was exceptional
and almost extravagant manifestation
of devotion, in the other an omission
of the ordinary civilities shown by
hosts to guests. 1, The woman washed
His feet with tears (‘‘the most price-
less of waters,” ‘“‘the blood of the
heart”), and wiped them with her
hair; Simon had not offered the cus-
tomary water and towel for washing
and wiping the feet of guests. 2. The
Pharisee had given no kiss of welcome,
but she had passionately and often
kissed His very feet. 3. Simon had
not given even common oil for the
head, but she had anointed His feet
with precious ointment.


Dignity and Humility.—-The Lord
Jesus receives the expressions of love
and honour with equal dignity and
humility; He would have suffered
Himself to be kissed even by the
cold-hearted Simon, as He dogs not
withdraw His feet from the tears
of the woman who was a sinner. He
is so humble in His majesty, and so
majestic in His humility, that—shall
we say like a child or like a sovereign %
—He complains before a whole company
of men, who were watching His words,
that certain marks of respect had been
culpably withheld from Him; and
every one must be made to feel that
He does this, not for His own sake,
but for the sake of men.—Stier.


The Rebuke of Simon's Under-breed-
ing.—There was something deeper
than humour here, but humour there
also was. Spoken in semi-public, how
it must have taken down the rich and
patronising Pharisee to have it flashed
in upon him that the seeming-humble
carpenter and peasant of Nazareth
knew -what a gentleman meant, and
who was not a gentleman. And not
only so, but it was inevitable that the
“odious comparison” to her advantage
with “ the woman” would draw down
on Simon alike the observation and
laughter of all who heard.—Grosart.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. VIL





The Explanation of Simon’s Dis-
courtesy.—If we should say that Simon
thought that he was a gentleman, and
that our Lord was not, we run the risk
of offending our own sense of propriety ;
but we are probably not far from the
truth. Simon treated our Lord with
personal rudeness just because He was
poor. And our Lord felt it, and called
attention to it plainly and pointedly.—
Winterbotham.


The Pharisee Unconscious of Sinful-
ness.—The Saviour might come into
that houseof the Pharisee—and no signs
of peculiar honour shall greet or repay
His presence—no water for His feet
no anointing of oil—no reverent kiss
of welcome. This is natural, for Simon
feels himself no sinner, nor counts it,
therefore, any great thing to be privi-
leged to entertain the sinner’s Friend.
—Vaughan.





Simon made to reprove Himself.—
Jesus with tact first asks leave to
speak, when He has to administer
reproof, puts that reproof into a
parable, and makes Simon thus ad-
minister his own reproof.—Llaikie,


Ver. 47. Love and Forgiveness, —We
have here three persons who represent
for us the Divine love that comes forth
amongst sinners, and the twofold form
in which that love is received.

I. Christ here stands as a mani-
festation of the Divine love towards
mankind. 1. This love is not at all
dependent upon our merits or deserts —
“tle frankly forgave them both.”
2. It is not turned away by our sins:
the self-righteous man had contempt
for the sinner, the @oly Saviour had
love. 3. It manifests itself first in
the form of forgiveness—only on this
ground can there be union between
the loving-kindness of God and the
emptiness and sinfulness of our hearts.
4, It demands service: that rendered
by the woman is accepted, Simon is
reminded of his omissions.

TI. The woman here stands as a
representative of the penitent lovingly


recognising the Divine love. 1. All
true love to God is preceded in the
heart by a sense of sin and an assur-
ance of pardon. Gratitude to God as
the Giver of blessings can scarcely be
called love, if there be not along with
it a recognition of His holiness and
mercy towards the penitent. 2. Love
is the gate of knowledge—it led her
to truer knowledge of Christ than the
Pharisee possessed, and it revealed to
her her own state. 3. Love is the
source of all obedience. Love prompted
her expressions of devotion to Christ,
love justified them, His love inter-
preted them and accepted them.

III. Simon here stands as a repre-
sentative of the unloving and self-
righteous man, all ignorant of the love
of Christ. He is a fair specimen of his
class: respectable in life, rigid in
morality, unquestionable in orthodoxy ;
intelligent and learned, high up among
the ranks of Israel. Yet the want of
love made his morality and orthodoxy
dead and dry encumbrances. The
Pharisee was contented with himself ;
and so there was no sense of sin in
him, therefore there was no penitent
recognition of Christ as forgiving and
loving him, therefore there was no
love to Christ. Hence there was
neither light nor heat in his soul; his
knowledge was barren notions, and his
laborious obedience to the law led
him to a fatal self-righteousness.—
Maclaren.


Ver. 47. “For she loved much.”—
The difficulty in connection with the
interpretation of this verse all depends
upon the meaning to be given to
the word “for”-—‘‘for she loved
much.” Does this mean “she has
been forgiven because she loved much ” ?
To hold that it does would violate
the statement in ver. 42, that the
debtor had nothing wherewith to
pay his debt—i.e. no ground on which
he could claim forgiveness. “For”
here means that Jesus is arguing from
the effect to the cause: her great love
shows that she is conscious of having
been forgiven a great debt. It is the


205


QHAP. VII.





same kind of statement as if we were
to say—“ The sun must have shone,
for the day is bright.” The majesty of
Jesus is displayed in the manner in
which He accepts the adoration and
love of the penitent, and in the exer-
cise of the Divine prerogative of for-
giving sins which He does not hesitate
to employ. The great lesson is com-
men ‘ed to all who are penitent to show
tleir gratitude by ] ving much.


Ver. 48. “ Be of good comfort.”—
By simple decree given as He sat at
the table He blotted out the record
of this woman’s sins; His know-
ledge of her sincere penitence being
absolute, and His authority to act in
God’s name supreme.


Ver. 49. ‘ Who ts this that forgiveth
sins also?” —The astonishment shown
by those who were present, at the
claim to forgive sin, was most natural,
for the majority of those there evi-
dently hesitated to regard Him as the
penitent woman did. We need not
credit them with malignant unbelief :
they were amazed at a claim which
doubtless many of them soon came to
see was fully justified. The answer to
their question would have been, “ It
is the Son of man” (cf. v. 24).


Ver. 50. ‘* Thy faith hath saved thee.”
—“ Thy faith which anticipated pardon
from Me, and -rought thee to Me
with public signs of penitence and love,
hath saved thee.” Christ mercifully
ascribes to faith those benefits which
are due to Himself as the efficient and
meritorious cause, and are apprehended
by the hand of faith as the instrument
on our part by which they are supplied.
—Wordsworth.


“Go in peace.” —Lit. “into peace”
—the state of mind to which she might
now look forward. Four great bless-
ings were therefore bestowed by Jesus
upon this penitent: 1. He accepted
the expressions she gave of love and
devotion ; 2. He approved her conduct


206


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,





and defended her cause; 3. He assured
her of forgiveness; 4. He dismissed
her with a word of benediction. The
whole incident is one calculated to
comfort the penitent, and to assure
them of the love of Christ for them
in spite of their deep unworthiness.
Yet we need to keep in mind that
there is a higher blessing attaching to
those who are consecrated in life to
Christ from the first than can be
known by those who have sunk deeply
in the mire of sin. None need, there-
fore, think lightly of the evil courses
from which this woman was redeemed,
“Though the love of the reclaimed
profligate may be and is intense of
its kind (and how touching and beauti-
ful its manifestations are, as here !),
yet that kind is not so high or complete
as the sacrifice of the whole life—the
bud, blossom, and fruit—to His service
to whom we were in baptism dedicated ”


(Alford).


Peace with Pardon.— “Saved!”
This poor, shame-soiled, sin-ruined
thing that the Pharisee would have
thrust out of his house into the street
-——saved! No return to the old life.
An heir of heaven. Christ touched the
sinful soul, and it was transformed
into beauty. The woman has been in
glory for eighteen centuries. This is
what Christ can do, will do, for all
who creep to His feet in penitence
and faith. Peace came with the for-
giveness. No peace till forgiven. No
peace for uncancelled sin. But when
Christ has forgiven, we should be at
peace. What is there to fear now or
ever? With our King’s pardon we
need not be afraid.—Miller.


“* Saved.” —The cheering word meant
much. ‘The expression “ saved” is not
to be restricted to the one blessing
of forgiveness of sins, though that is
specially included, as it was expressly
mentioned just before. Jesus meant
to say that faith would do, had already
done in principle, for the sinful woman,
all that needed to be done in order
to a complete moral rescue,—Brwuce.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. VIII.
sed =


CHAPTER VIII.
CRITICAL NOTES.


Ver. 1. Went throughout every city.—This marks a new departure in the work of Christ:
hitherto He had made Capernaum His headquarters, and had not gone very far away from it:
now He began to extend the range of His activity. The time, however, is not precisely indi-
cated. Shewing the glad tidings.—There is only one word in the original—* evangelising.”

Ver. 2. Certain women.—Cf. Matt. xxvii. 55, 56; Mark xv. 40,41. Mary called Magdalene,
—TIe. of Magdala, on the Lake of Gennesaret. As stated in a previous note, there is no
authority for identifying her with ‘the sinner” of the last chapter. She is introduced here
as one whose gratitude to Jesus had been excited by His having delivered her from the
direst form of Satanic possession, and as a person evidently of wealth, both of which
circumstances seem incompatible with those of the woman there named. Joanna.—Men-
tioned again in xxiv. 10: nothing more known of her. As here stated, she had been cured
by Jesus of some infirmity. Chuza.—Conjectured by some to be that “nobleman” (or
courtier) whose son Jesus had healed (John iv. 46). Herod.—/Z.e. Herod Antipas. Steward.
—The word is a very vague one, and may denote lieutenant of a province, treasurer, house or
land steward, agent or manager. The fact of Christ having a disciple or disciples among
those in the court of Herod explains what is said (in Matt. xiv. 2) about Herod’s speaking
“to his servants” about Jesus. Susanna.—Not again mentioned.

Ver. 3. Ministered.—Supplied the necessaries of life. Unto Him.—Rather, “ unto them”
(B.V.), i.e. to the apostolic company.

Ver. 4. A parable.—The word “ parable” means a putting forth of one thing beside another
for the purpose of comparison between them. Christ’s adoption of this mode of teaching
marks a certain change of procedure: He clothes the truth in a garb which will vei/ it from
the carnally-minded, but illustrate it to the spiritually-minded. This parable was the first of
the kind Christ spoke.

Ver. 5. A sower.—Rather, “the sower,” also “the rock” (ver. 6), “the thorns” (ver. 7).
The wayside.—The hard, beaten pathway. Trodden down.—This detail is peculiar to St. Luke,

Ver. 6. Rock.—That is, a rock covered with a thin coating of earth. St. Matthew and
St, Mark speak of the seed’s rapid growth and of the heat of the sun beating uponit. St. Luke
lays stress upon its being unable to draw up the moisture it needs for growth.

Ver. 7. Thorns.—Z.e. roots of thorns: ground infested with weeds which spring up along
with the good seed.

Ver. 8. An hundred-fold.—St. Luke omits the varying degrees of fertility—‘“some thirty-
fold, some sixty-fold, some an hundred-fold ” (Matthew and Mark). He that hath ears, etc.
— Jn other words, ‘this teaching is worthy the deepest attention of those who have the
moral and spiritual capacity to understand it’” (Farrar).

Ver. 9. Asked Him.—When He was alone (Mark iv. 10).

Ver. 10. Unto you it is given, ete.—This rather an answer to a question which St. Matthew
says the disciples put to Him, as to why He spoke to the multitude in parables. Mysteries.
—The word is generally used in the New Testament in reference to things that have once
been hidden, but are now revealed. Seeing they might not see, ete.—Unwillingness to obey
the truth leads to incapacity to see the truth. it is not Christ’s wish to reserve knowledge
of deeper truths for initiated disciples, but deprivation of the faculty of understanding
follows as a necessary consequence of neglect of that faculty. There is abundant com-
pensation, on the other hand, in the fact that the method of teaching He adopted opens up
fresh vistas of truth to those who are willing to be taught—who receive what they hear into
an honest and good heart.

Ver. 12. Those by the wayside are they, etc.—Notice in this and following verses the seed
is identified with those who hear it with varying results. In ver. 14 the identification leads
to a certain confusion of metaphor in the use of the phrase “go forth.” The first fault
noted is hardened indifference to the word that is heard; it has no effect whatever upon
them, and disappears without leaving a trace behind it.





207


a


onaP. vi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





Ver. 13, They on the rock.—The second fault is want of moral earnestness, which fs
generally accompanied. by impulsiveness of feeling. Temptation.—Trial, in the torm of
“affliction or persecution” (Matthew and Mark).

Ver. 14. Among thorns.—The third fault is that of preoccupation with other things, which,
whether morally innocent or evil, distract the attention and hinder growth in spiritual life.

Ver. 15.—Several details in this verse are peculiar to St. Luke—“an honest and good
heart,” “keep [the word],” and “with patience.” All lay stress upon “ the need of persever-
ance in opposition to the various temptations to fall away which have just been described”
(Speaker's Commentary).

Vers. 16-18.—This section is connected with the foregoing parable, as is evident from the first
sentence of ver. 18, and also from the fact that a similar section is found in the parallel
passage in St. Mark’s Gospel.

Ver. 16. A candle.—Rather, “a lamp” (R.V.), and so “candlestick” should be “stand”
(R.V.). “ The object of this saying is to impress upon the disciples their duty: they must
explain to others what has become clear to themselves” (Speaker’s Commentary).

Ver. 17.—The reference here is still to the light, or to Divine truth which was being un-
- veiled to the disciples : the Divine purpose is that it should shine out and illuminate the world.

Ver. 18. Seemeth to have.—-Or, “ thinketh he hath” (R.V.). For whoever hears without
understanding may in one sense be said to have, in another not to have, the truth.

Vers. 19-21.—St. Luke gives this incident as occurring after the parable of the sower,
though without any precise note of time: St. Matthew and St. Mark relate it as occurring
before that parable was spoken. It is probable that the latter evangelists follow the more
correct order of time.

Ver. 19. His mother and His brethren.—From the fact that Joseph is not mentioned, it is
reasonable to suppose that he was dead. The fact that the members of His family came
thus in a body seems to,indicate that they wished to control His actions. St. Mark says that
“they went out to lay hold on Him: for they said, He is beside Himself.” The great excite-
ment created by His teaching and miracles, His formal choice of apostles, the unfavourable
reception accorded to Him in Jerusalem, convinced them that He was bent upon a career
that was bound to be a failure; and mental alienation on His part seemed to be the only
explanation of His conduct. St. John says, “ His brethren did not believe in Him”
(vii. 5). Who these “brethren” were is an almost insoluble problem. Three hypotheses
on the subject have been maintained: (1) that they were actual uterine brothers of our Lord,
the sons of Joseph and Mary; (2) that they were legal half-brothers, the sons of Joseph by
a former marriage ; (3) that they were cousins of our Lord, the sons of Clopas (or Alphzeus)
and Mary his wife, sister of the Virgin, mentioned John xix. 25. For a full discussion of
these various hypotheses we refer the reader to Lightfoot on Galatians, Alford in his
prolegomena to the Epistle of James and his note on Matt. xiii. 55, article James in Smith’s
Dictionary of the Bible, and to article Jacobus in Herzog’s Real-Hncyclopaddie. On the
whole the third of these hypotheses seems to be more in accordance with the passages of
Scripture bearing on the matter than are either of the other two. The allusion in
Mark vi. 3 to Jesus as the son of Mary seems undoubtedly to distinguish Him as her only
son from the “brethren” there named—a fact which if allowed would be fatal to the first
hypothesis. While if Joseph had sons older than Jesus by a first wife, we could not under-
stand how Jesus could be heir through him of the throne of David.

Ver. 21. Are these.—St. Matthew and St. Mark add vividness to the narrative by their
description of Christ’s gesture and look as He spoke the words: the one says, ‘‘ He stretched
forth His hand toward His disciples,” and the other, ‘‘ He looked round about on them which
sat about Him.” The words assert the paramount claims of spiritual over natural relation-
ships, and show that Jesus Himself exemplified the rule which He laid down for His
disciples, and allowed no ties of human affection to draw Him aside from the path of
duty (cf. xiv. 26).

Vers. 22-25.—St. Luke’s note of time is very vague—‘on a certain day.” St. Mark says
that the incident happened on the evening of the day on which the parable of the sower
was spoken. Hence the two evangelists are in general agreement on this point. St.
Matthew introduces it without any reference to time.

Ver. 22. The other side.—The eastern side, which was comparatively uninhabited.

Ver. 23, Fell asleep.—A pathetic touch, indicating as it does how wearied He was with
the labours of the day. Came down.—From the hillsides. Recent travellers speak of these
sudden and impetuous storms as characteristic of the Lake of Gennesaret. Thus Mr.
Macgregor says: “The peculiar effects of squalls among mountains are well known to all
who have boated much on lakes; but on the Sea of Galilee the wind has a singular force
and suddenness; and this is no doubt because that sea is so deep in the world (six hundred
feet below the level of the Mediterranean) that the sun rarifies the air in it enormously,
and the wind, speeding swift above a long and level plateau, gathers much force as it
sweeps through flat deserts, until suddenly it meets this huge gap in the way, and it


208





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. VIIL.





tumbles down here irresistible.” He describes his own experience of “a great storm of
wind”: “A brisk breeze from Bashan had freshened while we paddled along these bays. ...
The sea rose more and more, and at last heavy clouds in the east burst into a regular gale.
. . . The wind whistled, and sea-gulls screamed as they were borne on the scud. Thick and
ragged clouds drifted fast over the water, which became almost green in colour, as if it were
on the salt sea, and the illusion was heightened by the complete obscurity of the distance,
for the other side of the lake was quite invisible. . . . The storm lasted next day” (The Reb
Roy). Were filled with water.—Rather, “ were filling with water ” (R.V.).

Ver. 24. Master, Master.—The repetition of the name is a mark of anxiety caused by the
danger in which they were. Rebuked the wind.—St. Luke agrees with St. Mark in repre-
senting Christ as stilling the tempest before He rebuked the disciples for unbelief. St.
Matthew reverses the order. Probably the former are more exact in the order of events they
stile the rebuke for unbelief would have greater weight after the deliverance from

anger.

Ver. a Where is your faith ?—“‘They had some faith, but it was not ready at hand”
(Benge).

Ver. 26. Country of the Gadarenes.—Rather, “ of the Gerasenes’’(R.V.). There is no doubt
that the place mentioned is Kerzha or Gersa—now a ruined city near the sea opposite to
Capernaum. ‘“ Directly above it is an immense mountain in which are ancient tombs. The
lake is so near the base of the mountain that the swine rushing madly down could not stop,
but would be hurried on into the water and be drowned” (/homson, “ The Land and the
Book”). The reading “Gerasenes” was formerly rejected because the only Gerasa then
known was an important town fifty miles away from the Lake of Gennesaret. t Matthew
has “ Gadarenes” (viii. 28, R.V.). The town of Gadara, which is three hours’ journey
distant from the south end of the lake, and separated from it by a deep ravine, probably
gave its name to the district—“ country of the Gadarenes.”

Ver. 27. Met Him out of the city.— Rather, “ there met Hima certain man out of the city”
(B.V.): he was a native of Gerasa, but since his frenzy began had lived among the tombs.
St. Matthew mentions two demoniacs. There is not necessarily any contradiction between
the narratives, as St. Mark and St. Luke simply record the healing of the man in connection
with whom there were many circumstances of special interest. In the tombs.—There were,
in ancient times, no asylums in which such persons could be confined and cared for. The
isolation, and neglect, and the dreary nature of his place of abode would naturally tend to
aggravate his madness. :

Ver. 28. Son of God most high.—This title is only found ini. 32, and in Acts xvi. 17, in
which last case it is used by another demoniac. Torment me not.—The confusion of per-
sonality in consequence of the demoniacal possession is so great that sometimes it is the
man who speaks, and sometimes the indwelling demon or demons.

Ver. 29. Kept bound,—Rather, “he was kept under guard and bound,” etc. (R.V.).
Wilderness.— Rather, “ deserts” (R.V.).

Ver. 30. What is thy name?—The question asked perhaps to awaken the man’s dormant
consciousness. Legion.—_The word is of course a Latin one, and came to be current in
Palestine because of the Roman occupation. A legion consisted of six thousand soldiers.
The fact of a multitude of evil spirits taking possession of one person is also alluded to in
ver. 2 of this chapter and in Matt. xii. 45.

Ver. 31. The deep.—Rather, “the abyss” (R.V.). ‘The word is used in Rev. ix. 1, xx. 3,
where it is translated “the bottomless pit,” and where it stands for the under-world, in
which evil spirits are confined ” (Speaker’s Commentary).

Ver. 33. A steep place.—Rather, “the steep” (R.V.), the precipice ; there being from all
accounts but one place where this could have happened. Were choked.—Many difficulties
* of various kinds are connected with this miracle. One of them is as to the injustice of
inflicting this loss upon the owners of the swine. The common explanation is that the loss
was deserved, as the animals were unclean, and can only have been kept in violation of the
Mosaic law. But, on the other hand, the population seems to have been of a mixed character,
and the animals may have belonged to Gentile owners. One point seems, however, to have
been generally overlooked, and that is that the destruction of the herd was not apparently
a necessary consequence of their becoming possessed by evil spirits. So that the per-
mission given to the evil spirits was not a deliberate infliction of loss upon the owners of
the herd. It was simply a case of panic to which al] herds of animals are liable, and for
which no one can have been held responsible. The evil spirits seem to have been carried
against their will into the abyss they dreaded to enter. We have no right to speak of Jesus
as having authority to punish breaches of the law in virtue of His Divine character, as we
have His own word that He resolutely abstained from exercising any judicial powers while
on earth (cf. chap. xii. 14). .

Ver, 34. What was done.—Rather, “ what had come to pass” (R.V.) ; so in ver. 35.


Ver. 37. Taken with great fear.—Rather, “holden with great fear” (R.V.), or “ oppressed
P 209





CHAP. VIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





with great fear.” Besought Him to depart.—Cf., with this Peter’s request (v. 8), and the
different feelings which inspired the similar prayers. Christ seems to have revisited the
region at a later period: see Mark vii. 31, viii. 10. Gadara was one of the ten cities in
the district known as Decapolis.

Ver. 39. The reason why Christ told this man to publish the tidings of his cure is not very
apparent. It may be that He wished him to be a witness of His Divine power in the midst
of a degraded and godless population. Christ they had entreated to depart, but among
them was one who would be a living testimony of His benefcence.

Ver. 40. Returned.—T.e. to Capernaum. Gladly received Him.—The word “gladly” is
inserted by the translators, but it is implied in the phrase in the original: “ welcomed Him”

Bava):
: Ver. 41. Jairus.—In Hebrew, Jair (Judg. x. 3). Ruler of the synagogue.—The affairs of
the synagogue were ruled by a college of elders, one of whom was president or “ruler.” It
is interesting to see that faith in Jesus was not altogether wanting among the official class in
Galilee. Come into his fiouse.—‘ Jairus had not the faith of the Roman centurion ” (farrar).

Ver. 42. Lay a dying.—Was at the point of death. St. Matthew, who does not mention the
coming of a messenger from the house of Jairus (here noted in ver, 49), describes her as
“even now dead”: he anticipates, that is, the mention of her actual death.

Ver. 43. Issue of blood.—A disease which, in acidition to its painful and weakening char-
acter, exposed her to the disagreeable restrictions imposed on those who were ceremonially
unclean. Spent all her living, ete.—St. Mark says she “ had suffered many things of many
physicians, and was nothing better, but rather grew worse.” The somewhat triflmg remark
has been made that St. Luke, as a physician, is more gentle in his reference to those of his
profession who had attempted to cure the woman. There seems to be little ground for the
statement.

Ver. 44. The border of His garment.—Perhaps the fringe or tassel of blue, worn in obedi-
ence to the law in Num. xy. 38-40.

Ver. 45.—The hasty and almost impatient reply of Peter is very characteristic of him.

Ver. 46. Virtue.—Rather, “power” (R.V.). I perceive that virtue, ete.—Rather, “I
perceived that power had gone forth from Me.” Tihis proves Christ's knowledge of the
circumstances at the very moment of the cure.

Ver. 47. Before all the people.—Peculiar to St. Luke. It is a significant detail: she had
sought a cure in secret, but is led to confess it openly.

Ver. 48. Daughter.—This is the only occasion on which Christ is recorded to have
addressed a woman in this way. The kindliness it expresses is specially appropriate to the
circumstances of the case. Be of good comfort.—Omitted by the best MSS. ; omitted in R.V.

Ver. 51. To go in.— Rather, “to enter in with Him” (R.V.). Peter, and James, and John.
—These same three disciples were chosen by Jesus to be witnesses of His transfiguration
and to be near Him during His agony in Gethsemane.

Ver, 52. All wept.— Rather, ‘all were weeping and bewailing her” (R.V.). Ze. in the
house, not in the chamber of death. The word translated “ bewail” meant originally to
beat or strike oneself: probably there is a reference to beating the breasts as a sign of grief.
St. Matthew mentions “ the minstrels” or flute-players, who together with other professional
mourners were ordinarily employed on such occasions. Not dead, but sleepeth.—TZe. she is
as one who sleeps, for she is shortly to awake. A similar word is used of Lazarus,
John xi. 11.

Ver. 54, And He put them all out.—To be omitted: omitted in R.V., probably an inter-
polation from the parallel passages in the other Gospels, Maid, arise.—St. Mark gives the
exact Aramaic words used, “ Talitha cumi.”

Ver, 55.—The command to give her to eat shows that she was restored to actual life with
its wants and weaknesses, and in that incipient state of convalescence which would require
nourishment.

Ver. 56.—St. Matthew tells us that secrecy was not maintained ; but, on the contrary,
“the fame thereof went abroad into all that land.” We need not suppose the parents
were disobedient to the command of Jesus ; an event of the kind, known to so many, could
scarcely be concealed.





MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—3.


Grateful Disciples—In some instances those who had profited by the exercise
of Christ’s miraculous power, and had been healed of their diseases, rewarded
Him with ingratitude, and did not even thank Him for their cure. But in many,
perhaps in most cases, those whom He healed became His disciples. Yet only
some of these became, or were allowed to become, His followers in the literal


210


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. VIII.





sense of the word. One, at any rate, who wished to accompany Him whither-
soever Hie went was not allowed to do so, but was told to return to his friends
and tell them of the great things God had done for him (ver. 39). In this
paragraph of the gospel history we read of a number of women who had been
healed of evil spirits and infirmities being permittel to manifest their gratitude
by following Him and by ministering to His necessities and to those of His apostles.
There is something very pleasing in this eager desire to be with Christ—to listen
to His teaching and to see His beneficent works, more especially those works of
healing which would remind them of their own deliverance. Yet the love and
gratitude thus manifested implied devotion of a heroic type, for many things
conjoined to interpose obstacles in the way of carrying out the desire to accom-
pany the Saviour in His missionary journeys. Two of these obstacles we may
indicate.

I. The life they shared was not without hardships and dangers.—Perhaps,
as we view them from this distance, the journeyings of the Saviour and His
disciples seem full of excitement and interest ; the varied scenes, the picturesque
incidents, the remarkaile persons who figure in them, the wonderful deeds of the
Saviour and His gracious discourses, appear to us as clothed with an almost
romantic charm. What could be more delightful than to listen to the Sermon
on the Mount, to witness the raising of the widow’s son from the dead, to partake
of the food miraculously multiplied, or to be present on occasions when Christ
showed merey to the outcast and friendless, or overcame His adversaries by a
wisdom which they would neither gainsay nor resist! But we need to remember
that there must have Leen many days of hardship and discomfort. Sometimes
the Son of man was wearied and exhausted, sad in heart at the sight of misery,
distressed by the unbelief of the multitude and the hatred of the ruling classes.
It was no light matter to follow Him day after day—to share His fatigues, and
griefs, and humiliations, and to become subject to the danger which loyalty to
Him often involved. Following Him when there was not leisure so much as to
eat—when He spoke words which sifted the crowds and drove many away—when
His enemies took Him up to the cliff to cast Him down, or when they were on
the point of stoning Him—was possible only for those of strong love and ardent
faith. We who are wedded to ease, and ruled by habit and custom, need not
delude ourselves by imagining that following Christ in these circumstances was
a privilege we would have been eager to secure. We are only too easily dis-
couraged by obstacles in the religious life—by our aversion to discomfort and
our regard for the world’s opinion—to be sure that if we had lived in the days
of Christ’s earthly ministry we should have displayed a devotion like that of
these disciples. : i

II. The perfect holiness of Christ, too, hindered many from following Him.—
It did not hinder these. If holiness does not attract, it repels. It is a constant
rebuke to all insincerity, double-mindedness, self-righteousness, and conceit, as well
as to all positively vicious tendencies and practices : it assails the faulty motive
as well as the sinful act. And the only way in which to live with any degree of
comfort in the society of one who is truly holy is to strive to become the same.
Following Christ, therefore, meant imitation of Him. In no other way could
the spectacle of His piety, love, humility, and heavenly-mindedness be borne day
after day. If we find ourselves incapable of a devotion to the Saviour like that
of this faithful band of women, we may well ask ourselves, Have we like them
known Him as a Healer and Deliverer? If we had really passed through their
experience, we could scarcely fail to manifest a gratitude like theirs.


21]


CHAP. VIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 1—3.


Ver. 1. “ Throughout every city and
village.” Christ now began to enlarge
the sphere of His work, and, instead of
making Capernaum His headquarters,
to enter upon a systematic and com-
plete visitation of the whole province
of Galilee. From this time it is that
He speaks of Himself as not having
where to lay His head. His apostles
too are called to give up their secular
occupations and place themselves at
His complete disposal—either to be
with Him as He preached, or to go
upon missions He might give them.
The difference between the subject-
matter of His preaching and that
of John the Baptist is very plainly
indicated. John spoke of preparing
for the coming of the kingdom of God;
Jesus announced the glad tidings that
it had come. The main duty of the
Christian preacher is, like Christ, to
proclaim the good news of God’s love
to men, though he will feel bound
also to speak words of warning to the
indifferent and impenitent.


Vers. 2, 3. ‘‘ Ministered unto them”
(R.V.).—A subordinate but still an
interesting question suggests itself as
to how Christ and the twelve were
sustained now that they had given
themselves up to spiritual work among
men. From what source was the com-
mon purse replenished ? (John xiii. 29).
How did they provide for bodily
necessities and have wherewith to
give to the poor? (John xii, 6). St.
Luke here gives the answer. It was
not by making use of His miraculous
power that Jesus provided sustenance
for Himself and for His apostles, but
by consenting to receive assistance
from some of those who were grateful
to Him for blessings they had obtained
from Him, ‘ He who was the support
of the spiritual life of His people dis-
dained not to be supported by their
gifts of things necessary for bodily life.
He was not ashamed to penetrate
so far into the depths of poverty as


212


to live upon the alms of love. He
only fed others miraculously ; for Him-
self, He lived upon the love of His
people. He gave all things to men
His brethren, and received all things
from them, enjoying thereby the pure
blessing of love; which is then only
perfect when it is at the same time
both giving and receiving. Whocould
invent such things as these? It was
necessary to live in this manner that
it might be so recorded” (Olshausen).


“ All these things shall be added.”
—Jesus thus fulfilled the precepts,
and found the accomplishment of the
promises He gave to His disciples:
“Seek ye first the kingdom of God,
and His righteousness ; and all these
things (food, clothing, ete.) shall be
added unto you” (Matt. vi. 33);
“ Every one that hath forsaken houses,

. or father, or mother, . .. or
lands, . . . shall receive an hundred-
fold” (ibed. xix. 29).


A Messiah living on the Bounty of
Men.—What a Messiah to the eyes of
the flesh was this One who lived on
the bounty of men! But what a
Messiah, to the eyes of the spirit, was
this Son of God, living by the love of
those whom His love had made to
live !— Godet.


The Maintenance of Ministers of
Religion.—The principle according to
which Christ acted is that laid down in
the New Testament for the guidance
of the Christian Church in the matter
of maintaining those who minister to
the spiritual needs of the community.
“The labourer is worthy of his hire,”
and “the Lord hath ordained that
they who preach tae gospel should live
of the gospel” (chap. x. 7; 1 Cor. ix. 14),


“ Certain women.” —The part played
by women in ministering to the necessi-
ties of Christ and His apostles is most
appropriate; for it is to Him that


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


OHAP. VIII.





they owe their emancipation from
‘degradation, and admittance on equal
terms with men to all the privileges
of His kingdom. In Christ there is
“neither male nor female” (Gal. iii.


28).


The Notices of Women in the Gospels.
—It is interesting to notice that the
Gospel history does not mention the
case of any woman who was hostile
to Jesus, but speaks of many who
were devoted to Him. Martha served
Him in Bethany, and Mary sat at
His feet; Mary anointed Him, and so
did the woman in the house of Simon;
most signal examples of faith were
afforded by the Canaanitish woman
and by her who touched the hem of His
garment ; a woman, the wife of Pilate,
bore witness to His innocence at the
time the unjust sentence was passed
on Him; women lamented Him on
His way to crucifixion, and drew near
to the cross; women went forth early
to the grave of the risen Lord, and
a woman was the first to see Him after
His resurrection.


The Same Kind of Devotion still Pos-
sible.—May not His loving people, and
particularly those of the tender, cling-
ing sex, still accompany Him as le
goes from land to land preaching, by
His servants, and showing the glad
tidings of the kingdom of God? and
may they not minister to Him of their
substance by sustaining and cheering
these agents of His? Verily they
may; and they do. “Inasmuch as ye
have done it unto the least of these
My brethren, ye have done it unto
Me.” Yes, as He is with them
“alway, even unto the end of the
world,” in preaching and showing the
glad tidings of the kingdom of God,


-even so, aS many as are with the


faithful workers of this work, and
helpful to them in it, are accompanying
Him and ministering to Him of their
substance. —Brown.


“ Mary .. . out of whom went seven
devils.” —She had been (1) delivered
from the direst form of misery, and
(2) was now admitted to the highest
felicity in following her Lord and in
ministering to His wants.


“ Joanna .. . wife of Hevod’s stew-
ard.”—Not even the corruptions of
Herod’s court could hinder the holy
influence of Christ from penetrating
to the hearts of some of those there.
In like manner there were Christians
in the household of Nero (Phil. iv. 22).


“ Susanna.” —Otherwise unknown ;
but what more glorious record could
be preserved of any life than is here
indicated by the mention of her name
in this connection ? what purer or more
lasting fame can any one win than that
of having ministered to Christ ?


The Needs of an Oriental compara-
tively Few.—It must be borne in mind
that the needs of an Oriental are very
small. A few dates, a little parched
corn, a draught of water, a few figs
or grapes plucked from the roadside
trees, suffice him; and in that climate
he can sleep during most of the year
in the open air, wrapped up in the
same outer garment which serves him
for the day. Hence the maintenance
of a poor man in Palestine is wholly
different from the standard of mainte-
nance required in such countries as
ours with their many artificial needs,
—SLarrar.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 4—18.


The Same Seed and Differing Soils—As Jesus watched the crowd assembling,
and perceived the various dispositions with which the people came, he could
not but reflect how much of what He had to say must certainly be lost on many,
He was conscious of that in His own mind which, could it only be conveyed into


213


CHAP. VIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





the minds of those pressing around Him, would cause their lives to flourish with
righteousness, beauty, love, usefulness, and joy. They came, some out of curiosity,
some out of hatred, all thinking themselves entitled to hold and express an
opinion concerning the importance or worthlessness of what He said. They
needed to be reminded that, in order to benefit by what He had to say, they
must bring certain capacities. The object of the parable is to explain the causes
of the failure and success of the gospel. The seed is not in fault, the sowing is
not in fault, but the soil is faulty.

I. The first fault of soil is impenetrability.—The hard, beaten: footpath that
crosses the cornfield may serve a very useful purpose, but certainly it will
grow no corn. The hard surface does not admit the seed: you might as well
scatter seed on a wooden table, or a pavement, or a mirror. ‘The seed may be
of the finest quality; but for all the purposes of sowing you might as well
sprinkle pebbles or shot. It lies on the surface. This state of matters then
represents that hearing of the word which manages to keep the word entirely
outside. The word has been heard, but that is all. It has not even entered
the understanding. Either from pre-occupation with other thoughts and hopes
such hearers have their minds beaten hard and rendered quite impervious to
thoughts of Christ’s kingdom, or from a natural slowness and hard frostiness
of nature: they hear the word without admitting it even to work in their under-
standing. They do not ponder what is heard; they do not check the statements
they hear by their own thought; they do not consider the bearings of the
gospel on themselves. The proposals made to the wayside hearer suggest
nothing at all to him. His mind throws off Christ’s offers as a slated roof
throws off hail. You might as well expect seed to grow on a tightly braced
drum-head, as the word to profit such a hearer ; it dances on the hard surface,
and the slightest motion shakes it off. The consequence is it is forgotten.
When seed is scattered on a hard surface, it is not allowed to lie long. The
birds devour it up. So when not even the mind has been interested in Christ’s
word that word is quickly forgotten ; the conversation on the way home from
church, the thought of to-morrow’s occupations, the sight of some one in the
street—anything is enough to take it clean away.

II. The second faultiness of soil is shallowness. —The shallow hearer our
Lord distinguishes by two characteristics: (1) he straightway receives the word,
and (2) he receives it with joy. The man of deeper character receives the word
with deliberation, is one who has many things to take into account and to weigh.
He receives it with seriousness, and reverence, and trembling, foreseeing the
trials he will be subjected to, and he cannot show a light-minded joy. The
superficial character responds quickly because there is no depth of inner life.
Difficulties which deter men of greater depth do not stagger the superficial.
These men may often be mistaken for the most earnest Christians; you cannot
see the root, and what is seen is shown in greatest luxuriance by the superficial.
But the test comes. The same shallowness of nature which makes them
susceptible to the gospel and quickly responsive makes them susceptible to
pain, suffering, hardship, and easily defeated. But how, then, can the shallow
man be saved? The parable, which presents one truth regarding shallow
natures, does not answer this question. But, passing beyond the parable, it may
be right to say that a man’s nature may be deepened by the events, and
relationships, and conflicts of life. Many young persons are shallow: the old
persons whom you would characterise as shallow are comparatively few.

III. The third faultiness of soil is “ dirt.”—There is seed in it already, and
every living weed means a choked blade of corn. This is a picture of the pre-
occupied heart of the rich, vigorous nature, capable of understanding, appreciat-
ing, and making much of the word of the kingdom, but occupied with so many


214


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. VIII.


other interests that only a small part of its energy is available for giving effect
to Christ’s ideas. And as there is generally some one kind of weed to which the
soil is congenial, and against which the farmer has to wage continual war, so
our Lord specifies as specially dangerous to us “the care of this world and the
deceitfulness of riches.” Among rich men and poor men alike you will find
some or many who would be left without any subject of thought, and any
guiding principle in action, if you took from them anxiety about their position
in life. The actions of a year, the annual outcome or harvest of the man, are
in many cases almost exclusively the product from this seed. Our Lord warns
us that if the word is to do its work in us, it must have the field to itself. It
is vain to hope for the only right harvest of a human life if your heart is sown
with worldly ambitions, a greedy hasting to be rich, an undue love of comfort,
a true earthliness of spirit. One seed only must be sown in you, and it will
produce all needed diligence in business, as well as all fervour of spirit.

In contrast to these three faults of impenetrability, shallowness, and dirt, we
may be expected to do something towards bringing to the hearing of the word
a soft, deep, clean soil of heart, or as said here “an honest and good heart.”
There are differences in the crop even among those who bring good hearts; one
bears thirty-fold, one sixty, one a hundred-fold. One man has natural advan-
tages, opportunities of position, and so forth, which make his yield greater.
One man m:y have had a larger proportion of seed; in his early days and all
through his life he may have been in contact with the word, and in favouring
circumstances. But wherever the word is received, and held fast, and patiently
cared for, there the life will produce all that God cares to have from it. The
requisites for hearing the word so as to profit by it are (1) honesty, (2) meditation,
(3) patience.—Dods.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 4—18.


Vers. 4-15. The Sower and the Seed.
—Consider this seed of the everlasting


duty, a specious self-esteem, a morbid
self-distrust.


gospel—

I. In the activitics which it de-
mands.—Sowing. watering, reaping.
Casting the seed of Divine truth into
the mind and heart, vigilant looking
for the germinating of the seed, the
expecting of results, and the gathering
in of these in greater or less abundance.

II. In the conditions which it im-
poses.—Genuineness, skilfulness, and
faith. The seed must be genuine,
not bastard wheat: skilfulness comes
through self-culture and experience.
The full assurance of a simple and
unhesitating faith.

III. There are risks which the seed
encounters.—The incessant malevo-
lence of the evil spirit, the emotional
or the earthly nature of those you
try to win, the peril from the home
environment, an imperfect sense
of responsibility, a one-sided view of


IV. The wages that it claims.—
Visible results, ‘gathered fruit,” the
love of those instructed, the enriching of
one’s own spiritual life, the discipline
of one’s own understanding. ‘To share
our possessions is to double them.
Truth is a possession not to be covet-
ously hoarded, but to be eagerly
passed on.

V. The joy of harvest.—Joy noble,
holy, unselfish, Divine. Joy among the
angels of God, in the heart of the
crowned Jesus, to the Father who
sees His Son glorified, to the husband-
man who gathers the sheaves into his
barn. What will your harvest be ?—
Thorold.


The Sower and the Seed.—Having
our Lord’s own explanation of the
parable, the application of its various
points is easily made.


215


- CHAP. VIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





I. The Sower.—He means Himself.
He came forth into the world to sow
good seed.

II. The seed.—God’s message in His
gospel.

III. The soil.—The four kinds are
pictures of four kinds of human hearts :
1. Those into whom God’s message
never sinks. 2. Those who are tem-
porarily influenced. 3. Those who are
preoccupied—the commonest soil of
all. 4. Those who have ‘“ honest and
good ” hearts.— Watson.


The Hearts which hear.

I. The heart which is never im-
pressed.—N either melted, attracted, nor
terrified. Because they listen care-
lessly or with dislike Satan, too, is
ever at hand to hinder.

II. The heart which receives shal-
low impressions.—Hager to learn, but
shallow-souled. Feelings touched, but
conscience unaffected. The hard rock
of an unchanged heart under the out-
ward show of warmth and interest.

III. The preoccupied heart.—Cares
keep some, riches keep others, from
Him at whose right hand are “ plea-
sures for evermore.”

IV. The prepared heart..—Earnest,
simple, grateful, The word is received
with the full intention of obeying it.—
W. Taylor.


Three Obstructions to Growth.—Three
distinct obstructions to growth and
ripening of the seed are enumerated.
The statement is exact and the order
transparent. The natural sequences
are strictly and beautifully maintained.
The three causes of abortion—the way-
side, the stony ground, and the thorns
—follow each other as the spring, the
summer, and the autumn. If the seed
escape the wayside, the danger of the
stony ground lies before it ; if it escape
the stony ground, the thorns at a later
stage threaten its safety; and it is
only when it has successively escaped
all three that it becomes fruitful at
length.—Arnot.


How the Call of God is received.—
This parable is both a solemn lesson


216


and warning, and also a description of
what is actually taking place in the
world. It tells how the human heart
actually treats the seed which is put
into it—the word of God—the impuise
which it receives from God to lead a
good and holy life. All these recep-
tions and all these rejections of the
word are actually going on amongst
us. There are calls perpetually going
on; there are either sudden rejections
or gradual forgetting of these calls
perpetually going on also. The parable
tells us how people treat these calls.

1. There is a certain class not neces-
sarily without religious impressions
and perceptions, but they think that
they shall be able to make religious
convictions and their treasured aim
of success in life agree. All at once
some impediment—something which
goes against their conscience—hbars the
way. By a summary act they cast
out the scruple, and are satisfied.
Scripture assigns this to diabolical
influence. Judas overcame with high
hand his reluctance to betray our
Lord; and it is said the devil entered
into him. Where Satan succeeds he
has gained a great victory, and goes
far to achieve the loss of a soul.

II. The second class are those who
from levity or carelessness of mind
allow the word, which they at first
received with gladness, to escape from
them. They can be acted upon,
“receive the word,” but have no energy
of their own to take hold of it and
extract its powers, and so they soon
fall away. It is one thing to begin a
thing, and a totally different thing to
go on with it. The commencement is
fresh ; the continuance becomes stale.
Perseverance to the end is the Chris-
tian triumph. Love is tried by con-
tinuance, by going on with what we
have begun. ‘This class, however, had
no depth of affection for what was
right in God’s law: they adopted it
as a fancy, and threw it away again
when they had tried it. Is not this
very prevalent? What change, what
inconstancy, do we see in the human
heart !


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. VIII.





III. The third class is guilty of
worldliness—absorbed in the business,
plans, and pursuits of this present life.
They do not give a place in their
thoughts to another world. The stream
of life carries them along, being in-
terested in the objects of this world,
until that which has thriven by practice
has completely driven out the principle
which has had no exercise, and the
result is a simple man of the world.

IV. Opposed to these different ways
of treating the word of God, which end
in its decay and suppression in man’s
neart, is the treatment given to it by
the honest and good heart, which does
not sin against light, abandon what is
undertaken, is not ensnared by the
deceitfulness of riches, or captivated
by the pomp and show of this world.
It is faithful to God, knows the excel-
lence of religion, is able to count the
cost, and to make the sacrifice for the
great end in view. —Mozley.


Different Classes of Hearers.

I. The wayside hearers.—Some
people become familiarised with the
gospel; it ceases to be news of any
kind. Every time we hear and do
not, that is a hardening of the foot-
path. “A smile at the end of a
sermon ; a silly criticism at the church
door ; foolish gossip on the way home.”
Thus the seed is lost.

TI. The rock hearers.—The word
gets easily in, and as easily out again.
Shallow, emotional hearers, who would
do anything when they hear, except
what costs trouble. They cannot re-
sist temptation.

III. The thorny hearers.—The
thorns are riches and worldly cares,
and the poor are troubled with both
as well as the rich.

IV. The: honest hearers.—Sincere,
earnest, believing, obedient.— Hastings.


Diverse Reception of the Word.

I. The wayside hearer hears the
word, but does not understand it: the
spiritually stupid.

II. The stony-ground hearer receives


the word with joy, but without thought :
the inconsiderately impulsive.

III. The thorny-ground hearer
receives the truth, but not as the one
supremely important thing: the double-
minded.

IV. The fruitful-ground hearer
receives the truth with his whole
heart, soul, and mind: those of open
and receptive mind.— Bruce.


Four Classes of Men.—Jesus dis-
cerned in the crowd four distinct kinds
of countenances: some unintelligent
and vacant; some enthusiastic and
delighted ; some of grave aspect, but
evidently preoccupied ; and some joyous
and serene, as of those who had sur-
rendered themselves wholly to the
truth He taught. The first class in-
cludes those who are characterised
by utter religious insensibility ; they
experience no anxiety of conscience,
fear of condemnation, or desire of sal-
vation : consequently they find nothing
in the gospel of Christ which is con-
genial to them. The second is that
of those whose hearts are fickle, but
easily excited, and in whom imagination
and sensitiveness of feeling supply for
a time the lack of a moral sense. The
novelties of the gospel, the opposition
to received ideas which it proclaims,
charm them. In almost every revival
such men form a large proportion of
the new converts. The third are those
of serious but of divided heart: they
geek salvation, and recognise the value
of the gospel; but they long also for
worldly prosperity, and are not pre-
pared to sacrifice everything for the
truth. In the case of those of the
fourth class, spiritual interests rule
the life. Conscience is not in their
case asleep, as it is in those of the
first of these classes: by it the will
is governed and not by imagination
or sentimental feelings, as in the case
of the second; and it rules over those
worldly preoccupations which are so
potent in the lives of the third.—
Godet.


Ver. 4. “ He spake by a parable.” —
217


<


CHAP. VIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





The preceding verses indicate a change
in the outward mode of life of our
Saviour. What follows indicates a
change in His mode of teaching, which
arrested the attention and excited the
surprise of His most intimate disciples
(cf. Matt. xiii. 10). Many were now
gathered together about Him, and the
mode of teaching He adopted was cal-
culated to sift the crowd, and separate
genuine disciples from mere careless
hearers.


Parables have a Dark and a Bright
Side—A parable is like the pillar of
cloud and fire, which turned the dark
side to the Egyptians, the bright side to
the people of the covenant ; it is like
a shell which keeps the precious kernel
as well for the diligent as from the
indolent.—Gerlach.


Local Colouring of this Parable.—
The parable spoken, as St. Matthew
tells us, while Christ taught on the
shore of the Lake of Gennesaret, may
have been suggested by the scene before
Him. Dean Stanley, describing the
shores of the lake, shows us how easily
this may have been the case: “ A slight
recess in the hillside, close upon the
plain, disclosed at once in detail every
feature of the great parable. There was
the undulating cornfield descending to
the water's edge. There was the trodden
pathway running through the midst
of it, with no fence or hedge to prevent
the seed from falling here and there
on either side of it, or upon it—itself
hard with the constant tramp of horse
and mule and human feet. There was
the “good” rich soil, which dis-
tinguishes the whole of that plain and
its neighbourhood from the bare hills
elsewhere, descending into the lake,
and which, where there is no inter-
ruption, produces one vast mass of
corn, There was the rocky ground
of the hillside protruding here and
there through the cornfields, as else-
where through the grassy slopes.
There were the large bushes of thorn
springing up, like the fruit trees of
the more inland parts, in the very


218


midst of the waving wheat” (Sinai
and Palestine).


Ver. 5. “A sower.”—Rather, ‘‘ the
sower,” 7.e. the servant to whom this
task is entrusted. The figure Christ here
uses of Himself—as one who by simple
teaching begins the task of establish-
ing the kingdom of God on earth—is
in striking contrast to the conception
of the Messiah which John the Baptist
had formed: ‘whose fan is in His
hand, and He will throughly purge
His floor ” (chap. iii. 17).


“ Some fell.” —Not “he sowed some
by the wayside,” but ‘some fell there.”
The intention of the sower is good, but


it depends upon the hearer where the
seed shall fall.


“ Trodden down. . . devoured tt.” —
Two dangers: 1. Careless obliteration
of the truth heard. 2. The active
malice of the devil.


“ Fowls of the air.”—These are the
thoughts, talk, and business of the
world, that dissipate the mind and
keep it in an atmosphere of frivolity,
preventing all entrance of what is
heard to the heart.—Stier.


The Seed by the Wayside.

I. The beaten path.—l. The heart
is trodden down by habit and custom.
2. The heart is trodden down by sin.
3. The heart is trodden down by the
very feet of the sower.

II. The lost seed.—l. It lies on
the surface for a little while and does
nothing. 2. It is soon carried off.—
Maclaren.


How are Human Hearts beaten into
a Highway ?—Every child’s heart is
sensitive to impression. But as it
grows older—

I. The thousand influences, feelings,
emotions, imaginations, treading over
it continuously trample it into hard-
ness.—Conviction of sin, not followed
by turning from sin, leaves the heart
harder.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. VIII,





II. The same effect is produced by
the common experiences of life.—The
wheels and carts of business. Too
many make their hearts an open
common, till they are beatcn into an
unimpressible callousness.

Ill. Another way is by the feet of
sinful habits.—The vile feet of lust,
of sensuality, of greed, of selfishness,
of passion, are allowed to tread there.
There is an impression that it does
young people no harm to indulge in
sin for a time, if they afterwards repent.
It is a fatal falsehood. The heart that
is trodden over by vile lusts or in-
dulgences of any kind is never the
same again.— Miller.


Ver. 6. “Jt lacked moisture.”—Tho
moisture at the root of the seed is the
same as what is called in another
parable the oil, to trim the lamps of
the virgins—that is, love and steadfast-
ness in virtue.— Bede.


Ver. 7. The Thorns.

I. They suck in the sap which
should go to nourish the good seed, and
leave it a living skeleton.

II. They outgrow the grain bcth in
breadth and height.

III. They spring of their own
accord, while the good seed must be
sown and cherished.

IV. As long as they live they grow.

V. They tear the husbandman’s
flesh, as well as destroy the fruit of his
field.

VI. It was where the seed and the
thorns grew together that the mischief
was done.

VII. When pulled up too late, they
leave a mere blank in the field.—
Arnot.


Ver. 8. “ Other fell on good ground.”
—Whence, then, is the difference ?
Not from the seed. That is the same
to all. Not from the sower, neither ;
for though tnese be divers, yet it
depends little or nothing on that. In-
deed, he is the fittest to preach who
is himself most like his message, and
comes forth not only with a handful


of seed in his hand, but with store of
it in his heart, the word dwelling richly
in him (Col. iii. 16). Yet the seed he
sows, being this word of life, depends
not on his qualifications in any kind,
either of common gifts or special grace.
People mistake this greatly ; and it is
a carnal conceit to hang on the advan-
tages of the minister, or to eye them
much.—Leighton.


“ He cried.”—The Lord calls the
serious attention of the crowd to the
unsatisfactory result of the sower’s
labours: “He exclaimed aloud ”—
He emphasised these words, which
were intended to awaken in His hearers
that faculty for recognising Divine
things without which even the teach-
ing of Jesus Himself would have been
for them an empty sound. The parable,
indeed, has that in it which might
easily be heard without being under-
stood: some might take pleasure in
the picture which it preseuted to the
imagination, without perceiving the
spiritual truth that lay behind it.
More than the bodily ear was needed
for the perception of that truth.—
Godet.


Ver. 10. “ Unto you it is given,” ete.
—Yet was there no permanent line of
demarcation drawn between the dis-
ciples and the multitude. It was
allowable for any hearer at any time
to pass from the careless or hostile
crowd into the company of those who
intelligently and sincerely accepted
Jesus as their Teacher and Saviour.


Ver. 11. “The seed is the word of
God.”—The point of resemblance be-
tween the two is the powerful vitality
that lies wrapped up in the unpre-
tentious husk. The word, like the
germ within the seed, has within it
a force which is quite independent of
human toil or effort, and which testifies
to its Divine origin.


Ver. 12. “ The way side.” —“‘ The way
is the heart beaten and dried by the
passage of evil thoughts.”


219


+


CHAP. VIII.


“ Then cometh the devil.” —“ This is
the most terrible saying in the whole
Bible,” says Luther, ‘‘and yet is so
little thought of! For who thinks and
believes that the devil too goes always
to church and sees how men listea so
carelessly to the word of God and do
not even pray, and how their hearts
are like a hard road, which the word
does not penetrate? Alas! even in us
who love the word of God there is still
something of the hard road in our
hearts.”


Ver. 13. “With joy.”—There are
two kinds of joy which the hearer of
the word may experience. There is
(1) the joy which springs from a recog-
nition of the greatness of the blessing
as meeting a moral need, and which
will lead the hearer to make any sacri-
fice to secure that blessing (cf. “for joy
sold all that he had,” Matt. xiii. 44);
and (2) the joy which springs from an
overlooking the costs, and hazards, and
hardships involved in a Christian life.


“In time of temptation fall away.” —
The heat which only matures a true
faith scorches up that which is merely
temporary.


Faith the Root.—Faith is to the
Christian life what the root is to the
plant.

I. It is hidden from sight in the
depth of the soul; but—

II. It is the source of spiritual firm-
ness, and stability, and prosperity.


Rocky Hearts.—O rocky hearts! How
shallow, shallow, are the impressions of
Divine things upon you! Religion goes
never further than the upper surface of
your hearts. You have but few deep
thoughts of God, and of Jesus Christ,
and of the things of the world to come.
Allare but slight and transient glances !
The seed goes not deep, It springs up,
indeed, but anything blasts and withers
it. There is little room in some. If
trials arise, either the heat of persecu-
tion without, or of temptation within,
this sudden spring-seed can stand before
neither.— Leighton.


220


TE ee fe


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


Ver. 14. Preoccupation with Worldly
Things. —The failure of the seed among
thorns is due to a preoccupation with
worldly things which in different cases
takes a different form,

J. The cares which harass the poor.

II. The distractions inseparably con-
nected with a life devoted to the
pursuit of riches.

III. The pleasures to which those
who are rich are tempted to addict
themselves. Cf. Jer. iv. 3: ‘“ Break
up your fallow ground, and sow not
among thorns.”


“Go forth.”—An indication of the
restlessness of such characters, as con-
trasted with. the “ patience” of those
of honest and good heart.


Childhood, Youth, and Age.—The
first hindrance, viewed generally and
as a whole, threatens the period of
childhood, which lives for the outer
world, and is as yet unsusceptible
of the higher truth; the second, the
period of youth, which is as susceptible
as it is inconstant; the third, a still
further advanced age, when the ripen-
ing in sanctification depends on the
rooting out of indwelling sin.—Séier.


The Two-hearted Hearers.—The two-
hearted come to no speed in anything.
Friendship, it has been said, is one
heart in two bodies; indecision is two
hearts in one body, the one filled with
earth’s thorns, the other with heaven’s
seed, Your heart can hold many things
at once, but you should never place
side by side in it the seed and the thorns,
Your whole soul must receive the seed
as the Ark received the law, having no
room for aught besides.— Wells.


Ver. 15. ‘“ Honest and good heart.”—
As for captious inquiries concerning
human goodness, we know indeed that
“there is none good but one, that is
God”; and yet Scripture, reason, and
experience convince us that some
natures afford a better soil for the
growth of spiritual seed than others,—
Burgon.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


Types of Character not Necessarily
Permanent.—The three unfruitful kinds
of ground do not indicate three types
of character which must necessarily
remain permanent: nor is the good
ground good in itself; it is made good
by the operation of the word, which,
though here described as seed, is else-
where represented as the dew and rain,
the hammer and the fire, which soften,
crush, and purify the hearts of men.


Ver. 16. “ When he hath lighted a
candle.” —Having spoken of the cffect
of the word upon the hearers, Christ
now tells His disciples what they must
do as teachers of the word.


Christ the Bringer of Light.—Christ
represents Himself as the bringer of
light, jast as He is the sower of seed.
This light therefore comes to us from
without, and is given to us that we
may display it to others. The very
purpose of a lamp is to shine and
to give light to those in the house
(cf. Matt. v. 14-16). The truth at
present veiled from the careless and in-
different is communicated by Christ to
His apostles, but not as a mystery to
be possessed and enjoyed by themselves:
they are illumined in order that they
may communicate to the world what
they have received. Hence the apostles
should take care to learn the meaning
of the parables, “not hiding them
under a blunted understanding, nor
when they did understand them, neg-
lecting the teaching of them to others.”


Ver. 17. ‘Be made manifest.”—
Christ was now taking special care in
teaching the apostles, imparting to
them in private special instruction,
and removing the veil that concealed
His meaning from so many who heard
His public discourses. But there was
nothing like favouritism in His pro-
cedure. He had in view the benefit
of all in imparting illumination to
the few: the present concealing was
for the purpose of future revealing.
This explains the plan He took for
giving light to all men. Instead of


CHAP. , VIII.





leaving the truth to its fate, and
contenting Himself with a public
proclamation of it, He took special
care to see that a certain number were
thoroughly acquainted with it, and
qualified to teach it to others. Instead
of leaving a vague, ill-understood
impression of His teaching to pervade
human society, He gave the twelve a
thorough training in spiritual things.


Ver. 18. The Pulpit and the Pew.

I. A critical spirit is a great hin-
drance to profitable hearing.

II. A formal spirit hinders profitable
hearing.

III. The preparation of the heart is
necessary to profitable hearing.

IV. A teachable spirit is helpful to
profitable hearing.

V. Attention is requisite to profit-
able hearing. — Kelly.


“ Whosoever hath.”—This was a
current proverb which Christ used to
enforce one of His own parables. It |
is true in nature, and also in the
spiritual sphere. Not that we ac-
quiesce in any doctrine of God’s
arbitrary decrees. It may be true
that few are chosen, but it is no less
true that many are called ; and if they
do not respond to the call, if they
are not disposed to receive the teach-
ing of Christ, the fault lies with those
who have so disposed them—at first
with their parents, and also much more
with themselves. The ‘irreducible
minimum” of truth which a man must
have if more is to be given him is the
“honest and good” heart. It was
just that honest and good heart which
alone made the difference between
the eleven and the multitude to whom
the same call was given, ‘“‘ Come unto
Me, and I will give you rest.”—
Beeching.


Progress in Knowledge.—The longing
to know is that which the disciples
“had,” and on account of which it
was granted to them to receive the
fulness of knowledge. His word given
to us raises ever deeper questions in


221


CHAP. VIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE,





our hearts, and we receive ever richer
answers.


The Responsibility of Hearing.—
1. The reward of hearing aright—
fresh knowledge communicated as the
faculty for receiving it is developed and
strengthened by exercise; 2. The
penalty attaching to neglect—utter


of the very power by which it is
apprehended. There is nothing arbi-
trary in this rule; it belongs to God’s
procedure in the kingdom of nature as
well as in that of grace. ‘“ The fabric of
the soul is affected by our indifference
—the penalty of degeneration is the
loss of functions, the decay of organs,
the death of the spiritual nature.”


deprivation of knowledge, and atrophy


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 19—21.


Natural and Spiritual Relationships.—The purpose for which Christ’s mother
and brethren came explains the words He uttered on this occasion. It was not
merely to see Him, but to persuade Him to give up the work in which He was
engaged, or even to use force to compel Him to yield to their desire. From the
zeal and ardour which seemed to render Him indifferent to food and repose,
they concluded that He was beside Himself (Mark iii. 20, 21), and probably also
they were alarmed at the enmity towards Him which the Pharisees had begun
to manifest. From their action and from the words which it evoked from Christ
we may learn several important lessons.

I. Faith is often found wanting in those who are most highly favoured in out-
ward circumstances.— Who could have been more highly favoured than the mother
and brethren of Jesus, in being permitted for so many years to witness His
pure and holy life? And yet they were at this time devoid of the faith in Him
which is necessary for genuine discipleship. Others who had seen and known
but little of Him had accepted Him as their Saviour and Lor.l, while they were
quite out of sympathy with the work God had sent Him to do. Familiarity
even with holy things is only too apt to breed indifference, and, as Christ
Himself said, a prophet often finds comparative strangers more willing to listen
to his message than those of his own country and kindred.

II. There may be collision between the claims of natural affection and those
of the kingdom of God.—Christ Himself had now to choose between the two,
and to subordinate the lower to the higher. And a like experience is familiar
to all who have ever attempted to serve Him. This painful conflict is perhaps.
seen in its sharpest forms ih cases where Christianity is beginning to make its
way in heathen society. New converts have often to sacrifice ties of kindred
and friendship for the sake of Christ, and to seem to be cruel to those whom
they love most dearly. But in no state of society is the conflict between lower
and higher duties altogether unknown. Circumstances often arise in which a
sensitive conscience guides the believer to take a line of action which may be
disapproved of by those whose good opinion and affection he is naturally most
anxious to retain. The rule he should follow is here laid down for him by the
example of his Master.

III. Obedience to God’s will means intimate union with Christ.—It was His
meat and drink to do the will of His Father, and all who are imbued with the
same spirit come into the closest fellowship with Him. It is quite evident that
the language which Christ here uses involves claims of a unique kind—that no
mere man, however holy, could thus present Himself as the bond of union
between heaven and earth. The high privileges which He thus proclaims as
belonging to those who become His disciples place rich and poor, high-born and
lowly, on the same level. And the union which exists between Him and them
death itself cannot break.


222


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. VIII.





IV. These family relationships suggest the spontaneous affection which
believers should cherish towards Christ and towards each other.—The mere
fact of relationships, such as are implied in the words “ mother, sister, brother,”
naturally calls up feelings of love, and suggests strong and indissoluble ties. We
experience a kind of horror at meeting with those who seem to be wanting in
this natural affection, which appears to us as rather an instinctive impulse
than an emotion which we can cultivate. Christ here uses these relationships
with all that they imply to represent the spiritual ties formed between Him
and His true disciples. And the common tie that binds them to Him should
bind them to each other. So do we find it in actual fact. Christians recognise
_ their brethren everywhere among those who believe in Christ, though they may

differ from them in race, and blood, and colour. The relation of spirit to spirit
is the profoundest of all. Civil wars, love of gain, and a hundred other things
have been known to break the family bond, and to extinguish natural affection.
But the mutual relations of believers with each other have been least disturbed
of any, when those ties have been real and not nominal.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 19—21.


Ver. 19. “ His mother and His show us only that belief in the sinless-


brethren.” —This is one of the cases in
which the parallel narratives in the
other Gospels serve to supplement the
history given by St. Luke, and to make
its significance clearer. Had we no
other information than that given here,
we should not have known the reason
why His mother and brethren desired
to see Him; we should not have had
reason for supposing that they were
bent upon checking or interfering with
His work; and His depreciation of
natural relationships as compared with
spiritual would have seemed uncalled
for. We learn, however, from Mark iii.
that His mother and brethren were (1)
alarmed at the rupture between Him
and the Pharisees, and (2) solicitous
also concerning His health—for He
and His disciples were so thronged by
the multitude as not to have leisure
“so much as to eat bread.” They
came to the conclusion that He was
beside Himself, and wished to put Him
under restraint ; or they alleged this
as an excuse for His procedure, in
order to pacify the anger of His
enemies. Their conduct was, there-
fore, blameworthy, as prompted by
excess of natural affection, an assump-
tion of authority over Him or worldly
policy. The comment of St. Chrysostom
on these words is interesting, even if it


ness of Mary was not in his time an
article of the Catholic faith: “‘ What
she attempted came of overmuch love of
honour ; for she wished to show to the
people that she had power and author-
ity over her son, imagining not as
yet anything great concerning Him ;
whence also she came unseasonably.
Observe then her and their reckless-
ness. For when they ought to have
gone in and listened with the multi-
tude, or, if they were not so minded, to
have waited for His bringing His dis-
course to an end, and then to have
come near, they call Him out, and do
this before all, exhibiting overmuch
love of honour, and wishing to show
that with much authority they enjoin
Him; and this, too, the Evangelist
shows that he is blaming ; for with this
very allusion he says, ‘while He yet
talked to the people’; as if he should
say, ‘What ! was there no other oppor-
tunity? What! could they not have
spoken with Him in private?’...
Whence it is evident that they did this
solely out of vain-glory.”


Ver. 21. The Spiritual Relationship
takes Precedence of the Natural.—The
reply of Jesus is virtually a statement
of the fact that when natural and
spiritual relationships come into con-


223


CHAP. VIII.


spear Fr ere


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





flict the former must be made to give
way. ‘He does not despise His mother,
but He gives higher honour to His
Father” (Bengel). The principle Christ
announced was one which had already
been approved in the word of God,
in the blessing pronounced by Moses
upon the tribe of Levi: ‘‘ Who said
unto his father and his mother, I have
not seen him ; neither did he acknow-
ledge his brethren, nor knew his own
children: for they have observed Thy
word, and kept Thy covenant” (Deut.
xxxiii. 9). We have therefore the
plain lesson taught us that we must
not allow ourselves to be guided solely
by natural feelings, but when earthly
ties bring us into conflict with our
duties towards God obey the higher
call even at the risk of seeming to be
cruel and hard-hearted. No friends or
relatives have claims upon us superior
to those which spring from our obliga-
tions to God and Christ.


“ My mother and My brethren are
these.” Perhaps in the jirst relation-
ship Christ referred specially to those
devout women mentioned in the earlier
part of the chapter, as ministering to
His wants and caring for Him with
all the affectionateness of their sex;
in the second He had in view the circle
of apostles and disciples immediately
surrounding Him. It is to be noticed
that our Lord, though in St. Matthew’s
narrative He introduces the additional
term “sister” into His answer, does
not, and indeed could not, introduce
“father,” inasmuch as He never speaks
of an earthly father. His Father was
in heaven.—A/ford.


Son of Man.—He is Son of man as
well as Son of Mary, and in one sense
is more identified with the race than
with her.


“ Brother, sister, and mother” —
These words define the compass and
limits of the relationship of the Son
of God and man with the- human
race. This relationship has already
been thrown open to the whole race


224


by His birth in the flesh, already
involved in the grace offered to all;
but it is completed only in those who
do the will of God, His Father in
heaven.—Stier.


A New Relationship.—Nor is thesepa-
ration between earthly and spiritual
ties necessarily final: His mother and
brethren, by becoming His disciples
also, will become bound to Him by
a closer than natural relationship.


But One True Nobdility.—There is
but one true nobility—that of obedi-
ence to God. This is greater than
that of the Virgin’s relationship to
Christ. Therefore when a woman
in the crowd exclaimed, “Blessed is
the womb that bare Thee, and the
paps which Thou hast sucked,” He
did not say ‘“‘She is not My mother,”
but “If she desires to be blessed, let
her do the will of God”; He said,
“Yea rather, blessed are they that
hear the word of God, and keep it.”—
Chrysostom.


A Widely Eatended Privilege.—With
the apparent severity of the answer
there is wonderful gentleness blended :
the claim to relationship is denied
to be the exclusive right of a few,
but the privilege of making it is ex-
tended to the many who obeyed His
word and accepted His teaching. All
who then heard the word of God and
did it, or who should hereafter hear
and do, are taken into this intimate
fellowship with Himself. ‘ This was
surely sent for the comfort of as many
as should come after; and it is well
worthy of remark how our blessed
Lord in countless ways contrived that
‘as many as are afar off’—even we
at this distant day—should be made
to feel that privileges of the highest
order are ours—privileges equal to
any which were enjoyed by kinsmen
and disciples in the days of the Son of
man” (Burgon).


One Family.—How glorious is the
thought that there is a family even upon


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,


earth of which the Son of God holds
Himself a part; a family the loving
bond and reigning principle of which is
subjection to the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and so embracing high and
low, rude and refined, bond and free,
of every kindred and every age that
have tasted that the Lord is gracious;
a family whose members can at once
understand each other andtake sweetest
counsel together, though meeting for
the first time from the ends of the
earth—while with their nearest rela-
tives, who are but the children of this
world, they have no sympathy in such
things; a family which death cannot


CHAP. VIII.


break up, but only transfer to their
Father’s house! Did Christians but
habitually realise and act upon this,
as did their blessed Master, what
would be the effect upon the Church
and upon the world ’—Brown.


Spiritual Affinity the Closest of All.
—The deepest affinity is that of the
spirit. Hence the supremacy, even
in the present provisional state of
things, of the wedlock relationship.
Hence, too, the still higher supremacy
of the relationship that will rule in
the world of glory (Matt. xxii. 30).—
Morison.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 22—25.


Faith and Fear.—Jesus was fast asleep amid the dashing waves and drenching
storm. But was the danger real? Yes, to human eyes very real. To these
fishermen, who had known that water all their days, it was real, and they were
afraid for themselves and Him. It was very natural, this fear, though foolish :
natural that they should dread the idea of all their hopes and prospects being
lost in this premature grave, yet foolish that they should fear for themselves and
Him so meaningless an end. Yet nature got the upper hand of faith, and they
gave way to their headlong terrors.

I. Christ rebukes the storm.—Though unmoved by the piercing shrieks of the
wind and the hoarse menace of the waves, He wakes at the first cry of the
disciples. He arose calmly, composedly. The Son of man had been sleeping. .
The Son of God awakes and speaks,—for Himself exhausted, for others still
mighty. He looked down at the waves; He looked up into the heavens. “ He
rebuked the wind and the raging of thé water : and they ceased, and there was
a calm.” What a revelation of Godin man! It is not so much the mere power
that impresses. We have seen Him do as great works before, and greater. But,
as the wondering disciples said, ‘it is the manner of the man.” In what con-
dition is man by himself more thoroughly helpless than in a storm at sea—in
a frail boat—the sport of the elements—a mere straw upon the waters, with
death opening all her mouths upon him? In no condition, unless you add that
in which Jesus was a few moments before—fast asleep. A waking man in a
shipwreck may be on the watch for some means of escape! But a man asleep in

a boat rapidly filling with water and on the point of going down !—such and so
helpless did Jesus seem the one moment. And the next ! He stands and speaks
to the elements, and they hear with the facility and readiness of well-trained
servants. ‘What manner of man is this! for He commandeth even the winds
and the water, and they obey Him.”

II. Christ rebukes His disciples—He had His own disciples to rebuke and
correct as well as the storm to still. “Where is your faith?” The question
does not imply that they were absolutely faithless. This could not be. Their
instinctive application to Him when things became so bad shows clearly enough
their belief that He could and would deliver Himself and them from the danger.
But He rebukes them for the littleness, the narrowness, of their faith, for the
want of larger trust. They ought to have had such confidence in Him as to


Qs 225


onaP. vit. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





believe that sleeping or waking made no difference to Him, that the boat which
carried Him and them together would not be overwhelmed. It was not that
they had no faith; but—like one who has a piece, though in sudden panic he
forgets to fire—it was as bad as if they had none. They failed to apply their
faith fully. It was not ready for use. They believed Jesus to be the Christ,
they had left all to follow Him, and had they been consistent with their own
belief they had showed no such unworthy fear. But fear for the moment ruled,
and not faith. Thus they became weak, as we all are when our faith is not at
hand in the time of need : thus they justly incurred the rebuke, ‘‘ Where is your
faith?” They had entrusted to Him their souls, their lives, their all; and yet
they forgot all this in a moment of panic, out of mere natural, human fear.
How exactly like us and our unbelief! For unbelief is always the same confused,
feeble, sinful thing. You have received Christ as your Saviour ; you have long
ago known His great salvation ; and yet let any sudden squall arise, and you fear
and ery out as if all were lost. You grow downcast “‘ when days are dark and
friends are few.” You are unstrung when some sudden trial crushes your home.
Your knees fail and your handshang down. Whyis this? Where is your faith ?
Let not your heart be troubled. Ye believe in God ; believe also in Jesus. You
believe in His almightiness, as the Christ of God, to whom all things in providence
are entrusted for His people’s sake. Is there anything in your lot or life He
cannot master whom the winds and waves obey? You believe in His wisdom.
Are not your times in His hand? And your times of storm and terror you have
found before to be His times of help and healing. You believe in His love; and
His love is never more active toward you than in the tempest of trial. You
believe in His faithfulness—that His promise stands sure, ‘‘ I will never leave thee,
nor forsake thee.”

The distinctive teaching of the miracle may be summed up in these two
items: 1. Directly, it teaches that to Him as Lord of providence belongs all
power to defend His cause and people from danger, and that He is continually
exercising that power which on special and signal occasions has called out not
. only the fervent adoration of His own, but has attracted the wonder and
admiration of the world. 2. Less directly, but very significantly, the story
suggests the perpetual presence of Christ in and with His Church, for its
protection and deliverance.—Laidlaw. .


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 22—25.


Vers. 22-25. The Peace-bringer in
the World of Nature.—Note :—
I. Christ’s sleep in the storm.
II. The awaking cry of fear.
III. The word that calms the storm.
IV. The gentle remonstrance.—
Maclaren.


Ver. 22. “ He went into a ship.”—
From a comparison of the various
synoptical narratives we learn that
this had been a very busy day in
the life of Jesus—it had been crowded
with works of healing, discourses,
controversies with opponents, and con-
versation with disciples. St. Mark


226


distinctly says (iv. 35) that the storm
upon the lake occurred on the even-
ing of the day when He first began to
speak to the multitude in parables.
We need not wonder, therefore, that
He was fatigued and fell asleep in the
boat. ‘The reason why He decided to
cross over to the eastern shore of the
lake does not seem to have been to
secure a measure of needed repose.
No hint of this being His purpose is
givenin the Gospels. His usual course
after imparting instruction in one
place was to go to another, and not
to rest (Mark i. 38). This district of
Decapolis, on the east of the Sea of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. VIII.





Galilee, was a stronghold of heathenism,
where there was an abundant field
for religious work, and where rest
would be out of the question”
(Speaker's Commentary).


“A ship.”—This ship which carried
Christ, and in which He taught,—
sometimes near shore, where the people
stood; sometimes in calm, sometimes
in storm,—was a beautiful emblem of
the Church sailing over the waters
of this world on her voyage to the
harbour of eternity.— Wordsworth.


Ver. 23. “He fell asleep.”—The
scene suggests that in Jonah i. 5,
where the prophet was asleep on board
the Phenician ship amidst the violence
of the storm, and had to be roused
from his slumbers. But with the
disobedience of the prophet, and his
helplessness to avert danger, are to be
contrasted the untroubled conscience
and serene majesty and power of
Christ when He was in like circum-
stances.


The Wearied Saviour.—How touch-
ing that our Saviour should have been
so speedily asleep! How suggestive
of His great exhaustion that He should
have been so sound asleep! Those
delicate energies of His humanity, that
needed to be statedly replenished, had
been subjected to an excessive drain in
consequence of the urgent demands of
the people for teaching and healing.—
Morison.


Vers. 24-32. Lake and Shore.

I. A stormy lake.—1. The weary
sleeper. 2. The sudden danger. 3. The
sure help.

II. The lake shore.—l.
sufferer. 2. A gracious Healer. 3. A
grateful would-be follower. Jesus
calms the stormy sea, and then calms
a storm-tossed soul.—W. Taylor.


A sad


Ver. 24. ‘‘ They awoke Him.”

I. The roar of the storm He did not
hear in His sound sleep, but the
moment there was a cry from His


disciples for help He awoke. What a
revelation of heart we have here! He
is never asleep to His praying people.
He hears the faintest ery of prayer
amid the wildest tumults of the world.
He is never too weary to listen to the
appeal of human distress.

II. Though aroused suddenly, He
awoke calm and peaeeful. Such an
experience reveals the grandeur and
purity of His nature. No terror, no
resentment, no upbraiding, for being
disturbed, but perfect calmness and
peace. Here we see what Christ
meant when He said, “ My peace I
give unto you.” In this peaceful
spirit He moved amid the various
turbulent scenes of His earthly life.—
Miller.


Even Weak Faith Hffectual_—The
disciples were in unbelief, which cried
out, “ We perish!” Yet were they at
the same time sufficiently believing
to call upon Him, “ Lord, help us!”
Even weak faith is faith still; the
trembling hand yet holds fast the
Deliverer.—Stier.


“ Master, master /”—The exclama-
tion which reveals (1) timorous faith,
reveals also (2) genuine faith, for in
their distress they flee to none but
Jesus.


Alarm and Perplexity.—The disciples
were (1) alarmed by the violence of the
tempest, and (2) perplexed by the fact
that for the moment Christ seemed
oblivious to their danger.


“ He arose.’—Let any man reflect
how one suddenly roused with outcries
of distress and danger of death around
him would in the weakness of humanity
comport himself, and it will help him to
perceive and estimate the unapproach-
able dignity of this Being. Even while
one with us He is paying His tribute
to the infirmity of our flesh. The Son
of man slept; the Son of God in man
awakes and speaks. For Himself ex-
hausted, for others almighty.—Stier.


227


<


CHAP. VIII.


Christ's Calmness.—Cesar’s con-
fidence that the bark which contained
him and his fortunes could not sink
forms the earthly counterpart to the
heavenly calmness and confidence of
the Lord.—T'rench.


“ Rebuked the wind.”—Speaking to
the wind and the billows of the water
as though they were living powers
(Ps. cvi. 9, “‘ He rebuked the Red Sea
also”), or to the evil powers which
may be conceived to wield them to
the danger of mankind.—Farrar.


Union of the Divine and the Human.
—What Moses performed in the might
of Jehovah when he opened with his
rod the way through the waters, that
the Son of the Father does through
the efficacy of His will alone. Here
also we meet with that union of the
Divine and human nature which we
so often discover in the gospel. He
who wearied with His day’s work lays
Himself awhile to sleep, because He
needs bodily rest, and remains quiet
in the most threatening danger, rises
at once in Divine fulness of might,
and commands the tempestuous wind
and bridles the sea.— Van Oosterzee.


The Voice of Authority.—The ele-
ments which are deaf to us heard their
Creator.—Jerome.


Ver. 25. “ Where is your faith ?”—
Christ acknowledges the faith which
the disciples had; answers the prayer
of faith by working a perfect calm ;
but rebukes them for not having the
stronger, firmer faith to trust Him
even when He seemed insensible to
their danger.—Alford.


A Weapon not at Hand.—Faith they
had, as the weapon which a soldier
has, but cannot lay hold of at the
moment when he needs it the most.—
Trench.


Luith should be a Preservative from
Terror.—W herein were the apostles to
blame? It was for the state of anxiety


228


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


and alarm in which Christ found them
when He awoke from slumber. Faith
may and should add intensity to our
prayers, but it should also save us
from agitation and terror.


Wait Patiently.—By these words
Christ censures all irregular ways of
endeavouring to extricate ourselves
from difficulties. Such irregular
methods argue lack of faith. They
are acts of irreverence, like that of
the disciples disturbing Christ in His
slumber. If the times are such that
we can neither row nor sail in the
vessel of the Church, we must wait
patiently in the ship till He arises
and calms the storm. Then the words
apply: “In quietness and confidence
shall be your strength ” (Isa. xxx. 15) ;
and, “Their strength is to sit still”
(ibid., ver. 7); and “ Stand still, and see
the salvation of the Lord” (Exod. xiy.
13).—Wordsworth.


“ Being afraid.” —Two kinds of fear
agitated the minds of the disciples
within the space of a very few moments :
indeed, the one fear followed imme-
diately upon the other. The first was
sheer terror of perishing in the waters ;
the second, a reverential fear, a holy
awe, at having experienced a deliver-
ance at once so gracious and so
astonishing.


The Teaching of the Miracle-—The
miracle proves (1) that Christ never
forgets His people, though He some-
times appears to do so; and (2) that
i will certainly deliver His people at
ast.


The Wonder of the Disciples.—The
wonder of the disciples may find ex-
planation in the fact that this miracle
was the first of the kind they had
witnessed—the first example of Christ’s
power over the blind forces of nature.
But we find in our own experience
that each new manifestation of God’s
power and love in delivering us from
danger excites as much astonishment
in our hearts as if we were learning


—


'HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. VIII.





’ for the first time the greatness of His


majesty and mercy.


“ What manner of man is this!” —A
question not of doubt, but of astonish-
ment. The disciples were amazed at


(1) the unexpectedness of the miracle,


and (2) at its unexampled character.
For not only was the violence of the
wind instantly checked, but also the
raging of the water, which is usually
disturbed for some time after the wind
falls, ceased in a moment, and “there
was a calm.” This miracle, like that
in v. 8, was wrought in a sphere
familiar to them, and they were there-
fore fully able to appreciate the great-
aess of the power Christ displayed.


The Purpose of the Miracle.

I. It renewed and confirmed faith
in Christ.

Il. It gave prophetic assurance of
His power and willingness to help in
all subsequent times of danger. When
at a later time storms threatened the
bark of the Church, disciples could
still believe that Christ was with them,
and that in His own time He would
deliver it and them from perishing in
the waves.


The Miracle a Parable.—The symbolic


application of this occurrence is too
striking to have escaped general notice.
The Saviour with His company of
disciples in the ship tossed on the
waves seemed a typical reproduction
of the Ark bearing mankind on the
flood, and a foreshadowing of the
Church tossed by the tempests of
the world, but having Him with her
always. And the personal application
is one of comfort and strengthening of
faith in danger and doubt.—A (ford.


Christ's Presence a Source of Safety.
—We are sailing in this life as
through a sea, and the wind rises, and
storms of temptation are not wanting.
Whence is this, save because Jesus is
sleeping in thee? If He were not
sleeping in thee, thou wouldest have
calm within. But what means this,
that Jesus is sleeping in thee, save that
thy faith, which is from Jesus, is
slumbering in thine heart? What
shalt thou do to be delivered? Arouse
Him and say, “ Master, we perish.”
He will awaken—that is, thy faith will
return to thee, and abide with thee
always. When Christ is awakened,
though the tempest beat into, yet it
will not fill, thy ship; thy faith will
now command the winds and the
waves, and the danger will be over.
—Augustine.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 26-—39.


The Lord of Demons.—The sufferer whom Christ healed was not merely a
maniac, but a demoniac. He is not a man at war with himself, but a man at
war with other beings, who have forced themselves into his house of life. The
narrative of his restoration has a remarkable feature, which may help to mark
off its stages. ° The word “ besought ” occurs four times in it (vers. 28, 31, 37, 38),
and we may group the details round each instance. :

I. The demons beseeching Jesus through the man’s voice.—He was, in the
exact sense of the word, distracted—drawn two ways. For it would seem to
have been the self in him that ran to Jesus and fell at His feet, as if in some
dim hope of rescue; but it is the demons in him that speak, though the voice
be his. They force him to utter their wishes, their terrors, their loathing of
Christ, though he says “I” and “me” as if these were his own. That horrible
condition of a double, or, as in this case, a manifold personality speaking
through human organs, and overwhelming the proper self, mysterious as it is,
is the very essence of the awful misery of the demoniacs. The mere presenec
of Christ lashes the demons to paroxysms; but, before the man spoke, Christ

229


CHAP. VIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





had given His stern command to come forth. He is answered by this howl of
fear and hate. Clear recognition of Christ’s person is in it. They know Him
who had conquered their prince long ago. The next element in the words is
hatred, as fixed as the knowledge is clear. God’s supremacy and loftiness, and
Christ’s nature, are recognised, but only the more abhorred. This, then, is a
dark possibility, which has become actual for real living beings, that they
should know God, and hate as heartily as they know clearly. That is the
terminus towards which human spirits may be travelling. The “ torment”
deprecated was expulsion from the man, as if there was some grim satisfaction
and dreadful alleviation in being there, rather than in “the abyss,” which
appears to be the alternative. How striking is Christ’s unmoved calm in the
face of all this fury! No doubt His tranquil presence helped to calm the man,
however it excited the demons. The distinct intention of the question, ‘‘ What
is thy name?” is to arouse the man’s self-consciousness, and make him feel his
separate existence, apart from the alien tyranny which had just been using his
voice and usurping his personality. But for the moment the foreign influence
is still too strong, and the answer comes, “ My name is Legion: for we are
many” (St. Mark). There isa momentary gleam of the true self in the first
word or two, but it fades away into the old confusion.

II. The demons beseeching Jesus without disguise.—Why should the expelled
demons seek to enter the swine? . It would appear that anywhere was better
than “the abyss,” and that unless they could find some body to enter, thither
they must go. It would seem, too, that there was no other land open to
them—for the prayer on the man’s lips had been not to send them “out of the
country,” as if it were the only country on earth open to them. That makes
for the opinion that demoniacal possession was the dark shadow which attended,
for reasons not discoverable by us, the light of Christ’s coming, and was limited
in time and space by His earthly manifestation. But on such matters there
is not ground enough for certainty. Another difficulty has been raised as to
Christ’s right to destroy property. But destruction did not necessarily follow
upon possession. The drowning of the herd does not appear to have entered
into the calculations of the unclean spirits. They desired houses to live in
after their expulsion, and for them to plunge the swine into the lake would
have defeated their purpose. The stampede was an unexpected effect of the
commingling of the demoniacal with the animal nature, and outwitted the demons,
There is a lower depth than the animal nature ; and even swine feel uncomfort-
able when the demon is in them, and in their panic rush anywhere to get rid of
the incubus, and, before they know, find themselves in the lake.

III. The terrified Gadarenes beseeching Jesus to leave them.—They had
rather have their swine than their Saviour. Fear and selfishness prompted
the prayer. The communities on the eastern side of the lake were largely
Gentile ; and, no doubt, these people knew that they did many worse things
than swine-keeping, and may have been afraid that some more of their wealth
would have to go the same road as the herd. They did not want instruction
nor feel that they needed a healer. Were their prayers so very unlike the
wishes of many of us? Is there nobody nowadays unwilling to let the
thought of Christ enter into his life, because he feels an uneasy suspicion that,
if Christ comes, a good deal will have to go? How many trades and schemes
of life really beseech Jesus to go away and leave them in peace? And He
goes away. Christ commands unclean spirits, but He can only plead with
hearts. And if we bid Him depart, He is fain to leave us for the time to the
indulgence of our foolish and wicked schemes. If any man open, He comes
in—oh, how gladly! but if any man shut the door in His face, He can but
tarry without and knock.


230


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. omar. vit.


a ee ee ee Fa,


IV. The restored man’s beseeching to abide with Christ.—Conscious weakness,
dread of some recurrence of the inward hell, and grateful love, prompted the
prayer. The prayer itself was partly right and partly wrong: right, in
clinging to Jesus as the only refuge from the past misery ; wrong, in clinging
to His visible presence as the only way of keeping near Him. Therefore He
who had permitted the wish of the demons, and complied with the entreaties
of the terrified mob, did not yield to the prayer throbbing with love and
conscious weakness. Strange that Jesus should put aside a hand that sought
to grasp His in order to be safe; but His refusal was, as always, the gift of
something better. The best defence against the return of the evil spirits was
in occupation. Therefore he is sent to proclaim his deliverance among friends
who had known his dreadful state, and to renew old associations which would _
help him to knit his new life to his old, and to treat his misery as a parenthesis.
Jesus commanded silence or speech according to the need of the subjects of
His miracles. For some, silence was best, to deepen the impression of blessing
received ; for others, speech was best, to engage and so. to fortify the mind
against relapse.—Maclaren,


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 26—39.


Ver. 26. “ Country of the Gadarenes.
—The connection is very striking
in which this miracle stands with
that other which went immediately
before. Our Lord has just shown
Himself as the Pacifier of the tumults
and the discords in the outward world;
He has spoken peace to the winds and
to the waves, and hushed the war of
elements with a word. But there is
something wilder and more fearful
than the winds and waves in their
fiercest moods—even the spirit of man,
when it has broken loose from all
restraints, and yielded itself to be his
organ who brings confusion and anarchy
wherever his dominion reaches. And
Christ will accomplish here a yet
mightier work than that which He
accomplished there; He will prove
Himself here also the Prince of peace,
the Restorer of the lost harmonies; He
will speak, and at His potent word this
madder strife, this blinder rage, which
is in the heart of man, will allay itself,
and here also there shall be a great
calm.—Trench.


A Semi-heathen Population.—The
region into which Christ had come
was inhabited by a semi-heathen popu-
lation, and both in the disobedience
to the Jewish law manifested in the


keeping of herds of animals reckoned
as unclean, and in the earnest request
proffered to Christ to depart from the
district, we have indications of the
spiritual condition of those to whom
He now came to preach the gospel
of the kingdom. Here where Satan
was most obeyed the tyranny of his
rule was manifested in its direct form.


Vers. 27, 28. “A certain man, which
had devils..—We have here one
of the greatest dangers, no doubt, to
which Jesus was exposed in the course
of His life: He was face to face with
uncontrolled brutal force. But the
sight of His perfect calmness, and of
His holy majesty, and of the profound
compassion which was expressed in His
countenance, affect this furious maniac;
as he recognises the contrast between
himself and the Saviour, there is
awakened even in him a sense of his
moral degradation. He feels himself
at once attracted by, and repelled by,
this Man who holds him under the
control of His commanding eye. A
crisis arises; it is declared by a loud
cry ; and then, like a wild beast in the
presence of its tamer, the man runs
forward and falls upon his knees,
though at the same time he protests
in the name of the spirit who possesses


231


CHar vu HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


him against the power which ‘is being
exercised upon him.—G'odet.


Ver. 27. “Met Him.”—In the
demoniac’s coming to meet Christ, and
yet entreating to be let alone, we have
a picture of a divided consciousness :
(1) an instinctive feeling that He was
the Deliverer ; and (2) a sense of the
awful gulf between the evil nature
and the Son of the most high God.


“ Abode . . . im the tombs.”—This
wretched: man was kept among the
tombs by an unclean spirit, that he
might have an opportunity of terrifying
him continually with the mournful
spectacle of death, as if he were cut
off from the society of men, aud
already dwelt among the dead.—
Calvin.


Ver. 29. “ Bound with chains.” —The
evil spirit is strong enough to break
all chains and fetters, and is over-
mastered only by the power of Jesus.
So too on the moral and spiritual side
of things an evil habit often cannot
be controlled by considerations of health
or propriety, or any of the restraints
which reason and conscience and public
opinion would impose; yet no evil
habit is too strong for the power of
Christ to fail to give deliverance.


Ver. 30. ‘ Legion.” —The name sug-
gests not only numbers, but organised
strength and tried courage—distinction
of ranks and unity of purpose.


The Christian's Armouwr.—Our Lord
describes the enemy as “a strong man
armed” (xi. 21, 22). Hence the Chris-
tian who has to contend with him or
his agents is furnished with weapons of
warfare also: ‘‘the whole armour of
God—girdle, breastplate, shield, helmet,
and sword” (Eph. vi. 13-17).


Ver. 31. “The abyss.”—The power
of Jesus Christ extends over animals,


demons, and the abyss. This the
demons themselves acknowledge.—
Bengel.


232


Ver. 32. “That He would suffer them.” ©
—The legion of devils would have had
no power over the herd of swine unless
they had received it from God: how
much less will they have power over
the flock of the Good Shepherd !


“And He suffered them.”—If this
granting of the request of the evil
spirits helped in any way the cure of
the man, caused them to resign their
hold on him more easily, mitigated
the paroxysm of their going forth (see
Mark ix. 26), this would have been
motive enough. Or still more probably
it may have been necessary, for the
permanent healing of the man, that
he should have an outward evidence
and testimony that the hellish powers
which had held him in bondage had
quitted him.—T'rench.


Ver. 35. “ Ran violently down a
steep place.” —God’s saints and servants
appear not to be heard; and the very
refusal of their requests is to them a
blessing (2 Cor. xii. 8, 9). The wicked
Satan (Job i. 11) and his ministers
and servants are sometimes heard,
and the very granting of their petition
issues in their worst confusion and loss.
These evil spirits had their prayer
heard; but only to their ruin.—
Trench.


Ver. 35. “ Sitting at the feet of
Jesus.” —Note the change: the frantic
demoniac has become a meek disciple.


Ver. 37. Tested and Found Wanting.

I. The Gadarenes tested—by the
presence of Christ as the Bringer of
spiritual blessings and the Deliverer
from evil.

II. The Gadarenes found wanting:
they had no desire to be delivered
from their sins, and felt that the
presence of a holy Being would only
bring further mischiefs upon them.


Impatience at Loss.—How hard it is
to recognise the hand of God in any-
thing which interrupts our present
enjoyment, brings us loss, and in any


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. VIII.


ne"


way interferes with our worldly pros-
perity! We overlook the actual bless-
ings which mingle with the most
afflicting dispensation. We do not
consider how near we may have been
brought, by chastisement, to the sacred
person of our Lord. We simply are
impatient and afraid. We desire
nothing so much as to be as, and
what, we were.—BSurgon.


God’s Power and God's Goodness.—
The Gadarenes cannot endure to have
Christ among them; but he who
has been delivered from the unclean
spirit is desirous to leave his own
country and follow Him. Hence we
may learn how wide is the difference
between knowledge of the goodness
and knowledge of the power of God.
Power strikes men with terror, makes
them fly from the presence of God, and
drives them to a distance from Him;
but goodness draws them gently, and
makes them feel that nothing is more
desirable than to be united to God.


“ Taken with great  fear.”—An
example of slavish fear. Contrast the
case of the Samaritans and the con-
sequences. Fear is the beginning of
wisdom (Prov. ix. 10), but perfect love
casteth out fear (1 John iv. 18).


The Answered Prayer.

I. “ Besought Him to depart.” This
is one of the saddest sentences in the
Gospels. We can scarcely conceive of
any one asking Jesus to go away. He
had come to bring blessings. He had
begun His work of grace. He would
have gone on to other gracious acts of
love and mercy had they not besought
Him to depart. It was probably all
because of the loss of the swine.

II. Some feel like the Gadarenes
when a work of grace begins in their
community.—_They are opposed to
Christianity because it interferes with
their business. They are against
Christianity, because Christianity is
against them. All of us are apt to
want Christ to depart from us when
He interferes with our cherished plans.


III. He complied with their prayer.
—He did not stay after these people
asked Him to go. He would not stay
where He was not wanted. He carried
back the gifts He had come there to
leave. Does Jesus never turn away
from any heart now because He is
not wanted ?— Willer.


“‘ Besought Hum to depart.”—Need
we wonder that to those who persist
for a whole lifetime in saying to the
Saviour, Depart from us, He should,
wearied out at length, Himself say in
the end, Depart from Me ?’—WMorison.


Ver. 38. “That he might be with
Him.”’—Perhaps his motive was fear
of a relapse, or it may have been
gratitude for the deliverance he had
experienced.


Ver. 39. “ Return to thine own
house.”—In the person of one man
Christ has exhibited to us a proof of
His grace, which is extended to all
mankind. Though we are not tortured
by the devil, yet he holds us as his
slaves till the Son of God delivers us
from his tyranny. Naked, torn, and
disfigured, we wander about till He
restores us to soundness of mind. It
remains that, in magnifying His grace,
we testify our gratitude.— Calvin.


Home Religion.—We should be care-
ful to carry religion into the home
(1) Because home is the place of the
most sacred relationships. (2) We
need religion in our homes because the
commonness and the constancy of the
home-relationships are apt to induce
in us a semi-forgetfulness of them.
(3) We need religion in the home
because home is the most hopeful place
for religious service. (4) Home re-
ligion is the best test of the reality of
one’s religion.


The Gadarene Missionary. — The
saved man is sent first to his own
house and friends.

I. Let all grace from Christ begin
to tell at home.—If it cannot win its


233


bY


CHAP, VIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





way there, it lacks some of its vital
force.

II. The true method of the house-
hold missionary.—‘‘ Shew how great
things,” etc. He has a story to tell
of personal experience, of grateful love,
of marvellous mercy. This—in his
mouth—touches men’s hearts.

III. Success in the narrower leads
to success in the wider sphere.—The
mission was successful. Doing exactly
as his Lord bade him, he was soon
able to do more. The letter of his
commission enlarged. In time he had
told his story to all Decapolis. His
doctrine enlarged as well as his diocese.
He could not tell his story without
giving Jesus all the praise, and he
found that praising Jesus was giving
glory to God, and so he preached a


Divine Saviour. The most terrible
sufferer from infernal power becomes
a preacher of salvation to ten cities.
A majestic entrance of the Sun of
Righteousness into this region of the
Shadow of Death! For though but a
momentary gloom, a ray of light was
left there. Jesus went a few hours to
Gadara. He found a demoniac, and
left a missionary.—Laidlaw.


“‘ Jesus had done.”—This is a very
natural and beautiful trait in the
story. Jesus had given all the glory
to God—had told him to return home
and “declare how great things God
had done for him.” He went his way
and told how great things Jesus had
done for him. He could not forget —
the Deliverer whom God had sent.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 40—42, 49—56.


The Sleeping Child awakened.—Sorrows and need make short work of pre-
judices. Jairus, as a synagogue official, was probably not over-favourable to
Jesus ; but he must have known of the cures already done in the synagogue at
Capernaum, and so he forgets his doubts and dignity, and flings himself at the
feet of the new Teacher, who, whether a heretic or not, may heal his little girl.
His “faith” was probably merely a belief in Christ’s miraculous power; and
he was far behind the heathen centurion, who did not ask Jesus to come, but
only to speak. But his agony was sore, his need great, his beseeching plaintive,
and Jesus does not stop to put him through a catechism before He responds to
his prayer. We are taught to think more loftily of Christ’s willingness and
power by His swift and exuberant answers to the poorest faith. Jesus has just
come from exhausting toils on the other side of the lake ; but He asks for no
leisure, but goes with the impatient father at once, attended by a gaping crowd
of sight-seers. Take our Lord’s three sayings (vers. 50, 52, 54) as guides to the
narrative.

I. He invites and encourages faith even at the moment when all seems
hopeless,—The impatience of Jairus was justified by the message of the child’s
death. His faith, such as it was, was ready to collapse. He could believe that
Jesus could heal, but to bring to life again was too much to expect. It
obviously had not occurred to him as possible. How should it? And at that
moment, when the last faint spark of light in the father’s darkened heart has
been blown out, Christ, for the first time in the story, speaks. His words sound
strange and almost meaningless, ‘Fear not.” What more was there to fear ?
The last and worst had come. ‘Only believe.” What was there to believe
now’ ‘She shall be made whole.” But she is dead. But there lies hidden to
be found by the believing father a comfort which was enough for faith to lay
hold of, though it might not be put in plain language. He gives Jairus enough
to cheer him and relight the flame of hope. He never bids us not to be afraid
without bidding us believe in Him, and giving faith something to cling to. A
true faith will accept His assurances even when they seem to imply impossi-


234


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. VIII.








bilities ; and many a mourning heart that has heard Jesus speak thus over the
dear dead whom He has not raised, knows how true it is that dying they have
been ‘made whole,” and live a fuller life.

II. He announces that the irrevocable is not irrevocable to Him and His,
for He comes to awake the sleeper.—This word was spoken in the house, at the
door of the chamber. Flute-players, and hired mourners, and curious neighbours,
and all the crowd that comes to buzz round sorrow, were there; and a yard
off, on the other side of a wall, lay the poor child quiet and deaf to it all. It
is absurd to imagine that the saying of Christ is to be taken literally, and that
the child was simply in a swoon or trance. The bystanders’ unfeeling laugh is
proof enough that what men call death had unmistakably taken place. They
had seen the last moments, and knew that she was dead. What then does the
saying mean? Jesus is not dealing in sentimental fine names for the unchanged
horror, as we sometimes do; but His change of names follows a change of
nature. He has abolished death, and, while the physical fact remains, the
whole character of it changes. Sleep is not unconsciousness. It suspends the
power of affecting, or being affected by, the world of sense, but does no more.
We live and think and rejoice in sleep. It has the promise of waking. It
brings rest. Therefore our Lord takes the old metaphor which all nations have
used to hide the ugliness of death, and breathes new hope into it.

III. His last word is the life-giving one in the death-chamber.—Silence and
secrecy befitted it. He kept out the noisy mob, and with the parents and the
three chief disciples enters the sacred presence of the dead. Why this small
number of witnesses? Possibly for the sake of the child, whose tender years
might be disturbed by many curious eyes; but also, apparently, because, for
reasons not known to us, He desired little publicity for the miracle. How
simply and easily the stupendous deed is done! One touch of His han’, two
words, the very syllables of which St. Mark gives, and “her spirit returned.”
He is the Lord both of the dead and the living, and His word runneth very
swiftly over the gulf between this world and the abode of the dead. They sleep
lightly, and are easily waked by His touch. Their sleep, while it lasts, is sweet,
restful, conscious, if they sleep in Jesus. As for the weary body, it slumbers ;
and as for the spirit, it may be said to sleep, if by that we understand the
cessation of toil, the end of connection with the outer world, the tranquillity of
deep repose ; but, in another aspect, the sleep of the saints is their passing into
a fuller and more vivid life, and they are “ satisfied,” when they close their eyes on
earth, to open them for heaven, and sleep to “ awake in His likeness.”—Maclaren.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 43—48.


Timid Faith rewarded and confirmed.—This incident is marked out among
our Lord’s healings by these two peculiarities. It was a miracle within a
miracle; and it was a cure obtained without a word spoken beforehand. Jesus
is called to go on an errand of mercy, and finds another merciful work to do
on the way. The power of Jesus not only flows out, but overflows and dispenses
blessings by the way. The crumbs that fall from His table are better than the
feasts of other masters. It was also a healing granted without any previous
conversation. In this it was exceptional. He usually talked with the patient,
or with those interested in the case, before He wrought the cure. The faith
of this woman was so fearless, prompt, and resolute that without question or
explanation, before a word had been spoken, she believes, resolves, acts. She
has snatched the blessing, and is only not permitted to steal it. For He would
not let her go until He had obtained a confession of her faith from her own


235


’


CHAP. VIII. H( MILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. : ‘





lips. Thus, though the conversation was not held till the cure had been wrought,
the exception confirmed the rule on which He acted, that, apart from faith,
and the acknowledgment of faith, there would be no blessing. Two things in
the narrative especially claim our attention : the woman’s confidence in Christ,
and Christ’s action towards her.

I. The woman’s faith in the Saviour, its strength and its weakness.—She
put herself in Jesus’ way on this eventful occasion, and thus proved the strength
of her faith. She was filled with a belief that He was able to heal even her.
She never seems to have doubted for a moment her right to take the cure
if she could get it. Such a Saviour should not come within arm’s length of
her, but she would stretch out her hand for the blessing. ‘Though she should
have to press her way through the crowd to reach Him, she would touch Him
and be healed. No doubt there were defects in this faith. Its strength and
weakness lay close together. It had the defect, so to say, of its quality. Its
promptness may have owed something to the mechanical or material conception
of the Healer’s power, as if it were some atmosphere that surrounded Him,
or some magical influence that flowed even from His garments. The confidence
she had in Jesus was typical in that it was strong and well-founded. That
it was mixed with those other elements from which the Lord proceeds imme-
diately to purify it may teach us a double lesson. It hints, on the one hand,
how small a part of gospel truth may save the soul, if there be faith to receive
and love to act upon it. The spiritual value of faith is not to be reckoned
by the correctness of conception on which it rests. Yet, on the other hand,
the trust which is well-founded and generous will meet with its reward in
a rapid and progressive enlightenment through Christ’s word and Spirit.

II. The Saviour’s action towards the woman, its wisdom and tenderness.—
The active faith of the sufferer, as it were, takes the blessing by storm, though
from One who is always willing to bless. He was not, indeed, unconscious
of the virtue He put forth, nor of the faith which received it. But to bring
that faith into clearness and purity it was necessary to bring the subject herself
into conscious and open relation to her Healer. Our Lord straightway turns
round, and puts the question which amazed the disciples, and drew forth Peter’s
characteristic remonstrance. Searching the crowd around, and hitherto behind
Him, His gaze falls upon the woman. The thin and pinched features, the pallor
of habitual ill-health, helped, perhaps, to single her out. But now there mingles
in it the glow of instantaneous success, and the blush of womanly sensibility.
She knew instantly that she was healed. She felt in that moment how far
her sanguine boldness had carried her. She perceived, indeed, that nothing
was hid from her Healer, but also that His mien was as gracious as His person
was mighty. What look of His met hers we can imagine. A rare delight
filled His countenance—a foretaste of the joy set before Him—at the signal
proof of confidence given by this poor, lone woman. This sunshine of His
face, added to the joy of her own success, gave her courage to tell Him, both
“for what cause she had touched Him, and how she was healed immediately.”
The avowal cost her not a little. She came “trembling” as she “ fell down
before Him,” and made her confession “before all the people.” But it was
richly rewarded. With a kindly word of greeting, He clears her faith to her
own mind, He confirms her cure as a permanent healing, and He claims to
be Himself the knowing and willing author of it all. We can see why for
His own sake, and for His works’ sake, Jesus had to make the cure public.
But we are also to note how good it was for the subject of it herself. She did
not mean perhaps “to filch the blessing.” Her failing leaned to virtue’s side.
She deemed it not worth while to have Him stop for her, when He was in such
urgency, and stand and speak the healing. One quiet touch would do all she


236


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. VIII.





needed. Had she been allowed to slip away without the public scene, she would
have lost two things: the honour of confessing her faith, and of having her
cure confirmed. Reserve was her fault, a wish to hide the cure; thus at once
cheating her own self of comfort, and withholding from the Lord His due
honour. He corrects that fault most gently and wisely. He does not insist
upon publicity till the healing had taken place, thus making confession as
easy as possible for her. The object of its publication then becomes apparent,
_viz. to show that the medium of the cure was faith, not physical contact, to
confirm what she had already taken by His own pronounced bestowal of it,
and to. bring her out in grateful acknowledgment, both for His glory and


her good.


There are Christians whose fault is reserve.
by stealth. The Saviour will not have it so.
a secret transaction, very close and personal between the soul and Christ.


it cannot remain secret.


They would be saved, as it were,
True conversion is, no doubt,
But


The virtue which is gone out of Him is a savour


which cannot be hid. A seen religion is not always real, but a real religion


is always seen.


We cannot claim Christ for ours, but He will also declare


His part in the blessed bond, and have us acknowledge that we are His.
“To confess with the mouth” is an essential part of the salvation which comes


by believing with the heart ; indeed, it is the consummation of it.
heart man believeth unto righteousness.”


of the man before God.
This crowns the transaction.
perfection.
acknowledged.—Laidlaw.


“ With the
This is the private justification


“ With the mouth confession is made unto salvation.”
It is more than its mere publication—namely, its
The salvation is neither comforting nor complete until it is openly


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 40—56.


Ver. 40. “ All waiting for Him.”
I. A sad father waiting.
II. A dead child waiting.
III. A sick woman waiting.—
Watson.


Vers. 41-44. Two Forms of Faith.

J. Jairus openly appeals to Jesus
on his daughter’s behalf, but is secretly
anxious: his faith, weaker than it
appears, would have ebbed away but
for the Saviour’s word of encourage-
ment.

II. The woman is too timid to make
her case known to Jesus, but for all
that her faith is stronger than one
would have judged it to be from out-
ward appearances.


Vers. 41, 42. “ Besought Him that
He would come.”—Similarity between
the raising of Jairus’ daughter and the
raising of Lazarus. In both cases there
is (1) delay in bringing help; (2) the
patient dies before Christ’s arrival ; (3)


there is a mysterious promise of deliver-
ance ; (4) death is spoken of as a sleep.


Ver. 42. “ She lay a-dying.”

I. There is nothing like trouble to
drive people to Christ.—So long as
things go on prosperously, many men
do not ask favours of Him; but when
great trial comes, He is the first to
whom they turn. This is one of the
most obvious uses of trouble.

II. The little daughter “lay a-
dying.” This is a universal experi-
ence. The paths of earth run diversely,
but they all reach this point at last.
No one knows when he will come to
it. Sometimes it is reached in early
youth, Children should think of it,
not sadly, and prepare for it, not
regretfully.

TII. The strongest men break down
when their children are ill or in
danger.—It is a touching sight to see
this father falling at Christ’s feet.
Stern, hard men often reveal tender-


237


CHAP. VIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





ness in such times of trial. Behind
such sternness an’ severity there is
often a gentle, sovmg, affectionate
heart.—Miller.


Ver. 43. “Could not be healed of
any.” —In like manner—

I. Sin is a disease of the soul.

II. When recognised, recourse is
often had to inadequate means of
cure.

III. No sinner, however inveterate
his case may be, need despair of a cure
if he will apply to Christ in faith.


Ver. 44. Faith's Approach to Christ.

I. Faith comes with a deep despair
of all other help but Christ’s.

IT. Faith hasa Divine power to dis-
cover Christ.

III. Faith comes with an implicit
trust in Christ.

IV. Faith seeks, for its comfort, close
contact with Christ.

V. Faith, with all its imperfections,
is accepted by Christ.

VI. Faith feels a change from the
touch of Christ.— Ker.


The Power of Feeble Faith.

I. Very imperfect faith may be
genuine faith.

II. Christ answers the imperfect
faith.

Tif. Christ corrects and confirms
an imperfect faith by the very act of
answering it.—Maclaren.


Faith mingled with superstition.—
This is a most encouraging miracle
for us to recollect, when we are dis-
posed to think despondingly of the
ignorance or superstition of many who
are nominally Christian: that He
who accepted this woman for her faith,
even in error and weakness, may also
accept them. Superstition tinged her
thoughts, but her feelings were ardent
and pleasing to the Lord: the head
may have been affected by vain ima-
ginations, but the heart was sound.


Ver. 45. “ Who touched Me ?”—The
fact that many thronged about Christ,


238


and only one, by reason of her faith,
was healed by touching Him, is highly
significant. Many in our day are
in close contact with the Saviour, in
worship, in reading the word of God,
and in celebrating the sacraments, who
are not healed by Him for want of the
faith which this sufferer manifested.


Ver. 46. “ Virtue is gone out of Me.”
—The poor woman had approached His
sacred garments as men are said to
touch relics, with a blind faith in their
mysterious virtue and efficacy. Even
thus she obtained a blessing, for it
was faith. But Christ would not so
be touched. He will have us know
that the fountain of grace is the living
God, who beholdeth all things in
heaven and earth, and who claims of
His rational creatures a reasonable
worship. —Burgon.


Ver. 47. “She came trembling.”—
This woman would have borne away
a maimed blessing, hardly a blessing
at all, had she been suffered to bear
it away in secret and unacknow-
ledged, and without being brought
into any personal communion with her
Healer. She hoped to remain in con-
cealment out of shame, which, however
natural, was untimely in this the crisis
of her spiritual life. But this hope
of hers is graciously defeated. Her
heavenly Healer draws her from the
concealment she would have chosen;
but even here, so far as possible, He
spares her; for not before, but after
she is healed, does He require the
open confession from her lips. She
might have found it perhaps altogether
too hard had He demanded this of her
before. But waiting till the cure is
accomplished, He helps her through
the narrow way. Altogether spare
her this painful passage He could not,
for it pertained to her birth into the
new life.—TZrench.


The Necessity for Open Acknowledg-
ment.—It was necessary that this
hidden act of faith should come to light
in order that (1) Christ might receive


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. VIII.





the glory due Him; (2) the suppliant
might be delivered from the false shame
which would have hindered her openly
acknowledging the benefit she had
received; and (3) others be led to
faith in Christ.


Doubts and Fears.—In this case the
cure came first—a cure wrought by
Christ without a word or sign. She
knew that what had been done in her
was a result of her own act, without
permission from Jesus, and she could
scarcely hope that the faith which
suggested it would be accepted as
genuine; hence the terror and trem-
bling, the sudden prostration and the
full confession.





Confessing associated with Believing.
—The apostle Paul lays equal stress
upon the necessity of confessing with
the mouth and of believing in the heart
(Rom. x. 9): “If thou shalt confess
with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and
shalt believe in thine heart that God
hath raised Him from the dead, thou
shalt be saved.”


Ver. 48. “ Thy faith.” Jesus wishes
her fully to understand that it is not
the contact of her hand with the
border of His garment that has, as she
expected, wrought the cure, but her
faith. The idea of a physical and
almost magical operation is dispelled,
and the moral significance of the
miracle is brought into view.


““Go im peace.” —If we keep in mind
how her uncleanness separated her off
as one impure, we shall have here an
exact picture of the sinner drawing
nigh to the throne of grace, but out of
the sense of his impurity not “with
boldness,” rather with fear and trem-
bling, hardly knowing what there he
shall expect; but who is welcomed
there, and all his carnal doubtings
and questionings at once chidden and
expelled, dismissed with the word of
an abiding peace resting upon him.—
Trench.


Ver. 49. “* Trouble not the Master.” —


The words are kindly, and even indicate
a measure of faith. “ Had He arrived
while she was still in life, He might
have saved her; but now she is beyond
the reach even of His help.”


“ Trouble not the Master.” —The word
oxvAAw is closely represented by our
word “worry.” Its primary applica-
tion is to sheep, or other tame animals,
hunted and torn by dogs or other
natural enemies. It is used in this .
sense in Matt. ix. 36, and is translated
in the R.V. by “distressed.” But in
ordinary colloquial use it came to mean
no more than “tease” or “ trouble.”


The Dead Daughter.

I. Jesus is never in a hurry.—It
seemed as if there was not a moment
to lose. Why did Jesus not hasten 2
Why did He stop to heal the woman ?
Because He is never so much engrossed
in one case of need that He cannot
stop to give attention to another. He
is never so pressed for time that we
have to wait our turn. No matter
what He is doing, He will instantly
and always hear our cry of need.

II. Jesus never waits too long or
comes too late.—It seemed as if He
had tarried too long this time; but
when we see how it all came out, we
are sure that He made no mistake.
True, the child died while He lingered ;
but this only gave Him opportunity
for a greater miracle. He waited that
He might do a more glorious work.
There is always some good reason
when Christ delays to answer our
prayers or come to our help. He
waits that He may do far more for us
in the end. Even in answering our
prayers it is best to let our Lord have
His own way as to when and how to
come to our help.—Miller.


Ver. 50. “ Fear not.”—The cheer-
ing word doubtless was the more
encouraging to Jairus, spoken as it
was so soon after the miracle which he
had witnessed.


Ver. 51. “ Peter, and James, and


239


CHAP. IX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


ee a


John.”—Christ took with Him only
those disciples who had hearts most
open to receive the fulness of His
grace; and it is interesting to notice
that Peter long afterwards in Joppa, in
performing a similar miracle, imitated


exactly the method followed by Jesus -


in the house of Jairus (Acts ix. 40).


Ver. 52. ‘She is not dead, but
sleepeth.” She did but sleep till He
» who is the resurrection and the life
came to waken her. In accordance
with our Lord’s teaching here the apos-
tolic and later Church has instinctively
substituted “sleep” for “death,” in
speaking of the believer’s removal from
this world (see Acts vii. 60; 1 Thess.
iv. 14).


Ver. 54. “Put them all forth.”—
1. Their presence was not needed—
they were mourners for the dead, and
Christ was about to awaken the
damsel from the sleep of death.
2. Their boisterous grief was incon-
gruous with the solemnity of the
oceasion, 3. Their scornful laughter
at His saying rendered them unworthy
to witness the deed of power.


“Took her by the hand.”—Our
Lord adapted His manner of working
miracles to the circumstances of the
oceasions. He called the four-days
dead Lazarus from the grave with a
loud voice (John xi. 43); but of this
youthful maiden it is said that He
took her by the hand and called her,


“‘ Damsel, arise,” and woke her gently
from the sleep of death.— Wordsworth.


“ Maid, arise.” —One of the Fathers
remarks that if Christ had not named
the child all the dead would have
arisen at His word.


Ver. 55. “Zo give her meat.”—An
indication of an affectionate care
which, even in the midst of the
greatest things, forgets not the least,
and which would provide for the
necessity of the exhausted child on her
return to life—Ster.


“Give her meat.”—Perhaps, too,
partaking of food was to be a sign
of actual restoration to bodily life,
as when Christ Himself after His
resurrection said, ‘‘ Have ye here any
meat ?” (chap. xxiv. 41).


Ver. 56. “Zell no man.”—The
reason for the prohibition was doubt-
less to avoid a notoriety, which might
excite the people and give occasion
for tumultuous proceedings. The dis-
ciples would, of course, obey; but the
parents could scarcely conceal their
feelings of gratitude.—Speaker’s Com-
mentary.


Silence enjoined. —Observe _ the
different courses followed by Christ
in these two cases: she who sought
healing by stealth was constrained
to confess openly the boon she had
obtained; he who publicly appealed
for the healing of his daughter is
enjoined to be silent about the miracle.








CHAPTER IX.


CRITICAL NOTES.
Ver. 1. His twelve disciples.—A better reading is, ‘‘the twelve” (R.V.): the reading in


the text is probably taken from the parallel passage in St. Matthew’s Gospel.


Power and


authority.—J.e. ability and right: the one applies to the endowment with special gifts, the
other to the right of using them on fitting occasions.

Ver. 3. Neither staves.— Rather, “neither staff” (R.V.). In the parallel passage in St. Mark
the permission is given to take a staff. A comparison of the passages removes the apparent
discrepancy. The apostles were to make no special preparation for the journey: if each
had a staff for walking, let him take it, but not provide one specially, Scrip.—Leather


wallet.


240


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. ST. LUKE, CHAP. IX.





Ver. 4. Whatsoever house, etc.—Not to seek for comfortable quarters, or to change about
unnecessarily.

Ver. 5. Shake off the very dust.—As a sign that all intercourse was at an end, and that
the messengers of Christ left those who rejected Him to bear the full responsibility of their
sinful conduct (cf. Acts xili. 51, xviii. 6). Against them,—A stronger expression than in the
parallel passage in St. Mark, where we read, “ for a testimony unto them ” (vi. 11, R.V.).

Ver. 6, Preaching the gospel.—Lit. “ evangelising”: it is a different word from that in
ver, 2, also translated “preach”—wlhich means ‘to proclaim as heralds” the kingdom of
God. The instructions to the apostles are given at greater length in Matt. x.

Ver. 7. Herod the tetrarch_— Herod Antipas (a son of Herod the Great), who now ruled
in Galilee: of frivolous and dissolute character, with a vein of superstition and cunning
running through it. He was at Jerusalem when Christ suffered, and was one of His judges.
All that was done by Him.—The best MSS. omit “by Him”: omittedin R.V. It is probable
that the mission of the twelve drew more widespread attention to the work and claims of
Christ, and that this reference to Herod is an indication of the fact. Of some.—J.e. “ by some.”

Ver. 8.—Notice the apposite use of phrases relative to John and to Elijah: “that John
was risen from the dead,” and that Elias had appeared”—-Elijah having been translated
without tasting of death. One of the old prophets. Jeremiah was expected by some to
appear again (cf. Matt. xvi. 14). See 2 Esdras ii. 18; 2 Macc. ii. 4-8, xv. 13-16.

Ver. 9. John have I beheaded.—The “I” is emphatic both here and in the second clause
of the verse: perhaps it is not too much to say that the form of the sentence indicates the
growing concern and alarm excited in the mind of Herod by Christ's increasing fame.
Desired to see Him.—Rather, “sought to see Him” (R.V.). His desire was at last gratified
when Pilate sent Jesus to him as a prisoner; but his wish that Christ would perform some
miracle met with no response from the Saviour (see chap. xxiii. 7-12).

Ver. 10. Went aside privately.—The reason of this retirement is stated by St. Matthew
(xiv. 13) to have been Christ’s hearing of the violent death of John the Baptist. It was a
precautionary measure, rendered all the more necessary by Herod’s desire to see Jesus,
St. Mark says that it was for the sake of quiet (vi. 31)—as the excitement produced by
the teaching of Jesus and His apostles was very great. There is no necessary discrepancy
in the narratives: the retirement in question may have taken place for more reasons than
one. City called Bethsaida,—This is not the Bethsaida near Capernaum on the west of the
lake, but Bethsaida Julias on the north, in the tetrarchy of Philip, near which was “a desert

lace.”
: Ver. 11. Followed Him.—Jesus went by boat, and the people, seeing the direction in which
He sailed, went thither on foot (Mark vi. 33). Received them.—J.e. did not dismiss them,
though their following Him defeated one of the purposes for which He had sought
retirement.

Ver. 13. Five loaves.—J.e. barley loaves (John vi. 9), the food of the poor. The miracle
that follows is the only one narrated by all four evangelists.

Ver. 14. Five thousand.—Men, besides women and children (Matt. xiv. 21). ;

Ver. 16. Blessed them.—‘ Agreeably to the Jewish custom, by which it was usual for
the head of the family, at every meal, to pronounce a blessing on the food, previously to
partaking of it, commencing with the words, ‘ Blessed art thou, O God, who bringest bread
out of the earth,’ etc.” (Bloomfield).

Ver. 17. Baskets.—The word used in all the narratives of this miracle is xé¢wos—a
wicker-basket, such as the Jews were accustomed to carry their food in when they were on
a journey. The word used in the account of the other miracle of the kind (Matt. xv. 37;
Mark viii. 8) is orvpis—a large rope-basket, capable of holding a man’s body (cf. Acts
ix. 25). St. Luke omits a long series of events which followed this miracle, and which are
related in Matt, xiv.-xvi. 12; Mark vi. 45-viii. 30; and John vi. /

Ver. 18. It came to pass,—This took place on the way to Cesarea Philippi: this was
a town in the valley of the upper Jordan near Paneas, which had been enlarged and fortified
by the tetrarch Philip. Praying.—This circumstance is peculiar to St. Luke. The people.—
Lit. “ the multitudes ” (R.V.). ; 4

Ver. 22, Elders and chief priests and scribes.—The three classes of which the Sanhedrim
was composed. F f

Ver. 23. To them all.—Te. to the multitude as well as to His disciples. Will come.—
Le. “desire to come.” His cross.—A prophetic allusion to the manner of His own death : in
it there is an anticipation of the part the Gentiles were to play in putting Him to death
as the cross was a Roman and not a Jewish instrument of punishment.

Ver. 24. Whosoever will save.—J.e. “ desire to save,” as in ver. 23. ;

Ver. 25. Be cast away.—Rather, “suffer damage,” as opposed to “gain”: R.V. ‘forfeit
his own self.” : een ,

Ver. 27. Till they see the kingdom of God.—As is evident from the connection in which
it stands, the first fulfilment of these words was in the Transfiguration.


R 241


a


CHAP. IX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





Ver. 28. About an eight days.—J.e. including the day on which the words were spoken
and the day on which they were fulfilled. St. Mark says “six days,” reckoning the
intervening time. Took.—“ Took with Him” is a better reading (R.V.). A mountain,—
Rather, “the mountain” (R.V.). It is probable that this was Mount Hermon, as it is the
only place within the neighbourhood of Czsarea Philippi that satisfies the requirements of
the case. The summit of Tabor, which is the traditional site of the Transfiguration, seems
to have been occupied by a fortress at this time. Besides, Tabor is in Galilee, while from
Mark ix. 30 we would understand that Jesus and His disciples went into Galilee after this
event. To pray.—This is peculiar to St. Luke.

Ver. 29. Whito and glistering.—The “and” is not in the original: the phrase might be
rendered ‘sparkling white.” There is perhaps a reference in the word translated “ glister-
ing” or “sparkling ” to the lightning-flash.

Ver. 31. Spake of His decease.—Lit. “departure” out of the world—a word which probably
includes His resurrection and ascension. The other evangelists say that Moses and Elijah
“talked ” with Jesus: St. Luke alone tells the subject of their conversation.

Ver. 32. Heavy with sleep.—This seems to indicate that the vision took place at night:
in accordance with this, we read in ver. 37 of their descending from the mountain “next
day.” And when they were awake.—R.V. “when they were fully awake,” or “having
remained awake” (margin). The idea seems to be that they struggled successfully against
the inclination to sleep.

Ver. 33. As they departed from Him.—TZe, Moses and Elijah. A better rendering would be,
“as they were parting from Him” (R.V.); or, “as they were being separated from Him.”
Good for us.—Good, delightful, pleasant. Tabernacles.—Or, “ booths.”

Ver. 34, A cloud.—Matthew, “a bright cloud”: probably we are to understand the
Shekinah—the symbol of God’s presence,

Ver. 35, My beloved Son,—Another reading is, “My Son, my chosen” (R.V.); this is a very
probable reading, as, apart from MS. evidence in favour of it, it is more easy to imagine
“beloved” (which occurs in Matthew and Mark) being substituted for “chosen,” than
“chosen” for “ beloved.”

Ver. 36. Was past.—R.V. “ when the voice came,” with “was past” in the margin. Lit.
the phrase is, “ when the voice had been,” ¢.e. had ceased. They kept it close.—According to
the command of Jesus (Matthew and Mark),

Ver. 37. Much people.—Better, “2, great multitude” (R.V.).

Ver. 38. A man of the company cried out.—Rather, “a man [came] from the multitude
[and] cried” (R.V.). Master.—J.e. teacher. Mine only child.—Peculiar to St. Luke: he notes
the same fact in the case of the widow’s son at Nain, and the daughter of Jairus.

Ver. 39. He suddenly crieth out.—The passage might be rendered, ‘it suddenly crieth
out,” 4.e, the evil spirit; but the A.V. is the more natural of the two. The symptoms
described are those cf epilepsy.

Ver. 42, And tare him,— Rather, “tare him grievously ” (R.V.); or, ‘ convulsed him ” (margin
of R.V.). Delivered him again to his father.—There is a peculiar note of tenderness in
St. Luke’s narratives of Christ’s miracles. Cf. chap. vii. 15.

Ver. 43. Mighty power.—-Rather, “majesty” (R.V.). But while they, ete.—“St. Luke
places in marked contrast the wonder and admiration excited by the works of Christ and
the announcement of His approaching death. The words of Christ were calculated to check
the disciples’ hope of an earthly kingdom ” (Speaker’s Commentary).

Ver. 45. Hid from them, that they perceived it not.—Rather, “that they should not
perceive it’? (R.V.). The writer clearly refers to a Divine purpose that they should not at
present be aware of the full meaning of these words.

Ver. 46. A reasoning. —Rather, “a dispute.”

Ver, 47. Perceiving the thought of their heart.—The word “thought ” is the same as that
in ver. 46, translated “reasoning.” We are naturally led to understand that the disputation
was not carried on or fully spoken out in the presence of Jesus. A’chi!d.—Rather, ‘a little
child” (R.V.). ;

Ver. 48.—Meyer explains the idea of the passage as follows : This child, the child whom
Jesus sets before His followers, stands as a type of the humble and childlike disciple ; and
(the dispute having been about the comparative greatness of the disciples) such a disciple
is the greatest: he is so honoured by God that he stands on earth as the representative of
Christ, and of God Himself, since “he that is [willingly] least among you all, the same
shall be [truly] great.”

Ver. 49. In Thy name.—The words “in My name” (ver. 48) evidently suggested to John
what he and others of the disciples had seen being done in the name of Christ. He was
shocked at seeing one who was not of their company doing work which was not always
possible for them to do (ver. 40).

Ver. 50. Against us is for us.—A better reading is, “against you is for you” (R.V.). The
meaning of the two is, however, virtually the same: “us” includes both Christ and His


242


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. IX.
Se a ee eer


people. Another, and at first sight a contradictory maxim is found in Matt, xii. 30: “He
who is not with Me is against Me.” The whole section (ix. 51—xviii. 28) is tue record of our
Lord’s last journey from Galilee to Jerusalem; and most of the incidents related in it are
peculiar to St. Luke. It was evidently not a direct journey, but a “ slow, solemn, and public
progress,” covering a period of some montis. In John x. 22 we find our Lord in J erusalem
at the feast of the Dedication (about the end of December). After that feast He retired to
Bethany beyoud Jordan: from this retreat He came to Bethany near Jerusalem to raise
Lazarus from the dead: then He again retired to Ephraim, anc six days before the Passover
a returned to Jerusalem for the last time.

er. 51. When the time was come.— Rather, “ when the days were well-nigh come” (R. V.).
That He should be received up.—The word translated “ vepsied up” ee His nsec
or ascension into heaven. He stedfastly set His face.—A Hebraism, with reference pro-
bably to Isa. 1.7. Sent messengers,—The action, which contrasts with His former avoidance
of publicity, is to be explained by His now formally avowinz Himself to be the Christ.

Ver. 52. Village of the Samaritans.—Samaria lay in the direct route from Galilee to Jerusalem.

Ver. 53. Did not receive Him, ete.—The question as to the comparative claims of the
Samaritan temple at Gerizim and the Jewish Temple at Jerusalem was distinctly involved :
Christ’s preference of the latter led to the Samaritans’ rejection of Him.

Ver, 54. James and John.—Whom He had surnamed “Sons of Thunder ” (Boanerges,
Mark iii. 17): this ebullition of fiery zeal highly characteristic of them. Even as Elias did.
—See 2 Kings i. 10-12. This phrase is omitced from R.V., as it is not found in some of the
earliest MSS. It may be a gloss, but if so it is of great antiquity, as the words are found
in nearly all other MSS., versions, and writings of the Fathers. They may have been
omitted accidentally, or on dogmatic grounds—to avoid apparent disparagement of the Old
Testament. The recent vision on the mountain (ver. ©0), when Christ received honour from
Moses and Elijah and from God, may have suggested the proposal to chastise the
inhospitable Samaritans,

Ver. 55. He turned. —Christ was evidently walking at the head of the company of disciples
when the messengers returned with the tidings that the Samaritans refused to receive Him,
And said, Ye know not... save them (ver. 56).—These two sentences also are omitted in
the R.V., on the ground that the most important MSS. do not contain them. They do not,
however, read like interpolations: they breathe too Divine a tone of thought, and are too
characteristic of the Saviour, to have originated in any such way. So far as MS. evidence goes
there is less authority for the doubtful sentence in ver. 56, “For the Son of man,” etc.,
than for the other in ver. 55. Ye know not.—J.e. “ Ye think ye are animated by the Spirit
that moved Elijah, but ye are mistaken: it is personal irritation, and not zeal for God, that
underlies your suggestion.” Some prefer to take the sentence as a question, “ Know ye not,”
etc., 2.¢. that the Spirit of Christ is different from that of Elijah? It is doubtful, however,
whether this rendering is grammatically possible.

Ver. 56. Another village.— Probably a Galilean and not a Samaritan village—as, if it had
been the latter, we should have expected some remark upon the more noble character of its
inhabitants. It would appear that when this incident occurred Christ and disciples were
on the border between Galilee and Samaria,

Ver. 57. In the way.—Perhaps to the other village. It may be, however, that this is an
indefinite form of expression, owing to the fact that St. Luke here departs from chrono-
logical order. St. Matthew distinctly states that these incidents occurred at an earlier time
(viii. 19-22). It is unlikely that the same requests or proposals should have been made to
Christ, and should have been answered by Him in the same way, on two separate occasions.
I will follow Thee, etc.—His self-confidence is akin to that of St. Peter (Jobn xiii. 37).

Ver. 58. Nests.— Rather, “shelters”: birds do not take refuge in their nests.

Ver. 60, Let the dead, ete.—Any one, even one spiritually dead, could attend to this
subordinate duty of burying the dead: a higher duty, which he could not delegate to
another, was incumbent upon this disciple. Some have interpreted the man’s request as his
asking for permission to remain at home until the death of his father; but this is improbable.
Had his father been lying dead at that moment, the disciple would scarcely have been
among the crowd. V/arrar suggests that his desire was to go and give a farewell funeral
feast and put everything in order. Some detail which would have made the matter clear
has perhaps been omitted. It may be that the father was hopelessly ill, so that the delay
in all probability would not have been for long.

Ver. 61. Bid them farewell.—Cf. with this the circumstances of Elisha’s call (1 Kings
xix, 20). What was granted in one case, it might not have been safe to grant in another.
This is a more reasonable explanation than to hold that Christ demands a more complete
self-devotion than Hlijah had any right to command. This third case is peculiar to St. Luke.

Ver. 62. The plough.—The kind of plough used in the East was easily overturned: a
labourer who looked back regretfully, with his heart fixed on other things than his work,
would be of little profit to his master.


CHAP. IX. H OMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—6.


The Servants sent forth.—The very summary account of the trial mission of
the twelve here given presents only the salient points of the charge to them, and
in its condensation makes these the more emphatic. —

I. The gift of power.—Miracle-working in various forms is specified. We
may call that Christ’s greatest miracle. That he could by His mere will endow
a dozen men with such power is more, if degree come into view at all, than
that He Himself should exercise it. But there is a lesson in the fact for all
ages—even those in which miracles have ceased. Christ gives before He
commands, and sends no man into the field without filling his basket with
seed-corn. His gifts assimilate the receiver to Himself; and only in the measure
in which His servants possess the power which is like His own, and drawn from
Him, can they prepare His coming, or prepare hearts for it.

II. Equipment.—The special commands here given were repealed by Jesus
when He gave His last commands. In their letter they apply only to that one
journey, but in their spirit they are of universal and permanent obligation.
The twelve were to travel light. Food, luggage, and money, the three requisites
of a traveller, were to be ‘conspicuous by their absence.” That was repealed
afterwards, and instructions given of an opposite character, because, after His
ascension, the Church was to live more and more by ordinary means; but in
this journey they were to learn to trust Him without means, that afterwards
they might trust Him in the means. He showed them the purpose of these
restrictions in the act of abrogating them. ‘ When I sent you forth without
purse... lacked ye anything?” But the spirit remains unabrogated, and the
minimum of outward provision is likeliest to call out the maximum of faith.
We are in more danger from having too much baggage than from too little.
And the one indispensable requirement is that, whatever the quantity, it should
hinder neither our march nor our trust in Him who alone is wealth and food.

III. The disposition of the messengers.—It is not to be self-indulgent. They
are not to change quarters for the sake of greater comfort. They have not
gone out to make a pleasure tour, but to preach, and so are to stay where they
are welcomed and to make the best of it. Delicate regard for kindly hospitality,
if offered by ever so poor a house, and scrupulous abstinence from whatever
might suggest interested motives, must mark the true servant. That rule is
not out of date. If ever a herald of Christ falls under suspicion of caring more
about life’s comforts than about his work, good-bye to his usefulness. If ever
he does so care, whether he be suspected of it or no, spiritual power will
ebb from him.

IV. The messenger’s demeanour to the rejecters of their message.—Shaking
the dust off the sandal is an emblem of solemn renunciation of participation,
ard perhaps of repudiating of responsibility. It meant certainly, ‘‘ We have
no more to do with you,” and possibly, ‘‘ Your blood be on your own heads.”
This journey of the twelve was meant to be ‘of short duration, and to cover
much ground, and therefore no time was to be spent unnecessarily. Their
message was brief, and as well told quickly as slowly. ‘The whole conditions
of work now are different. Sometimes, perhaps, a Christian is warranted in
solemnly declaring to those who receive not his message that he will have ne
more to say to them. That may do more than all his other words. But such
cases are rare; and the rule that it is safest to follow is rather that of love,
which despairs of none, and, though often repelled, returns with pleading, and,
if it have told often in vain, tells now with tears, the story of the love that
never abandons the most obstinate,


244


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


CHAP. IX.


ee ee


Such were the prominent points of this first Christian mission.


They who


carry Christ’s banner in the world must be possessed of power (His gift), must
be lightly weighted, must care less for comfort than for service, must solemnly
warn of the consequences of rejecting the message, and they will not fail to
cast out devils and to heal many that are sick.— Maclaren.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 1—6.


Vers. 1-6. The Commission of the
Twelve.

I. What Christ bestowed on them.
—l. Power—ability to do their work.
2. Authority—the right to do it.

II. The instructions He imparted to
them.—l. They were to live very
simply. 2. They were to be prepared
for tailures.—W. Taylor.


Vers. 1-5.—The nature and the wm-
portance of this mission.

I. Christ the source of power and
authority: able to deliver sinners from
Satan’s bondage, and to sustain His
servants.

II. The duty of the ministers of
Christ to attend to the necessities,
temporal and spiritual, of men, and to
be indifferent to their own ease and
comfort.

III. Men are inexcusable when they
reject and despise God’s message, and
every circumstance will turn to a testi-
mony against them.


The Miracles and the Doctrine.—
Miracles of mercy proved the doctrine to
be of God; the doctrine calling men
to repentance proved that the miracles
were wrought by the power of God.


Ver. 1. “Power and authority.”—
Ability to act and the right to exercise
it. The evil spirits will owe obedience
because of the authority with which the
apostles are clothed, and will pay it
because of the power they possess.


Power in Proportion to Faith.—
Power is given by God, but becomes
ours only by faith, and is in proportion
to our faith. In ver. 40 we read of
this power proving ineffectual from
lack of faith.


Ver. 2. 4 Temporary Commission.
—They are now sent to proclaim
through Judea that the time of the
promised restoration and salvation is
at hand: at a future period Christ
will appoint them to spread the gospel
through the whole world. Here He
employs them as assistants only, to
secure attention to Him where His
voice could not reach: afterwards He
will commit into their hands the office
of teaching which He had discharged.


““ To preach the kingdom.” —We may
suppose that the apostles would give
some narrative of the life of Christ,
reproduce some of His teaching, lay
stress upon the importance of the mes-
sage He had charged them with, and
summon all to repentance and faith,
The preaching was largely in antici-
pation of great blessings to be wrought
by Jesus: after Pentecost their preach-
ing was, ‘we announce the redemption
which has been fulfilled, in order that
ye too may have fellowship with us,
and our fellowship is with the Father,
and with His Son Jesus Christ’
(1 John i. 1-3).


“ He sent them.”—Christ sent the
apostles just as the sun sends out its
beams, the rose the sweetness of its
scent, the fire its sparks; and just as
the sun appears in its beams, as the
rose is felt in its scent, and the fire in
its sparks, so is Christ recognised and
apprehended in the virtues and powers
of the apostles.—Chrysostom.


Ver. 3. The Spirit of the Instructions,
—The general spirit of the instruc-
tions merely is, Go forth in the
simplest, humblest manner, with no
hindrances to your movements, and in


245


CHAP. IX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





perfect. faith; and this, as history
shows, has always been the method of
the most successful missions. At the
same time we must remember that the
wants of the twelve were very small,
and were secured by the open hospi-
tality of the Kast.—/arrar.


An Ample Equipment.—This pro-
hibition of all provision is, if narrowly
examined, itself a glorious equipment ;
for He who thus forbids thereby per-
mits and commands them to expect in
faith what they need, and to be fully
assured beforehand of that which they
afterwards (chap. xxii. 35) were con-
strained to confess—that they should
lack nothing.—Séier.


Ver. 4. Two Evils to be avoided.—
1. The apostles were to be careful not
to seem to be unduly interested in
matters concerning their own conve-
nience and comfort during their stay.
2. They were not to excite jealousy by
preferring one family to another, when
all should be equally the objects of their
solicitude. Great harm is done to the
cause of Christ when His ministers
come under reasonable suspicion of
acting from selfish and interested
motives, and when they fail to mani-
fest the courtesy and tact which are
necessary for successful work among
different classes of people. Most, if
not all, of the disputes that spring up
in Christian congregations are due to


neglect of the one or the other of these
rules.


Ver. 5. “ Will not receive you.” —The
despisers are guilty of two offences :—

I. Ingratitude in refusing the in-
estimable treasure of the gospel.

II. Rebellion in rejecting the mes-
sage sent from their King. No crime
is more offensive to God than contempt
of His word.


“ Shake off the dust.”—A solemn
act which might have two meanings :
(1) we take nothing of yours with us—
we free ourselves from all contact and
communion with you; or (2) we free
ourselves from all participation in your
condemnation—will have nothing in
common with those who have rejected
God’s message. It was a custom of
the Pharisees, when they entered Judea
from a Gentile land, to do this act,
as renouncing all communion with
Gentiles. Cf. the symbolical action
of Pilate (Matt, xxvii. 24).—Alford.


Warnings to the Impenitent still
needed.—The spirit of the injunction
runs through all the ages, and has come
down to our day. And hence a very
heavy responsibility rests on that minis~
ter of the gospel who gives no intima-
tion of any kind to the impenitent
with whom he associates, that they
are impure in the sight of God, and
in danger of eternal separation from
the good.—Morison.





MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 7—9.


Herod Antipas.—The three synoptical evangelists furnish us with various
details of the history of Herod Antipas, which, when combined, present a
striking picture of the downward progress of one who has entered on a career
of crime. He appears as an Kastern despot, capricious, sensual, and super-
stitious ; who speaks with the pride of an Ahasuerus, and yet is the slave
of a Jezebel ; in whose earlier history there were hopeful elements, but who in
the end seems to have outlived them all, and to have been hopelessly hardened
and reprobate.

I. The hopeful period in his life.—He is affected by the widespread move-
ment inaugurated by John the Baptist. Righteousness, though presented in
iss sternest form by the preacher of the wilderness, compels his respect and


246


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LURE. CHAP. IX.





admiration. He cannot, either, be insensible to the power and authority which
clothe God’s servant; and so he gladly listens to John, and even goes so far
as to attempt to observe some of his precepts. So far he stands on the same
level with the soldiers, publicans, and harlots, who were moved to outward
reformation of life in view of the coming of the kingdom of God.

II. The turning-point in his life—He is reminded by the Baptist of the
unlawful connection he had formed with the wife of his own brother, and is
forced to decide between the claims of righteousness and the promptings of
evil passions. He silences the voice of conscience, and imprisons the man who
had had the courage to tell him of his sin. His vacillation between good and
evil is shown by his treatment of the Baptist: he protects John for a time
against the rage of Herodias, and though he keeps him a prisoner he allows
his disciples to have access to him. But once he has failed to take up a decided
stand against evil, he grows daily weaker and weaker, and at last he consents
to give orders for the execution of God’s prophet. He is indeed entrapped
into the murder of the Baptist, but the snare that catches him is of the
weakest, flimsiest character. Infinitely better would it have been for him to
break his word than to dip his hands in the blood of one whom he knew was
holy, and to do this for the gratification of a hatred which was base and cruel,
and with which he did not sympathise.

III. His final state——He is shaken with superstitious fears when he is told
of the mighty works of Christ and of His apostles. In place of the one
preacher of righteousness whom he had slain, another and even greater has
arisen, and is multiplying His work twelvefold by means of those whom He
has sent forth through the length and breadth of the land. “ He desired to
see Him.” But it was the curiosity not of faith, but of unbelief—of a heart
hardening, if not already hardened, against holy impressions. He doubtless
heard of our Saviour’s heavenly discourses, of His deeds of love, and miracles
of mercy; but the report of these things wrought none of those blessed effects
on Herod which they produced on guileless and innocent hearts. His
curiosity, when at length he saw Jesus as a prisoner, proved to be of the most
frivolous kind: “he hoped to have seen some miracle done by Him” (chap.
xxiii. 8), And he who had slain the Baptist became associated with Pilate in
the murder of the Prince of life.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 7—9.


Ver. 7. The Cowardice of Sinners.—
It is the curse of unbelief that a
cowardly heart is given to sinners:
“the sound of a shaken leaf shall chase
them: and they shall flee as fleeing
from a sword; and they shall fall
when none pursueth” (Lev. xxvi. 36:


cf. Job xv. 20, 21).


Ver. 8. “ That Elijah had appeared.”
—Elijah was expected to appear before
the coming of Christ. Hence the in-
quiry in John i. 21, and in Matt.
xvii. 11; hence also the suspicion ex-


pressed in ver. 19; and hence the
scoff of the populace as our Saviour
hung upon the cross—-“ Let be, let us
see whether Elias will come to save
Him.”


Ver. 9. “He desired to see Him.”
—The desire was fulfilled; but no
sign of grace to Herod was implied by
this fulfilment. For Christ did not
come to Herod of His own free-will,
but was brought into his presence
by those who had seized and bound
Him.


247,


ol a Bee | il


CHAP. IX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 10—17.


Bread from Heaven.—The apostles needed rest after their journey. Our Lord
suggested a brief retirement, and sought it at the Eastern Bethsaida, a couple of
miles up the Jordan from its point of entrance to the lake. The curious crowd
following on foot effectually destroyed all hope of retirement. Without a sigh
or sign of impatience Jesus welcomed them. He received them patiently,
because ‘‘ He was moved with pity” (St. Mark), and saw in their rude crowding
about Him the token of their lack of guides and teachers. They seemed to
Him not merely a mob of intrusive sight-seers, but like a huddled mass of
unshepherded sheep. Christ’s heart felt more lovingly than ours because His
eye saw deeper, and His eye saw deeper because His heart felt more lovingly.
If we lived nearer Him, we should see, as He did, enough in every man to draw
out pity and help, even though he should jostle us and interfere with us. Coming
to the miracle itself, we may divide the narrative into three parts: the pre-
liminaries, the miracle, and the abundant overplus.

I. The preliminaries.—Our Lord leads up to the miracle by forcing home on
the minds of the disciples the extent of the need, and the utter inadequacy of
their resources to meet it, and by calling on them and the crowd for an act of
obedience, which must have seemed ludicrous to many of them. The strange
suggestion that the disciples should feed the crowd must have appeared to them
absurd, but it was meant to bring out the clear recognition of the smallness of
their supply. Therein lie great lessons. Commands are given and apparent
duties laid on us, in order that we may find out how impotent we are to do
them. It can never be our duty to do what we cannot do; but it is often our
duty to attempt tasks to which we are conspicuously inadequate, in the confi-
dence that He who gives them has laid them on us to drive us to Himself, and
there to find sufficiency. The best preparation of His servants for their work
in the world is the discovery that their own stores are small. Those who have
learned that it is their task to feed the multitude, and who have said “ We have
no more than such and such scanty resources,” are prepared to be the distributers
of His all-sufficient supply.

II. The miracle.—Like that of the draught of fishes, it was not called forth
by the cry of suffering, nor was the need which it met one beyond the reach of
ordinary means. It was certainly a miracle most plainly meant to strike the
popular mind, and the enthusiasm excited by it, according to John’s account,
was foreseen by Christ. Why did He evoke enthusiasm which He did not mean
to gratify? For the very purpose of bringing the carnal expectations of the
crowd to a head, that they might be the more conclusively disappointed. The
miracle and its sequel sifted and sent away many disciples, and were meant to
do so. He blessed the bread. What He blesses is blessed, for His words are
deeds, and communicate the blessing which they speak. The point at which the
miraculous multiplication of the food came in is left undetermined. The pieces
grew under His touch, and the disciples always found His hands full when they
came back with their own empty. The symbolical aspect of the miracle is set
forth in the great discourse which follows it in St. John’s Gospel. Jesus is the
bread of God which came down from heaven. That bread is broken for us.
Not in His incarnation alone, but in His death, is He the food of the world;
and we have not only to “eat His flesh,” but to “drink His blood,” if we
would live. Nor can we lose sight of the symbol of His servants’ task. They
are the distributers of the heaven-sent bread. If they will but take their poor
stores to Jesus, with the acknowledgment of their insufficiency, He will turn
them into inexhaustible supplies. What Christ blesses is always enough.


248


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. IX.


eee





IIT. The abundant overplus.—Twelve baskets were filled: that is to say,
each apostle, who had helped to feed the hungry, had a basketful to bring off
for future wants. The “broken pieces” were not crumbs that littered the
grass, but the portions that came from Christ’s hands. His provision is more
than enough for a hungry world, and they who share it out among their fellows
have their own possession of it increased. There is no surer way to receive the
full sweetness and blessing of the gospel than to carry it to some hungry soul.
These full baskets teach us, too, that in Christ’s gift of Himself as the bread of
life there is ever more than at any given moment we can appropriate. Other
food cloys and does not satisfy, and leaves us starving. Christ satisfies and does _
not cloy, and we have always remaining, yet to be enjoyed, the boundless stores


which neither eternity will age nor a universe feeding on them consume.—
Maclaren.


** Make them sit down.”

I. The command to make them sit down by fifties in a company was expressive
of the authority of Christ over human multitudes whenever He comes into
contact with them. There were five thousand men besides women and children
present, and, according to three evangelists out of the four, special emphasis is
attached to this command, “Make them sit down.” There was no doubt a
growing confusion at this time: the night was at hand, and the multitude,
wearied by a day of restlessness under a burning Eastern sky, and largely
irritated by discussion, and carried away by the back-wave of the day’s excite-
ment, had become well-nigh unmanageable. In the presence of that confusion
the disciples had readily given their rough and ready solution, “Send the
multitude away, that they may go into the towns and country round about, and
lodge and get victuals: for we are here in a desert place.” Christ, on the
contrary, said in brief, ‘‘ Nay, make them sit down.” He, as the master of
assemblies, did not seek to rid Himself of the confusion by ridding Himself of the
multitude. In this respect, as well as in a thousand other respects, He towered
above all others. He was never excited, and never doubtful as to what should
be done; but was always calmly confident amid the seething passions and
conflicting voices of human multitudes. Thus, at the very outset, we find this
distinctive attribute of Christ’s ministry. He never lost command, but was ever
calm and masterful as the Lord of men.

II. But this command was not only expressive of the unique authority of
Jesus Christ ; it was also an illustration of His most tender consideration for those
who needed it most. John tells us that only the men sat in fifties; and Mark
intimates the same. There were women and children there, but, as Matthew
too asserts, the five thousand consisted of men apart from women and children.
Luke tells us that they sat down “ by fifties in a company.” The words which
Mark uses suggest that the multitude looked like a garden of flowers, well
arranged in groups of living men, turning their faces as expectant to the Christ
as the flowers turn theirs to the sun. But observe that women and children
were not in these regular ranks of panting humanity. No one has been in a
throng of five thousand men, when there has been rushing movement, discord,
irritation, and weariness, without being impressed with the danger for women
and children, especially when the overwhelming majority were men. Here we
have one of the many beautiful touches of the Gospel narrative—the thoughtful-
ness of Christ concerning the weak. Order is the first law of heaven, and when
Christ would perform this miracle order was the first essential. Thoughtful
consideration for the weak who were in danger of being trodden underfoot was
the second—“ Make the men sit down ”—so that in addition to the orderliness of
their own ranks there may be opportunity for the women and the children to


249


CHAP. IX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





have their share. Christ never overlooks any section of the community, ignores
no small one in the greatest mass of human life.

III. This command awakened new hopes and expectations in the hearts of
the assembled multitude. They had walked along the northern coast of the Sea
of Galilee into that desert place on the eastern coast, and were wearied by the
journey and the fatigue of the day. The length of the journey would make it
probable that the women and children were few compared with the men. This
is another subtle proof of the accuracy of Gospel records. The few, however,
were not overlooked. All were weary—especially the women and children—with
the events of the day. Their hopes had to a large extent been satisfied, yet
weariness and hunger had taken possession of them. Now Christ awakened new
hopes in their hearts. No one awakens within the heart of man such expecta-
tions as Jesus Christ. They soon came to the conclusion that the great Teacher
was about to feed them. Where all was to come from they did not know, save
that it would come from the same source of power and of grace as many other
provisions for the need and sorrow of men had come in that unique ministry ;
and so every one in that vast throng was encouraged to hope for and expect
some wonderful miraculous provision.

IV. By this command Christ willingly subjected Himself to a new test of His
Divine power and sympathy. There was no necessity for His doing this save
the irresistible promptings of His great love. The multitudes might have been
dismissed, and yet He would have preserved His character apart from this
further manifestation of His divinity. No one expected it; even His own
disciples did not. It was not, therefore, done in an emergency; but this
command going forth subjected Him willingly and voluntarily to a new test.
That is what Christ ever does. Almost every command He gives to men subjects
Him to new tests. ‘ Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ,” that is the command ;
“and thou shalt be saved” is the promise. He stakes His honour, and stands
or falls by every command that He gives us which has a latent promise in its
folds.

V. By this command Christ subjected the disciples to a new test. They had
to exercise sufficient confidence in Him to go and tell the multitude to sit down
and wait for their meal. They had just been arguing with Christ. Two hundred
pennyworth of bread would not suffice, according to their calculation. There
was a boy present, it was true, who had brought his five loaves and two fishes;
but what were they among somany? Now that is just what is taking place
every day. Every faithful messenger of Jesus Christ, who goes forth to meet
the wants of men and women, knows that, apart from the power of the Christ
behind him, his task is one of forlorn hope and sad humiliation. But every
mission has its test, and every man of God who has gone forth at the Master’s
bidding has gone forth with the full assurance that he cannot be disappointed
or humiliated.

VI. This command, moreover, came as a test for the multitude. Every one in
that great multitude had to obey in anticipation of the feast. Now that was
pre-eminently an act of faith. They had confidence that Jesus Christ would not
have sent the message to them unless He meant to feed them. And still that is
all that is required—that men should just do as He tells them, namely, look for
the blessing and wait for it. How many there are unprepared to do that, and
yet are surprised if they are not fed! There was not a man among the five
thousand foolish enough to act in that fashion. ‘“ Make them sit down by fifties
inacompany. And they did so.”—Davies.


250


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. IX.





SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 10—17.


Ver. 10. “A desert place.”—The
two miracles of feeding the multitudes
were performed in desert places: this
circumstance (1) brought out most
impressively the greatness of Christ’s
power, who could, apart from ordinary
means, feed so large a number of
people; and (2) reminded those present
of the miraculous way in which God
had for forty years sustained their
nation in the wilderness.


The Christian Uses of Leisure.
I. Communion with outward nature.
TI. Intercourse with fellow-believers.
IIl. A closer converse with Christ
Himself.— Ker.


Ver. 11. “The people . . . followed
Him.”’—The unexpected arrival of the
people defeats the plan Jesus had
formed. But the Lord is deeply touched
by the love towards Him manifested
by this multitude, which were like
sheep without a shepherd (Mark
vi. 34): He “receives” them with
tender loving-kindness; and while
crowds arrive one after another in the
course of the morning (John vi. 5),
a thought springs up in His heart.
What it was St. John tells us (ibid. 4).
The Passover season was drawing near.
Jesus had not been able to go up to
Jerusalem with His disciples, so violent
was the rage of His enemies. So then
in this unexpected gathering, like that
of the people in Jerusalem, He discerns
a signal from heaven, and He resolves
to hold a feast in the wilderness to
take the place of the Passover for
those who surround Him.—Godeé.


Ver. 12. “Go into the towns.”—This
miracle was not urgently called for by
the physical necessities of the multi-
tude, as in the other instance of miracu-
lous feeding (Mark viii. 2, 3). The
disciples themselves were of the opinion
that in the neighbouring villages and
country the people might get food.
“It was a symbolic, didactic, critical


miracle. It was meant to teach, and
also to test: to supply a text for the sub-
sequent sermon (recorded by St. John),
and a touchstone to try the character
of those who had followed Jesus with
such enthusiasm. It was meant to
say, ‘I Jesus am the bread of life.
What this bread is to your bodies, I
Myself am to your souls’” (Bruce).


Vers. 13-16. “ Took. . . blessed...
gave.” —The significant points in the
action of that day were (1) the provision
accepted from the disciples, (2) the
blessing of it by Jesus, and (3) the
distribution of it among the people.—
Laidlaw.


Ver. 13. “ Give ye.”—The words are
emphatic, for the disciples had been
counselling the people to get food for
themselves.


* Give ye them to eat.” —Christ wishes
His disciples to realise their own utter
inability, in order that they might
by-and-by realise more intensely the
fulness of His ability.


“We have no more”—Here we
may learn, at least, not to be too
confident in our reckonings, so long
as they are made for plus or minus.
How many great counting-houses have
forgotten in their books the column
for the blessing or—the curse of God!
—NStier.


Ver. 14. “By jfifties.,—In which
subordinate circumstance we behold
His wisdom who is the Lord and Lover
of order. Thus all confusion was
avoided. There was no danger that
the weaker, the women and children,
should be passed over, while the
stronger and ruder unduly put them-
selves forward. The apostles were
thus able to pass easily up and down
among the multitude, and to minister
in orderly succession to the needs of
every part.—Burgon.


251


OHAP, IX.


“ Made them all sit down.”—The
apostles caused the people to sit down
before they knew what Christ was
about to do. They obeyed His com-
mand. They were weak and inexperi-
enced, but still they were childlike,
and allowed themselves to be led by
His hand. “This is the true kind
of obedience,” says Bernhard, ‘“ which
does not look at what is commanded,
but is content to know that it is
commanded by God.”


Ver. 16. “ Blessed them.”—-To be
thankful for little is the way to obtain
more. The action of the Saviour, if
we compare the various narratives of
this miracle, consisted (1) of thanks-
giving—acknowledgment of all the
goodness of God, and an anticipation
of the coming display of His power
and love; and (2) of blessing the food
for the use of the people. “To bless
means to speak well of. Our Saviour
on the present occasion would doubt-
less speak well of His Father; and,
coincidently, He would speak well of
the provision, His Father’s gift, which
He was about to distribute and in-
crease. He might speak well, too, in
reference to the people petitioning for
their weal. He would thus coincidently
bless the Father, bless the food, and in-
voke blessing on the people” (Morison).


A Like Miracle ever being wrought.—
He conceals the miracle, and no one
sees how the bread multiplies in His
hands, any more than one sees the grass
growing. ‘The same Divine Person,
in a manner less striking, because more
gradual and regular, but certainly not
less wonderful, ripens all the seeds in
all the gardens and orchards and in
all the vineyards and meadows of this
world, in successive seasons, ever since
man dwelt in Paradise, to minister
food to His creatures” (Wordsworth).


252


a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


Inexhaustible Provision.—The Bible
is little in bulk, like the five barley
loaves and the two fishes. What thou-
sands upon thousands has it fed, and
will it feed, in every age, in every land
of Christendom, to the world’s end !


Ver. 17. The Teaching of the Miracle.
—tThe miracle teaches us— ¥
I. That it is our duty to do what
we can to supply the bodily wants of

others.

II. That those who follow Christ
may trust to Him for the necessaries
of life.

III. That it is becoming to thank
God for His goodness before partaking
of food.

IV. That nothing should be lost or
wasted.


“ Fragments.” —The food Christ gave
differed from the manna ; for (1) the
manna was only sufficient for him who
gathered it, and (2) could not be kept.
The fragments are more in bulk than
the original stock: in their being
gathered at the command of Christ
we have a beautiful picture of God’s
bounty in nature, which is at once
lavish and careful.’


“ That remained.” —A sign that there
had been abundance. Twelve baskets,
because at Christ’s command the twelve
apostles gathered up the fragments.
““We have thus a visible symbol of


that love which exhausts not itself


by loving, but after the most prodigal
outgoings upon others abides itself far
richer than it would else have done;
of the multiplying which there ever is
in a true dispensing ; of the increasing
which may go along with a scattering
Prov. xi. 24: cf. 2 Kings iv. 1-7)”
Trench).


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. IX.





MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 18—27.


The Divine Christ confessed.

I. The first section gives us Peter's great confession in the name of the
disciples (vers. 18-20).—Our Lord is entering on a new era in His work, and
desires to bring clearly into His followers’ consciousness the sum of His past
self-revelation. The excitement which He had checked after the first miraculous
feeding had died down. Amid the seclusion of Caesarea, far away from dis-
tracting influences, He puts these two momentous questions. The first question
is as to the partial and conflicting opinions among the multitudes; the second
hints at the fuller unveiling of the depths of His gracious personality, which the
disciples had experienced, and implies, ‘“‘ Surely you, who have been beside Me,
and known Me so closely, have reached a deeper understanding.” It has a tone
of the same wistfulness and wonder as that other question of His, “ Have I
been so long time with you, and yet hast thou not known Me?” For their
sakes He seeks to draw out their partly unconscious faith, that had been
smouldering, fed by their daily experience of His beauty and tenderness. Half-
recognised convictions float in many a heart, which need but a pointed question to
crystallise into master-truths, to which henceforward the whole being is subject.
Great is the power of putting our shadowy beliefs into plain words. ‘ With the
mouth confession is made unto salvation.” Why should this great question have
been preceded by the other? Probably to make the disciples feel more distinctly
the chaotic contradictions of the popular judgment, and their own isolation by
their possession of the clearer light. He wishes them to see the gulf opening
between them and their fellows, and so to bind them more closely to Himself.
It is the question the answer to which settles everything fora man. It has an
intensely sharp point. We cannot take refuge from it in the general opinion.
Nor does any other man’s judgment about Him matter one whit to us. Christ
has a strange power, after eighteen hundred years, of coming to each of us, with
the same persistent interrogation on His lips. And to-day, as then, all depends
on the answer we give. Many answer by exalted estimates of Him, like these
varying replies, which ascribed to Him prophetic authority; but they have not
drunk in the full meaning of His self-revelation unless they can reply with the
full-toned confession of the apostle, which sets Him far above and apart from
the highest and holiest. The confession includes both the human and the
Divine sides of Christ’s nature. He is the Messiah; but He is more than a
Jew meant by that name—He is ‘“‘the Son of the living God,” by which we
cannot indeed suppose that Peter meant all that he afterward learned it
contained, or all that the Church has now been taught of its meaning, but
which, nevertheless, is not to be watered down as if it did not declare His
unique filial relation to the Father, and so His Divine nature. Christian
progress in doctrine does not consist in the winning of new truths, but in the
penetrating further into the meaning of old and initial truths.

II. The startling new revelation of the suffering Messiah (vers. 21, 22).—
The gospel has two parts: Jesus is the Christ, and the Christ must suffer and
enter into His glory. Our Lord has made sure that the disciples have learned
the first before He leads to the second. The very conviction of His dignity
and Divine nature made that second truth the more bewildering ; but still the
only road to it was through the first. The new teaching as to the sufferings
was no new thought to Himself, forced on Him by the growing enmity of the
nation. The cross always cast its shadow on His path. He was no enthusiast,
beginning with the dream of winning a world to His side, and slowly and
heroically making up His mind to die a martyr; but His purpose in being born

253


CHAP. IX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





was to minister to and to die a ransom for the many. Note the detailed accuracy
of the prevision which points to the rulers of the nation as the instruments,
and to death as the climax, and to resurrection as the issue, of His sufferings ;
and the clear setting forth of the Divine necessity which, as it ruled all His life,
ruled here also, and is expressed in that solemn “must.” The necessity was no
external compulsion, driving Him to an unwelcome sacrifice, but one imposed
alike by filial obedience and by brotherly love. He must die because He
would save.

III. The law which ruled the Master's life is extended to the servants
(vers. 23-27).—They recoiled from the thought of His having to suffer. They
had to learn that they too must suffer, if they would be His. “If any man will”
gives them the option of withdrawal. A new epoch is beginning, and they will
have to enlist again, and do it with openeyes. He will have no unwilling soldiers,
nor any who have been beguiled into the ranks. No doubt sone went away,
and walked no more with Him. ‘The terms of service are clear. Discipleship
means imitation, and imitation means self-crucifixion. A martyred Master
must needs have for followers men ready to be martyrs too. But the require-
ment goes much deeper than this. There is no discipleship without self-denial,
both in the easier form of starving passions and desires, and in the harder of
yielding up the will, and letting His will supplaut ours. Only so can we ever
come after Him, and of such sacrifice of self the cross is the eminent example.
When Jesus began to teach His death, He immediately presented it as His
servants’ example. The ground of the law is stated in ver. 24. The wish to
save life is the loss of life in the highest sense. If that desire guide us, then
farewell to enthusiasm, courage, the martyr spirit, and all which makes man’s
life nobler than a beast’s. He who is ruled mainly by the wish to keep a whole
skin loses the best part of what he is so anxious to keep. Regard for self as a
ruling motive is destruction, and selfishness is suicide. On the other hand, lives
hazarded for Christ are thereby truly saved; and if they be not only hazarded,
but actually lost, such loss is gain; and the same law by which the Master
“must” die and rise again will work in the servant. Ver. 25 urges the
wisdom of such apparent folly, and enforces the requirement by the plain
consideration that “life” is worth more than anything beside. Therefore the
dictate of the wisest prudence is that seemingly prodigal flinging away of the
lower “life,” which puts us in possession of the higher. Note that the appeal
is here made to a reasonable regard to personal advantage, and that in the very
act of urging to crucify self. So little did Christ think, as some people
do, that the desire to save one’s soul is selfishness. Ver. 26 confirms all the
preceding by the solemn allusion to the coming of the Son of man as Judge.
They surely shall then find their lives who have followed Him here. Ver. 27
adds a confirmation of this announcement of Hiscoming to judge. The question
of what event is referred to may best be answered by noting that it must be one
sufficiently far off from the moment of speaking to allow of the death of the
greater number of His hearers; that it must also be an event, after which
these survivors would go the common road into the grave; that it is apparently
distinguished from His coming “in the glory of the Father,” and yet is of such
a nature as to afford convincing proof of the establishment of His kingdom on
earth, and to be, in some sort, a sign of that final act of judgment. All these
requirements meet only in the destruction of Jerusalem, and of the national life
of the chosen people. That was a crash of which we only faintly realise the
tremendous significance. It swept away the last remnant of the hope that
Israel was to be the kingdom of the Messiah; and from out of the dust and
chaos of that fall the Christian Church emerged, manifestly destined for world
wide extension.—Maclaren.


254


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP, IX.


a a cee)


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 18—27.


Ver. 18. Opinions about Jesus Christ.

I. There are those who consider
Him to have been the best of men
that ever lived, but do not consider
Him to have been perfectly sinless. —
Three objections are fatal to this
opinion: 1. It is contrary to the
Saviour’s own claims. 2. It is founded
on a prejudice against the miraculous.
3. It deprives Him of all place in
connection with salvation.

II. That He was a perfect man, but
not the God-man.—Two objections to
this opinion: 1. It is opposed to the
clear testimonies of Scripture. 2. The
Christian Church has ever refused to
rest in such a view.

III. That He was a Divine Saviour,
but not a Saviour by atoning sacrifice.
—But we have in Christ’s own teach-
ing the doctrine of the Atonement.
1. We have a doctrine of penalty
following sin. 2. It is taught by what
Christ says of His own substitution.
3. It follows from our Lord’s con-
necting His death with the forgiveness
of sins. 4. The fact that Christ con-
nects His death with a covenant, and
with a new covenant, brings it in His
own teaching into line with the Old
Testament sacrifices.—Cairns.


Vers. 18-20. The Masters Prayer
and the Disciples Confession.—The
time has come for an onward step.
These twelve men must be made to
gather into one, and to speak out the
net result of these months of silent
accompanying. They must be brought
to book (so to say) as to their dim,
floating ideas. The time is come for
confession of Christ. How shall it
be done? The Divine Master takes
them apart by themselves, on a journey
the farthest that He ever made north-
ward in Palestine. He had brought
them thither for a sacred purpose.
They were to pass from an unrealised
to a realised conviction—from the
spiritual stage of “believing unto
righteousness” to the further spiritual


stage of ‘confessing unto salvation.”
Can you wonder that St. Luke, the
historian of Christ’s prayers, tells us
that this step, this leap, this bound,
was prefaced by one of the prayers
of Christ? While witnessing His ab-
sorbed, engrossed, unconscious solitude,
He put to them this question, “ Whom
say the people that I am ?”

I. Surely there is Divine skill, and
tenderness as well, in this way of
putting the question.—He asks first,
What do other people say ? before He
goes on to propose the vital question,
But what do ye, My disciples, My near
ones, My own, say and think of Me?
Even when the time has come for
fixing their floating thoughts, for
getting an answer, positive and per-
emptory, as to the state of their 6wn
belief—even then He will approach
the subject distantly, lest haply, even
then, a too sudden and abrupt interro-
gation might startle, perplex, or deter
them.

II. Well, they say, opinions are
divided.—John the Baptist, risen again
from the death in Macherus—that is
one idea. Elias, come again to fulfil
the last prophecy of the Old Testament
—that is another. A prophet—one of
the prophets—without pledging them-
selves to a name or an identification—
that is a third. In the midst of all
these ignorant or superstitious imagin-
ings, what say ye ?

III. The time has come for an
answer from the disciples.—The brave,
sometimes too brave, Peter, as usual,
is the spokesman. “The Christ of
God.” Was it not for this answer,
this revelation, this unveiling, that the
“effectual fervent prayer” had as-
cended @ When we think what lay in
that good confession—what for future
generations-—what for a world about
to be bought with blood—what for a
Church to be founded, as upon a rock,
on that brief utterance, so vital, so
boundless in the thing signified,—can
we imagine an oceasion more suitable


255


CHAP. IX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,





for the exercise, by anticipation, even
of the mediatorial office, than that
which required, and waited for, an
unveiling, not by flesh and blood, but
by a Father in heaven, to men standing
here in all the backwardness, and in
all the boundedness, of a fallen hu-
manity, of a mystery kept secret hither-
to from eternal times ?— Vaughan.


Ver. 21. “To tell no man.”—For
these, perhaps, among other reasons:
1. Because His work was not yet
finished. 2. Because as yet their faith
was very weak and their knowledge
partial. 3. Because they had not yet
received the Holy Spirit to give power
to their testimony. 4. Because the
public proclamation of the truth would
have precipitated the workings of God’s
foreordained plan.—farrar.


Ver. 22. ‘ Must suffer.”—The gospel
may be stated in two propositions.
1. Jesus is the Christ. 2. The Christ
must suffer, die, and rise again; or


Christ by death will enter into His


glory.


A revelation of the Passion.—Christ
reveals—

I. Who are to inflict the sufferings.

II. The form these sufferings are
to take.

III. The necessity for His enduring
them.

IV. Their issue in His resurrection.


Vers. 23-26. Three Great Lessons :—

I. Not only Christ, but also His
followers, must suffer and deny them-
selves.

II. That all have a life to save,
more precious than all else to them.

III. That the great day of account
should be ever before them.


Ver. 23. The Christian’s Journey.—
1. Those things of which he takes
leave. 2. The burden he carries.
3. The road he traverses.


“Will come.”—It is a matter of
choice to follow Christ; but if the
DAR


resolution be formed to do go, there is
no choice but to deny oneself and take
up the cross.


“ Deny himself.”—As Peter said
when he denied Christ, “I know not
the man,” so say thou of thyself, and
act accordingly.—Bengel.


“ Deny himself .. . take up his cross.”
—The one is an active, the other a
passive, state. Self-denial is a man’s
own act, and requires the strenuous
exercise of the will. ‘‘Taking up the
cross” implies patient submission to
the will of another.


“* His cross.”—If not (1) contempt
or suffering endured for the sake of
Christ, then (2) some form of affliction
connected with this earthly life,
or (3) temptations from without, or
(4) inward conflict with sin.


Requisites for Discipleship.

I. The first requisite in a disciple is
self-denial.

II. The second requisite is cross-
bearing.

III. The third requisite is spiritual
service, true and constant obedience.
—Anderson.


‘* No cross, no crown.”

I. The cross is to be taken up,
not simply borne, when laid on the
shoulder.—This implies willing, cheer-
ful suffering for Christ. Some people
endure trials, but always with repining.
The spirit of these words requires
cheerfulness in suffering for Christ.
Half the trial is gone if we meet it in
this glad spirit.

II. It is one’s own cross, and not
another’s, that is to be taken up.—
The particular cross that God lays at
our own feet. We are not to make
crosses for ourselves, but we are always
to accept those that are allotted to us.
Each one’s cross is the best for him.
If we knew what other people’s crosses
were, we might not envy them, or wish
to exchange our cross for theirs.
What seems a flower-woven cross may


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. IX.





be full of sharp thorns. The easiest
cross for each one to bear is one’s own,

Ill. There is a way to remove the
crosses out of our life.— Always gladly
accept through love to God whatever
trial, pain, or loss God sends. If my
will acquiesces in His, there is no cross,
—NMiller.


Self-sacrifice.—Self-sacrifice repre-
sents more exactly than self-denial the
idea intended to be conveyed by the
Lord’s precept here. Not that ‘let
him deny himself” is other than a literal
translation of the original phrase, but
that in popular parlance self-denial
has come to mean something much
more superficial, much less thorough-
going, than what is obviously denoted
by Christ in this passage. Self-denial,
in the sense in which it is an essential
condition of coming after the Saviour,
is the doing by self what St. Peter
did by Christ-—repudiating all connec-
tion with self, utterly disavowing it as
our master.—Goulburn.


What is Self-denial?—The word is
often and much mistaken in common
use, as if it meant much the same as
self-control—the control of lower ele-
ments of our being by higher; but
this is not self-denial as Christ uses
the word. To “deny” self means to
treat it as non-existent. It means
to ignore, to turn the back upon,
to shut the eyes to self—something
far different from mere self-control.—


Moule.


Self-denial.

I. There are few things in which
people play more wretched farces than
in their efforts at self-denial—vVery
few seem to have the remotest concep-
tion of what it means. The giving up
of meat on Fridays, abstinence from
social dissipation in Lent, and many
other useless and uncalled-for sacrifices
—these things do not constitute self-
denial. There is no merit in giving
up anything for its own sake.

II. True self-denial is the yielding
of the whole life to the will of Christ.
—It is self coming down from the


life’s throne, laying crown and sceptre
at the Master’s feet, and thenceforth
submitting the whole life to His sway.
It is living all the while not to please
ourselves, but to please our Lord—
not to advance our own personal
interests, but to do His work. It is
the glad making of any sacrifice that
loyalty to Him requires. Self gives
way altogether to Christ as the motive
of life.

III. Nothing is true self-denial
which is done merely as self-denial.—
True self-denial, like all other forms of
Christlikeness, is unconscious of self,
wists not that its face shines. We
deny ourselves when we follow Christ
with joy and gladness, through cost
and danger and suffering, just where
He leads.— Willer.


Vers. 24-26. Three Reasons for Cross-
bearing.

I. We must sacrifice something—
either the lower or the higher life,
animal happiness or spiritual blessed-
ness (ver. 24),

II. The incomparable value of the
soul.—He who gains the world at the
cost of his soul is a loser by the
bargain (ver. 25).

III. At the second advent cross-
bearers will receive a crown of right-
eousness.—T'o cross-spurners will be
assigned shame and everlasting con-
tempt.— Bruce.


Ver. 25. Profit and Loss.

I. The gain here spoken of is nominal,
imaginary.

TI. The loss is real, and it is the
greatest conceivable. 1. The soul is
lost by not being exercised. 2. The
soul is lost when it is perverted and
corrupted.—Service.


Ver. 26. “ His own glory,” etc.—
The glory is threefold: 1. His own,
which He has to and for Himself as
the exalted Messiah. 2. The glory of
God, which accompanies Him as coming
down from God’s throne. 3. The glory
of the angels who surround Him with
their brightness.— Meyer.


257


CHAP, IX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





Ashamed of Christ.—This is what
men are guilty of when Christians are
in a minority, or when earnest Chris-
tianity is powerfully opposed. There
is no temptation to be ashamed of
Christ when all the world around you
is, ab any rate, professedly devoted to
Him. But the temptation was a very
formidable one when the Church was
young, and when Christians carried
their lives in their hands. Wonderful,
however, it is how, in these first ages
of the faith, men and women, boys


‘and girls, in all conditions of life, joy-


fully accepted a painful death rather
than be disloyal to their Lord and
Saviour. But the wheel of time brings
strange revolutions, and we no longer
live in times when it could be said
with entire truth that no one is ashamed
of Jesus Christ. Many in all Chris-
tian countries professedly reject His
name. And that this is so surely im-
poses on all rue Christians the duty
of explicitly confessing Christ before
men.—Liddon.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 28—36.


“ In the Holy Mount.”—All the accounts of the Transfiguration carefully date
it with reference to Peter’s great confession and Christ’s subsequent plain
announcement of His sufferings. ‘These sayings” made an epoch in our Lord’s
life both as regarded Himself and His followers, marking for Him a new step
towards the cross, which was henceforth perceptibly nearer and still more
familiar, and for them a new pain, which might easily become apostasy. The
Transfiguration seems to have a bearing both on Him and them.

I. The change in our Lord’s appearance.—St. Luke’s special contribution to
this part of the narrative is the mention of Christ’s praying. It connects His
prayer immediately with the glory shining in His face. Prayer and communion
with God will imprint a glory on a homely face yet, which, though it be nowise
miraculous, does none the less show where the man has been. If we lived more
habitually in the secret place of the Most High, our faces would oftener seem
like those of angels, and a pure and quiet heart would make itself seen there.
The glory that shone on Christ’s countenance and whitened even His garments
did not fall on Him from without, but rose, as it were, to the surface from
within. “The veil, that is to say, His flesh,” became partially transparent for a
moment, and revealed not only the glory of grace and truth, but the lesser
glory, which could be made visible, at least by symbol. It was a gleam of
Deity, like a stray sunbeam through a rift in a clouded sky. So could He
always have walked among men; and that brief flash increases our sense of the
continual voluntary humiliation of His humble manhood, and tells us that “ there
was the hiding of His power.”

II. His converse with the mighty dead.—They came before the apostles were
awake, and that mysterious colloquy had lasted for an indefinite time before
human ears caught some fragments of it. St. Luke gives the fullest account of
this incident. He alone tells us that our Lord’s companions were ‘in glory,”
robed in like lustre to His, and “ walking with Him in white.” He alone tells
us the subject of their speech. They did not come as to tell Him that He must
die; for His plain declaration to that effect preceded this event. Did they
come to learn it from Him, and so to bear back to the dim regions whence they
came the glad tidings that the loug-waited-tor hour was ready to strike?
They stand there surely rather as learners than as teachers. The legislator and
the great prophet represented all the earlier revelation, and fitly stand at His
side to whom it had all pointed. The “departure which He should accomplish
at Jerusalem” was the goal of law and prophecy. The loftiest organs of
revelation in the past were His heralds and servants, honoured by being


208


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. IX.


Ena reenee


allowed to attend on Him. The depths of the worlds of the dead were moved at
His coming, and “the people that walked in darkness” saw “a great light.”
Jesus, too, needed strengthening, and the presence of these two may have been
for Him what the angel from heaven was in Gethsemane. The continued
conscious existence of the dead, the purpose of all “the sundry times” and
“divers manners” of the past speech of God, the sovereign completeness and
supremacy of the message in the Son, the central place of His death in His
work—are all set forth in that wondrous interview between these three.

III. The attesting voice from heaven.—Peter’s foolish speech was, according
to this Gospel, called out by seeing the two majestic forms in the act of “ parting
from Him.” The apostle was half-awake, stunned, and bewildered, and would.
fain have kept them there. There is something very naive and childlike in the
proposal to make the three tabernacles, as if these might be an inducement for
the strangers to stay awhile. Inconsiderate as the speech was, it was very full of
love to Jesus, and it said something for Peter’s loyalty and reverence for Him, that
he put the Lord first, before Moses and Elijah. His preposterous proposal was
interrupted by the descent of the cloud. One reading of St. Luke’s words makes
all six to have entered into it, whilst another, more probably, leaves the disciples
without. The remark about the voice coming “out of the cloud” seems to imply
that the hearers were not within its folds. If so, then that visible symbol of
the Divine Presence, which had dwelt in the first Temple between the cherubim,
and had been absent for long ages, now again appeared. The disciples saw
with terror Jesus and Moses and Elijah lost in its folds. They were alone, and
might well wonder whether they were ever to see Jesus more. The Divine voice
was meant altogether for the disciples, both in its first part, which declares
Christ’s dignity, and in its second, which commands their attentive acceptance of
His word. In them. the whole world is spoken to, and the command is for each
of us. The strange light had faded from His face when He came to them, the
mysterious two had vanished, the cloud had melted into the blue, the silent,
bare hillside was as it had been, and “Jesus was found alone.” So all other
teachers, helpers, guides, are lost in His sight, or drop away as the ages roll on,
and He only is left. But He is left, and He is enough and eternal. Happy are
we if in life we hear Him, and if in our experience Jesus is found alone, the
all-sufficient and unchanging companion and portion of our else lonely and
restless spirits.— Maclaren.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 28—36.


Vers. 28, 29. The Transfiguration
Prayer.—This great scene left its
mark for ever on the three chosen
witnesses of it. The evidence of the
Transfiguration must of necessity have
been more impressive to the three
spectators than it can be to the readers
of their account of it. Marvellous,
miraculous revelation! What mys-
teries gather round the scene! Jesus
had gone up into the mountain to
pray. It was as He prayed that He
was transfigured. Can we at all
interpret this prayer? We cannot.
We know not what that prayer


specially asked. But we may know
some of the Divine intercessions
specially needed by us in seasons of
which the Transfiguration is for all
time the august and solemn type.

I. Seasons every life has of a
brighter experience than the com-
mon. Seasons of natural or spiritual
exhilaration, in seclusion or in com-
pany. How natural to wish to prolong
these seasons, neglecting every-day
duties, heedless of other men’s sorrows !
Is it wrong for us to think at such
moments of the gracious intercession
above, which would ask for us to use


259


CHAP. IX.


as not abusing, even if it be the
Christian intercourse or the spiritual
happiness? These things must come
and go; duty before pleasure, even in
the soul.

II. How sorely do we all need the
Transfiguration view of Christ—were
it but for once—never to fade again
out of the memory, the soul’s memory,
of the beholder! St. Peter thought
of that one night when he was draw-
ing near to his own “exodus,” and
said that it assured him of the truth


of his preaching, and of the truth of


his Gospel, on to the very end. Which
of us does not want just that
something, if it might be so, to turn
faith into sight and hope into know-
ledge? It would perhaps come to us
—or something of its kind—if we
watched for it as men watch for the
morning—if we had the patience and
the earnestness to say to the Divine
Visitant, “I will not let Thee go,
except Thou bless me!” Shall we
use the record of the Transfiguration
prayer as giving us hope that the
heavenly intercession may ask that
indeed beatific vision, the spiritual
sight of Christ, even for us ?

III. Do we not all need that firm
hold of the two revelations, the
cross and the glory of Jesus Christ,
which He enforced so strongly by the
teaching and the prayer of this
memorable moment? May the prayer
of Christ in heaven reconcile us to
this twofold condition : a Divine Lord
dying to save, a Divine Love humbling
itself to suffert-a cross uplifted to
draw all men to Him who hangs upon
it, a cross to be borne now by all who
would enter into the glory !—Vaughan.


An Answer to Prayer.—The Trans-
figuration was an answer to prayer.
We do not say that Jesus was praying
for this alteration in His countenance
and raiment, or even for the privilege
of talking with these wise and sympa-
thetic spirits about the work which He
was to accomplish at Jerusalem. But
yet all this was in answer to the prayer
He was offering when it came. To


260


ne. nea


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,


lift up the soul to God calms and
ennobles it.


Vers. 28-36. The Meaning of the
Transfiguration.

I. The Transfiguration is an illustra-
tion of the efficacy of prayer.

II. It demonstrates the perfect
holiness of Jesus Christ.

III. It brings into clear view the
voluntary character of His submission
to sufferings and death,


An Aid to Faith and Patience.—
The Transfiguration was an aid to
faith and patience, specially vouchsafed
to the meek and lowly Son of man in
answer to His prayer, to cheer Him
on His sorrowful path to Jerusalem
and Calvary. It supplied three distinct
aids to faith.

I. It gave a foretaste of the glory
with which He should be rewarded
after His passion for His voluntary
humiliation and obedience unto death.

II. It gave assurance that the
mystery of the cross was understood
and appreciated by saints in heaven,
if not by the darkened minds of sinful
men on earth.

III. A third and chief solace to the
heart of Jesus was the approving voice
of His heavenly Father.—Bruce.


Ver. 28. “ Peter and John and James.”
—Those now chosen to witness His
glory on the mountain of transfigura-
tion afterwards witnessed His agony
in the garden of Gethsemane.


Ver. 29. A Light from Within. —
It would appear that the light shone
not upon Him from without, but out
of Him from within : it was one blaze
of dazzling, celestial glory; it was
Himself glorified. What a contrast
now to that ‘“ visage more marred
than any man, and His form more
than the sons of men”! (Isa. lii. 14).
—Brown.


Ver. 30. ‘Moses and Elias.”—The
two who appeared to them were the
representatives of the Zaw and the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,


CHAP. IX.





Prophets: both had been removed from
this world in a mysterious manner—
the one without death; the other by
death, indeed, but so that His body
followed not the lot of the bodies of
all; both, like the Greater One with
whom they spoke, had endured that
supernatural fast of forty days and
nights: both had been on the holy
mount in the visions of God. And
now they came, endowed with glorified
bodies before the rest of the dead, to
hold converse with the Lord on that
sublime event, which had been the
great central subject of all their
teaching, and solemnly to consign into
His hands, once and for all, in a
symbolical and glorious representation,
their delegated and expiring power.—
Alford.


Moses now admitted to the Land of
Promise.—Moses had not been per-
mitted when alive to enter the land of
promise; but here we see him brought
into it to do homage to Christ.


Preparation for Death——When, in
the desert, He was girding Himself
for the work of life, angels of life came
and ministered unto Him ; now, in the
fair world, when He is girding Himself
for the work of death, the ministrants
come to Him from the grave—but from
the grave conquered—one from that
tomb under Abarim, which His own
hand had sealed long ago; the other
from the rest into which he had entered
without seeing corruption. There stood
by Him Moses and Elias, and spake
of His decease. And when the prayer
is ended, the task accepted, then first
since the star paused over Him at
Bethlehem, the full glory falls upon
Him from heaven, and the testimony
is borne to His everlasting Sonship and
power— Hear ye Him.” —Ruskin.


Witnesses to Immortality. Here we
have two thoroughly trustworthy
witnesses, in Moses and Elias, that
the dead are not dead, and that those
who die in faith only pass out of this


poor, wretched life into a better.—
Luther.

Recognition in Another World.—S8t.
Peter knows and recognises Moses and
Elias, whose features he had never
before seen. Perhaps we have here
an intimation of the fact that saints
in glory will know each other.


Ver. 31. “ Spake of His decease.” —
(1) The adoring gratitude of glorified
men for His undertaking to accomplish
such a decease; (2) their felt depend-
ence upon it for the glory in which
they appeared ; (3) their profound in-
terest in the progress of it; (4) their
humble solaces and encouragements to
go through with it ; and (5) their sense
of its peerless and overwhelming glory.
—Bbrown.


“ Decease.” —The striking word ‘“ de-
parture” which St. Luke uses, and
which is here translated by ‘“‘ decease,”
suggests ascension rather than death.
It is doubly significant, as being both
an appropriate term in the case of the
Son of God, and as alluding to the
new exodus in which He delivers all
who believe in Him from worse than
Egyptian bondage. There is some-
thing deeply tragic in the allusion to
Jerusalem—‘“‘the city that slays the
prophets” (chap. xiii. 33).


Ver. 33. “ Good for us to be here.” —
The words contain an admixture of
truth and error.

I. Truth: a recognition of that
wherein felicity consists—in a vision
of the Redeemer’s glory, and in hearts
aflame with love and joy.

II. Error: a certain tinge of carnal
self-love, and great ignorance of that
which is needed to fit us for everlasting
happiness. The vision is a means, and
not an end; it is given to prepare for
tribulations, and to sustain the disciples
under them—to strengthen them for
self-denying service.


“ Three tabernacles.” —His desire was
foolish, because—

I. He did not comprehend the
design of the vision.


261


CHAP. IX.


II. He absurdly put the servants
on a level with their Lord.

III. He proposed to build fading
tabernacles for men who had _ been
already admitted to the glory of heaven
and of the angels.—Calvin.


Vers. 33, 40, 45. Three Incapaci-
ties.—1. Speech without knowledge.
2. Action without power. 3. Hearing
without understanding.


Ver. 34. Fearing as they entered the
Cloud.—Men are impatient of clouds,
and are slow to learn their uses,
until they get a period of unbroken
sunshine. Men do not see much in
the clouds ; they are generally unwel-
come visitors. They are not ready
to learn that clouds are often the
bearers of blessings, and harbingers of
good.

I. They are slower still to learn the
revealing power of clouds. Job said,
“Men do not see the bright light that
is in the clouds.” ‘Jn the clouds” ;
not fringing the clouds, but in them.
We look for light by the dispersion of
clouds ; God’s greatest sons have looked
for it in the heart of clouds. When
God gave the law, He did it amid
clouds and thunderings. At the heart
of the densest cloud was God Himself,
and it was from the midst of that
cloud that Moses came with his face
reflecting a glory greater than the
glory of the sun. These three apostles
on the mount were not afraid of the
glory of the Transfiguration and the
brightness of that light that touched
the summit upon which they stood:
they were only afraid of the darkening
cloud into which they were called to
enter. They had no idea that there
was a burden of glory, but had a very
keen conception of the burden of dark-
ness. Paul exclaimed, “Our light
affliction, which is but for a moment,
worketh out for us a far more exceed-
ing and eternal weight of glory.”

II. In such circumstances as this
the cloud very often reveals more
than the glory. I know it is hard to


262


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


believe it. You will remember that
in Hden it was in the cool of the
evening that our first parents heard the
voice of God—just when the shadows
were lengthening, and the brightness
of the day was departing, and the
darkening hour was drawing near, so
full of solemnity, because so full of
subdued light suggestive of mystery.
And we may follow that a little further,
and sometimes find that when the
darkness is thickest round us, and we
can see nothing, God often reveals
Himself to us as He does not when
our vision is distracted by the beauties
of creation around us. We have seen
Jacob ascending the hill as the night
gathered and the darkness descended,
and laying his head upon a_ stony
pillow to sleep, and when asleep having
a grander vision than he ever could
in his waking hours. We see too
much sometimes to see at all. The
world with its thousands of objects,
while all given to us that we may see
them, very often fail to give us the
truest sights ; and the night must come
and the dirkness gather round us, so
that, closed in with God, we may have
some revelation we had not in the
glaring and blinding day.

III. They, however, feared simply
because they did not know the capacity
of the cloud to teach them the lesson
they needed to learn. It was in the
cloud that they learnt to give un-
divided attention to what Christ had to
tell them; and His first command was
to keep the memory of that revelation
to themselves, and meanwhile to come
down, in the inspiration of it, to the
foot of the hill, and there heal one of
the world’s sufferers. The people at
the foot of the hill should be better
for the Transfiguration at its summit.
—Davies.


Ver. 35. ‘My beloved Son: hear
Him.”-—Two titles bestowed on Christ.

I. Beloved Son—as distinguished
from servants like Moses and Elijah.

II. The supreme and only Teacher
of His Church,


-_.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. IX.








Ver. 36. “Jesus was found alone.” for a time, but the gospel remains
Moses and Elias vanish. Christ is left for ever to the end.
alone. Thelaw and the prophets were


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 37—45.


The Power of Faith.—The narrative of this miracle which St. Luke gives is
much briefer than those in the two first Gospels, and omits a number of details
which give special interest to this manifestation of Christ’s power and love.
The side-lights of the story are full of instruction: e.g.—-

I. The vicarious power of faith.—The success of this poor father for his
child is typical of a whole class of our Lord’s acts of mercy. One-half of the
detailed healings in the Gospel history were wrought at the prayer of friends.
A considerable proportion were cures of those who could in nowise appeal
to Jesus on their own behalf, and who, therefore, so far as receptive faith
was concerned, were represented by their intercessors. Among the countless
undetailed healings the proportion of such cures must have been great. Indeed,
this was evidently a principle of the Lord’s healing ministry. What a gospel,
this, the Author of which plainly says by His deeds, “ Not only come, but bring !
Come for yourselves and find rest. Bring also the halt, the blind, the weak,
the little ones, that they too may get the blessing, and My house may te filled.”
How far-reaching this principle is will appear when we consider the gracious
teachings of Christianity as to infant salvation, its still wider teaching as to
the place of representative faith for thore who can own and confess nothing
for themselves; also the marvellous spiritual results of patient, persevering,
intercessory prayer. Nor should the reflex action of the principle be forgotten.
The father stands beside the Christ of history, a monument of faith, timid yet
true, because his love for his boy set him there. His ‘“‘ Have mercy on us and
help us,” like the heathen mother’s ‘‘ Have mercy on me,” was highly honoured
by Jesus. The parental love that identified itself with the suffering child was
used by Him as a step to the faith which united child and parent both to the
Healer. Thus will true spiritual affection for those committed to our care draw
ourselves and them into closest bonds with Christ.

II. The situation of the unsuccessful nine.—Their failure had been con-
spicuous, and rankled in their minds. The cause of it was unbelief, want of
faith, or rather of the watchfulness in prayer which keeps faith ready for action.
Does not the situation recur? Are there not social evils preying on the body
politic, ‘‘open sores,” even of the modern world, with which Christianity—at
least the Christianity of the Churches—seems unable to cope? Are there not
times when their failure threatens to shame the cause of Christ, if not Christ
Himself? But the Church is not Christ. His working is not to be measured
by that of any human representatives, official or unofficial, We must not
repeat the mistake of the multitude that day, and, because the disciples have
failed, think that Jesus will fail. There are evils not to be met successfully
without exceptional devotion and self-sacrifice in His followers. There are
kinds of demonism——how many of them are still with us!—in face of which
ordinary easy-going Christianity. breaks down. To cast them out heroism is
needed; and surely Christ and His cause have never wanted for heroes and
heroic devotion when the need came.—Laidlaw.


263


CHAP. IX.


a
ye aced


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE,


—— et


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 37—45.


Ver. 37. A Great Contrast.—Very
remarkable is the contrast between the
scene on the Mount of Transfiguration
and that which met the eyes of Christ
at its foot: on the one hand the open
heaven and the presence of glorified
spirits, and on the other a vale of tears,
with the worst forms of misery, pain,
and unbelief. In his well-known
picture of the Transfiguration Raffaelle
has depicted this contrast in the most
striking manner.


Ver. 41. ‘‘ Faithless and perverse
generation.” —The censure must have
been felt (1) by those who had hastily
argued from the impotence of the
disciples to that of their Master ; (2) by
the father of the child, whose faith
was so weak; (3) by the disciples who
had attempted in vain to exorcise the
evil spirit.

“ How long shall I be with you ?”—
What a contrast for Jesus between
the hours of holy peace which He
had just passed in communion with
heaven, and the sight of the agony
of this father and of the agitated
crowd !—Godet.


“ How long.” —He was hastening to
His Father, yet could not go till He
had led His disciples to faith. Their
slowness troubled Him.—Bengel.


Ver. 42. “The devil threw him
down.”—That the devil should rage


with more than ordinary cruelty
against the child, when he is brought
to Christ, ought not to excite surprise ;
for in proportion as the grace of
Christ is seen to be nearer at hand,
and acts more powerfully, the fury of
Satan is the more highly excited.—
Calvin.


Ver. 44, “ Let these sayings sink down
into your ears.”—The disciples are to
bear in mind these admiring speeches
on account of the contrast which His
own fate would now appear with the
same. They are, therefore, to build no
hopes upon them, but only to recognise
in them the mobile vulgus.—Meyer.


“ Delivered into the hands of men.”
—If men offer thee a wreath of
honour, be careful to intertwine with it
a bunch of myrrh, and thus remind
thyself, as thy Saviour did, that men
are changeable, and their praise fickle
and destitute of power to give strength
or comfort in death. —Besser.


Ver. 45. “ They feared to ask Him.”
—Why did they fear to ask Him?
Because they had an idea what the
answer would be, and did not wish to
understand what was exceedingly dis-
agreeableto them. In this we can see
how the will governs the understand-
ing. Our Lord has still, alas! too
many of such disciples who know not
because they will not.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 46—50.


Humility commended ; Jealousy reproved.—In very different frames of mind
did Jesus and the twelve apostles return from the Mount of Transfiguration to
Capernaum. His thoughts were fixed upon the cross, theirs upon places of
honour in the kingdom which they believed He was about to establish on earth.
This difference came out in their respective utterances. Jesus spoke for the
second time about His coming sufferings, while te disciples disputed among
themselves which of them should be the greatest. This dispute is a humiliating
revelation of the mood in which the disciples of Jesus were, and showed how far
they were from obeying the command so lately heard by three of them on the
holy mount—“ Hear ye Him.” The cross of which He spoke they thought
not of ; or, rather, they banished it from their thoughts, and fixed their attention


264


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. IX.


upon the honours and rewards which could scarcely fail to be theirs when their
Master had set up His kingdom. It was therefore most needful for Jesus to
banish this spirit of selfish ambition from the minds of His disciples, if they
were to co-operate with Him as ministers of the kingdom of God.

I. The lesson of humility.—He chose a little child, and presented him to the
disciples as a type of the feeble, the ignorant, and the poor, whom they were in

danger of slighting and driving away by assuming airs of superiority, and also
as a type of the humble in spirit. It is of the very nature of ambition to
render him who cherishes it harsh and contemptuous towards others, especially
towards those who are too weak and insignificant to be rivals. And hence, in
order to be kind and gracious and loving in their relations with those to whom
they ministered, the disciples needed to cast out from their minds the selfish
schemes they were forming to secure their own advancement and high places
in the kingdom. It is significant that Christ does not put an end to all strife
by saying that there would not be difference of rank in that kingdom—that in
it all would be equal. On the contrary, He distinctly says that there are grades
of distinction there as well as in the kingdoms of the world; and He enunciates
the principle according to which promotion would be given. ‘He that is least
among you all, the same shall be great.” This child in its unpretentiousness,
and simple trust and love, represents the type of character He would have them
to imitate; and he who came nearest to it would become worthy of high rank
in the kingdom of heaven.

II. Jealousy reproved.—The consciences of the disciples seem to have been
touched by the reproof of Christ. It recalled to the memory of some of them
the attitude they had recently taken up in dealing with one who was a believer
in Christ, but who, for some reason or other, had kept aloof from their company.
So far from “receiving ” him and approving the good work he was doing in
Christ’s name, they had forbidden him to proceed further in it. They tell what
they had done, apparently with an uneasy feeling that their action would not
meet with their Master’s approval. Perhaps the man whom they had inter-
dicted was after all “a little one” whom they should have taken to their hearts,
and not an enemy to be silenced. The same self-seeking spirit that had led
them to dispute among themselves as to who should be greatest, had led them
to resent any apparent encroachment upon their prerogatives as accredited
ministers of Christ. The lesser fact that the exorcist followed not them over-
shadowed the greater fact that he was a follower of their Lord. The reply of
Christ, in which He claims as allies those who in faith in Him do good work,
and in which He passes no censure upon those who are unattached to the visible
Church, contains a lesson which His followers in all ages have been very slow
to learn. Had it been learned, there would not have been the many exhibitions
of bigotry and uncharitableness which have marred the history of the Church
and diminished its power for doing good in the world. All would have been
approved, encouraged, and helped who in the name of Christ strove against evil,
and proved the genuineness of their attachment to Him by the success of their
work. As it is, it is a defect of every organised form of Christianity that those
connected with it look on all who are outside it with a certain measure of
suspicion and jealousy and ill-will.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 46—62.


Vers. 46-62. Lessons to the Twelve. III. Merey (vers. 51-56).
I. Humility (vers. 46-48). IV. Self-sacrifice (vers. 57-62).—W.
II. Tolerance (vers. 49, 50). Taylor.


265


CHAP. IX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





The Disposition which Christ Ap-
proves.—The aim of this whole section
is to show the mind which our Lord
desires to see in His disciples.

I. Childlike humility.
II. Gentle love.

III. Resolute self-devotion.

Vers. 46-56. How Christ rebuked
Pride.

I. Pride is a common sin.

II. It takes various forms.—1. Pride
of place (vers. 46-48). 2. Pride of
party (vers. 49, 50). 3. Offended pride
(vers. 51-56).—W. Taylor.


Three Faults rebuked.—Three wrong
dispositions rebuked: (1) ambition to
be greatest ; (2) intolerance, in forbid-
ding even exorcism ; (3) vindictiveness,
in proposing to avenge an insult by
calling down fire from heaven.


Vers. 46-50. LHaclusiveness and
Bigotry.— The same spirit of pride
that led the apostles to vie with each
other as to who should be greatest
prompted them to manifest exclusive-
ness and bigotry in forbidding exorcism
in the name of Christ because the
exorcist did not belong to their circle.


Ver. 46. “ Which should be the
greatest.”—The disciples were guilty
of a double fault: 1. They were in-
clined to dispute about the rewards of
victory before they had accomplished
their warfare. 2. They were animated
by selfish ambition and jealousy.


The Crown and the Cross.— The
Saviour’s repeated predictions of His
sufferings had not sunk into the minds
of His disciples: they were thinking
of the crown, while their Master’s eye
was fixed upon the cross.


Ver. 47. “Set him by Him.”—They
knew that the greatest in the kingdom
of heaven is he who is nearest to
Christ ; but they asked which of them
had the best claim to the place. Pro-
bably the rest of the apostles envied
those who had been with Christ upon


266


the mount, and this was the origin of
their strife.


Ver. 48. ‘ This child.”—The central
point of comparison is the child’s
humility. This humility (1) frees the
child’s understanding from vain imagi-
nations, (2) the child’s heart from
rivalry, and (3) the child’s will from
stubbornness.—Van Oosterzee.


Ver. 49. “We forbad him.”—Cf.
the jealousy of Joshua against Eldad
and Medad, and the noble answer of
Moses (Num. xi. 27-29).


Ver. 50. “ Morbid him not.”—1. A
reproof for the past. 2. A direction
for the future.


“ He that is not,” etc.—When, in
applied morals, we sit in judgment on
ourselves, we should in ordinary cir-
cumstances apply the law stringently,
“ He who is not with Christ is against
Him.” But when we are sitting in
judgment on others, into whose hearts
we cannot look directly, we should in
ordinary circumstances apply the law
generously, ‘“‘ He who is not against
Christ is with Him.”— Morison.


Two Complementary Sayings.—In
Matt. xii. 30 we have a saying which
is at first contradictory to this: “He
who is not with Me is against Me.”
Yet both are true. In the contest
between good and evil neutrality is
as bad as enmity, so that those not
for Christ are against Him; yet we
can recognise all as on our side who
are striving against evil, even if they
are not using our methods or formally
taking their place beside us. While
the apostles were taught this lesson in
toleration, the man receives only nega-
tive praise. There are always earnest
Christian labourers who decline to be
orderly in their methods. Their irregu-
larity calls for toleration, not approval.


Inward Unity and Outward Con-
JSormity.—The saying in Matthew re-
fers more to inward unity with Christ:


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. IX.


a ee a ee ey


this one to outward conformity with
His people. The former may exist
independently of the latter, and its
existence unites real Christians, what-
ever their name and outward differ-
ences,


Lessons taught by the incident.

I. Beware of hasty conclusions con-
cerning men’s spiritual state based on
merely external indications.

II. “Forbid him not” reminds us
of the sorrowful fact that too often
in the history of the Church it has
been the spirit of the twelve rather
than that of their Master which. has
predominated.

ITI. Outward union among Chris-
tians may be impracticable, yet the
duty remains of recognising from the
heart all who truly love Christ, what-
ever Church they may be in; they
should be dearer to us than those in


our own Church who may be in spirit
and life not with Christ, but against
Him.


A Lesson of Mercy.—This text
teaches us a lesson of mérey. It guides
our estimate of others. It says: “Do
not make a man an offender for a
word; do not let your sympathies be
narrowed to the circle of those who
express the same convictions in the
same phrases, or seek the same end
by the same precise means, as yourself,
Be prepared to believe and act upon
the belief that God is not limited to
one field of action or to one kind of
character, but can aid and bless the
work, and will eventually accept the
person of all those who love the Lord
Jesus Christ in sincerity, and who
avail themselves of His help in com-
bating evil within and around them.”—
Vaughan.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 51—56.


The Spirit of the Old Testament and of the New.—We have here one of the
memorable incidents of our Lord’s last journey to Jerusalem. Very solemnly
and very sweetly does the Evangelist introduce the reference to His passion—
“when the time was come that He should be received up.” It mitigates the
bitterness of His Lord’s sufferings and death, looking on as it thus does to the
issue and the end, to the taking up of Christ into heaven, to His reception in
His heavenly home and into His Father’s glory.

I. The insult.—“ He sent messengers before His face” as harbingers, to use
that word in its most proper sense. ‘And they went, and entered into a village
of the Samaritans, to make ready for Him. And they did not receive Him,
because His face was as though He would go to Jerusalem.” ‘This refusal of
theirs was no piece of ordinary inhospitality such as the Samaritans were wont
to show to Galilean pilgrims on their way to the feasts at Jerusalem. It was
not merely as such a pilgrim that they shut their doors against Him ; for this
we must remember was Christ’s solemn progress from Galilee to Judea as
Messiah, with these messengers everywhere announcing Him as such, But,
as the Samaritans esteemed it, a Messiah going to Jerusalem to observe the
feasts there did by His very act proclaim that He was no Messiah; for on
Gerizim, as they believed, the old patriarchs had worshipped, consecrating it
to be the holy mountain of God—which, therefore, and not J erusalem, the
Christ, when He came, would recognise and honour as the central point of all
true religion. 4

II. The anger of the apostles.—The sons of Zebedee were probably with the
Lord when the tidings were brought back of the village which, refusing to
receive Him, had missed the opportunity of entertaining, not angels, but the
Lord of angels, unawares. Upon this provocation all their suppressed and
smouldering indignation against the schismatics, through whose territory they


267


hy gts + , a Ao ee
; a 9


UMAP. IX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





were journeying, breaks forth. At this instance of contempt shown to their
Lord and to themselves (for no doubt a feeling of personal slight mingled with
their indignation, however little they may have been aware of it themselves),
the “sons of thunder” would fain play Old Testament parts. They feel that a
greater than Elias is here; for they are fresh from the Mount of Transfiguration,
where they had seen how the glory of Moses and Elias paled before the brighter
glory of Him whom they served. An outrage against Him, and a rejecting of
Him, should therefore not be less terribly avenged. With all of carnal and
sinful which mingled with this proposal of theirs, yet what insight into the
dignity of their Lord, and the greatness of the outrage directed against Him,
does it reveal—what faith in the mighty powers with which He was able to
equip His servants! And yet it might almost seem as though, with all this
confidence of theirs, there was a latent and lurking sense upon their part of a
certain unfitness in this their proposal ; and thus out of no desire to intrude into
their Lord’s office, but only out of a feeling that this avenging act might not
exactly become Him, they proffer themselves as the executors of the judgment.
It will become the servants, though it might not perfectly become the Lord.

III. The disciples rebuked.—‘‘ He turned, and rebuked them: Ye know not
what manner of spirit ye are of.” ‘‘ You are missing,” Christ would say, “ your
true position, which is, having been born of the spirit of forgiving love, to
be ruled by that spirit, and not by the spirit of avenging righteousness. You
are losing sight of the distinction between the old covenant and the new,
missing the greater glory of the latter, and that it is the higher blessedness to
belong to it.” It behoves us to see clearly that there is no slight cast here on
the spirit of Elias. Both spirits, that which breathed through and informed
the prophets and saints of the old covenant, as well as that which should
inform the disciples of the new, are Divine. The difference between them is
not of opposition, but only of time and degree. The spirit of the old testament
was a spirit of avenging righteousness; God was teaching men His holiness
by terribls things in righteousness. But the spirit of the new covenant, not
contrary, but brighter, is that of forgiving love; in it He is overcoming man’s
evil with His good. Each economy has one predominating tone from which
it takes its character. The two apostles were for the moment failing to recognise
this. In a confusion of old and new, and not knowing of “what manner of
spirit” they were, they had fallen back on the rudiments of God’s education
of His people, when it was their privilege to go on unto perfection, and to teach
the world the far greater might of meekness and of love. In their missing of
all this there was a fault and matter of blame, yet blame by no means so severe
as some are disposed to find. They were rebuked for choosing that which,
perfectly good in its own time, was only not good now because a better had
come in, for returning to the lower level of the old covenant when Christ had
lifted them up, if only they had understood this, to the higher level of the
-new.—T'rench,


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 51—56.


Vers. 51-56. The courage and meek-
ness of Christ.

I. The Divine courage and firmness
of Christ in despising death.

II. The deadly enmities produced
by differences about religion.

III. With what headlong ardour


268


the nature of man is hurried on to
impatience !

IV. How ready we are to fall into
mistakes in imitating the saints!

V. By the example of Christ we
are called to the exercise of meekness.
—Calvin.


‘


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. IX.





Ver. 51. “ Received up.”—Our Lord’s
agony, cross, and passion were at
hand ; but He looked through them all
to His glorious ascension.


Ver. 52. “ To make ready for Him.”
—An indication of the dignity which
was mingled with the humility of the
Saviour. He required some prepara-
tion to be made for His coming,
attended as He was by disciples, and
did not choose to subject Himself
to the inconveniences of haphazard
arrangements made after His arrival,
when a little foresight and manage-
ment might prevent confusion and
discomfort.


Ver. 53. “Did not receive Him.”—
Note the disastrous effects of religious
prejudice.

I. It leads to a rejection of the
Saviour.

II. It prompts a rudeness and
discourtesy of which worldly people
would be ashamed to be guilty.

III. It robs those who are blinded
by it of those rich blessings which
would result from communion with the
Saviour and with His true disciples.


Ver. 54. “ James and John.” —Christ
had surnamed them Boanerges, or
“Sons of Thunder” (Mark iii. 17),
and their present proposal strikingly
harmonises with some aspects of the
character that gained for them the
name. We should do them wrong if
we imagined that their proposal was
a mere outburst of personal annoyance.
It sprang from sincere jealousy for
the honour of their Lord, though with
it there may have mingled party
passion—some remains of old-standing
dislike of Jews to Samaritans.


Ver. 55. “Ye know not.”—James
showed, when he suffered in patience
death by the sword, that he had learned
the meek spirit of Christ.


“ What manner of spirit.”—1. They
thought they were actuated simply by
zeal for Christ, but pride and anger


vitiated their zeal. 2. The spirit they
manifested was not such as became the
apostles of the gospel, who were sent
to proclaim mercy even to the chief of
sinners.


Elias’ Spirit.—KElias’ spirit, I hope,
was no evil spirit. No; but every good
spirit, as good as Elias’, is not for every
person, place, or time. Spirits are
given by God, and men inspired with
them, after several manners, upon
several occasions, as the several times
require. The times sometimes require
one spirit, sometimes another. Elias’
time, Elias’ spirit. As his act good,
done by his spirit, so his spirit good in
his own time. The time changed; the
spirit, then good, now not good. But
why is it out of time? For the Son
of man is come. As if He should say,
Indeed, there is a time to destroy
(Eccles. iii. 3) ; that was under the law,
the fiery law, as Moses calls it; then
a fiery spirit would not be amiss. The
spirit of Elias was good till the Son of
man came; but now He is come, the
date of that spirit is expired. When
the Son of man is come, the spirit of
Elias must be gone; now specially, for
Moses and he resigned lately in the
mount. Now no lawgiver, no prophet,
but Christ.—A ndrewes.


Ver. 56. Give People Time.— They
went to another village.”

I. Christ’s action here illustrates
the importance of giving people time
to accept His claims.—This need not
involve any surrender of the truth.
No good is done by speaking as if the
truth were less certain, less supremely
important, than in our hearts we
believe it to be. But who are we, that
we should dare to foreclose the time
of others’ growth? The impenetrable
reserves of truth, its distances of un-
approachable light, make us: incapable
of judging how God may lead men on
to it. Who can tell how he may help
others by his own reverent and hope-
ful patience !

Il. This example of Christ ought
to help us in the ordinary affairs of


269


CHAP. IX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





life—How much unsuspected beauty
might be disclosed around us if we
gave people time! Remember that
they who would foreclose the case for
others would themselves be without
light and hope if God had not borne
with them. They are depending
moment by moment on His long-suffer-
ing. And think how much forbear-
ance we have received from others!
So much, that we have been often
unconscious that we needed any. If
we considered these things, we would
gladly give others time to amend.—
Paget.


Salvation—The love of God can


pursue and convict the most lost and
erring. It goes after lost sheep. But
how? By our accepting the yoke of
Christ we come in touch with this
store of vitality. The prime aim of
the new creation is to take the will
of God as the motive of life. “Thy
will be done” is the acceptable prayer
for salvation. Salvation from what ?
From the crushing or subtle power of
temptation—from all that harms us.
Do not associate salvation merely with
deliverance from a future hell: salva-
tion is deliverance from evil habit,
from disappointment, from worry.
This incoming saving power of God is
for daily use.—Jones.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 57—62.


The Three Aspirants——The manifold wisdom of Christ, which displayed itself
in His drawing and attaching of souls to Himself by ways the most different,
must often fill us with devout admiration. It can never fill us more with
this than when there are brought before us in quick succession moral and
spiritual conditions, with much apparent similarity, which yet are most diversely
treated by Him. Such we have here. There are three who, either in their own
intention or in the Lord’s, are candidates for admission into the inner circle of
disciples—into the circle, that is, of those who should not merely themselves
receive the truth, but, as Christ’s witnesses, should be actively employed in
imparting the knowledge of that truth to others.

I. The offer repelled.—First there offers himself a scribe (Matthew), and his
words sound fairly: “ Master, I will follow Thee whithersoever Thou goest.”
They a little remind one of the great-hearted words of Ittai to David: “ Surely
in what place my lord the king shall be, whether in death or life, even there
also will thy servant be” (2 Sam. xv. 21). Nor is there any reason to suppose
that this aspirant to discipleship and to all which discipleship might involve
meant at the time otherwise than he spoke. Yet there is not in him that true
devotedness to Christ which shall lead him so to follow that Lord in this world
that in the world to come he shall be free to follow Him whithersoever He
goeth (Rev. xiv. 4). These words have more in them of Peter’s confident
asseveration, ‘‘ Lord, I am ready to go with Thee, both into prison, and to
death” (chap. xxii. 33). At all events, they inspire Him, who knowing all things
knew what was in man, with no greater confidence than those other words
of Peter hereafter should do; for, not welcoming this volunteer, but rather
repelling, He answers, ‘‘The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have
nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay His head.” In other
words: ‘Lookest thou for worldly commodities through the following of
Me? In this thou must needs be disappointed. These cannot be My followers’
portion, since they are not Mine. The Son of man is homeless and houseless
upon earth.” Nor does this answer of Christ come out to us in all its depth
of meaning till we realise that hour when upon His cross He bowed His head, not
having where to lay it, and having bowed it thus gave up the ghost. Whether


270


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. IX.


eee


this scribe withdrew and went away, we are not informed. That he did with-
draw is certainly the impression left upon our minds. But whatever was the
issue, this reply of Christ was not meant merely and only to repel. It was
intended rather to throw back this candidate for the honours of discipleship on
deeper heart-searchings, that, having made these, he might either fall off
altogether, or else that he might attach himself to the Lord in quite another
spirit from that in which he made his present offer of service.

II. A summons to heroism.—The Lord, who has checked one, incites
another ; for He knew there was more truth in the backwardness of him to
whom He addresses Himself now than in the forwardness of that other who
had just addressed Him. He has for him that significant “‘ Follow Me” which
He had for a Philip, a Matthew, an Andrew, a Peter. It is in answer to
such a summons that this one replies, “Lord, suffer me first to go and
bury my father.” This may mean, “My father now lies dead; suffer me,
before I attach myself to Thee, to render the last offices of pity to him.”
And Christ’s answer we may interpret as implying, ‘“‘ The spiritually dead,
those who are not quickened as thou hast been with the spirit of a new life,
are yet sufficient for the fulfilling of this office which would now call thee
away from Me—namely, the burying of the naturally dead; they can perform
it as well as thou, and, under present circumstances, thou must be contented
to leave it to them.” When duties come into collision, sacred duties such as that
which this man pleaded must give way to those more sacred yet. Christ had
said to this man, ‘‘ Follow Me”; so that now that saying held good, “ Whoso
loveth father or mother more than Me is not worthy of Me.” And then Christ
justifies His withdrawal of this man from attendance on the dead. He hada
fitness for work which, if not directly with the living, was yet with those who
were capable of being made alive: “Go thou, and preach the kingdom of God.”
As though He hadsaid: ‘“ Another task is thine—namely, to spread far and wide
the glad tidings of life, which as many as hear shall live. One of My royal
priesthood, a Nazarite of Mine, having fellowship with Me who am the Life,
thy occupation is henceforth with the living, and not with the dead.”

III. Half-heartedness blamed.—A third offers himself for discipleship ; yet
this with conditions, and craving time for farewells which he would fain inter-
pose. He, too, must learn that there is no dallying with a heavenly vocation ;
that when this has reached a man, no room is left him for conferring with
flesh and blood ; to him, too, as to the king’s daughter of old, the word of that
precept has come, ‘Forget also thine own people, and thy father’s house”
(Ps. xlv. 10); while, as it may only too easily prove, his worst foes, those who
will most effectually keep him back from God, may be those of his own house-
hold (Matt. x. 36, 37). The Lord, therefore, will give no allowance to his
request, shuts out at once all dangerous delays and interludes between the offer
of service and the actual undertaking of it. He who holds the plough must
not look behind him; if he does, he spoils the furrow, and mars the work which
he has undertaken. The discipleship of Christ is such a putting of the hand
to the plough, for the breaking up of the hard soil of our own hearts, for the
breaking up of the hard soil of the hearts of others. The image sets forth the
laboriousness of the work better than the more usual image of sowing; and, so
to speak, carries us a step farther back in the spiritual husbandry. But he who,
having put his hand to the plough, and thus begun well, shall afterwards, Christ
does not say turn back, but even so much as look back, in token that his heart is
otherwhere than in the task before him, he may still have his hand on the
plough, but having fallen away in heart and affection from his work, he traces
no straight furrows, he breaks not up aright any fallow ground ; he “ is not fit,
or rather, is of no service and profit, ‘for the kingdom of God.” Indeed, unless


271


OHAP, IX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





kept to his work as an hireling, it is likely that he will presently leave his plough
in the half-drawn furrow, and be found to have exchanged toil and exposure
abroad for the comforts and ease of his own hearth. —T'rench.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 57—62.


Vers, 57-62. Would-be Disciples.—A.
slight examination of the three cases
suftices to show that they practically
break into two classes marked by the
broad distinction that Christ warns
and repels the one, but calls and
insists upon the services of the other.
One man is discouraged by Christ ;
two are pressed to enter on the instant
into Christ’s service. And this, even
though the first seems the most ready,
and the other two show a desire to
shirk the call. This varying treat-
ment must turn upon some underlying
contrast in their spiritual condition ;
for Jesus has not two sets of terms,
He is no respecter of persons who
picks and chooses arbitrarily, and so
His methods of treatment, though
opposed, are quite consistent.

I. See how He deals with uncaleu-
lating readiness.—It was a striking
thing for a scribe publicly to offer to
become Christ’s scholar. But he only
took Jesus for another, a wiser scribe
than himself—a very shallow qualifi-
cation for Christian discipleship. His
dilettante admiration and transient
enthusiasm were unfit to stand the
test of practical service. He knew
nothing of the life of exposure and
privation which this great Scribe led.
The Son of man was often homeless
and shelterless. His disciples were
drawn to Him and kept by Him with
a hold which made them indifferent
to privation. It was a heart-hold.
He had won them for ever to Himself.
And to be a Christian now means
separation for Christ’s sake from the
spirit of the world, and makes a man
more or less of an alien and a pilgrim
here. It calls him -to deny himself
and to toil for the salvation of others.
Your easy-going scribe will not do
that.

_ II. See how He deals with reluct-


ec te


ance.—Under this term the second
and third cases are to be reckoned.
The first of the two is no volunteer ;
but he has received the call. Con-
cealed discipleship is no longer to be
maintained. Open confession, public
service, consecration of himself to the
work of Christ—this is what the
Lord claimed from His hesitating but
genuine disciple. Such a moment comes
to every true disciple. It comes as a


summons to decision for and open con- ,


fession of Christ. It comes as a call
for testimony and service, where irk-
some, unpleasant toil is needed. The
feeling of duty is Christ’s call, and
it leaves you ill at ease until it is
obeyed.

III. The great lesson taught by
both instances is that such clear,
imperative call from Christ sounding
in the heart and conscience takes pre-
cedence of everything else.—Neither
of the two of whom Luke tells us
wanted to go. When called, they
made excuses for not complying. They
did so on the ground of something
which seemed to have a prior claim.
One urged a domestic duty, the other
domestic affection. The first had a
dead father to bury, the second had a
family circle who as yet knew nothing
about his new call to higher work.
Yet family life, as Jesus views it, is
for the present only, and not for
eternity. The interests and claims of
the living, spiritual world must take
precedence of the dead one. In this
man’s case the two duties were made to
conflict that there might be a lesson
to you and me for all time. Summoned
to the holiest of all duties, the disciple
is absolved from the holiest of earthly
duties. As for the second man, it is
evident that the lower affections of
the natural heart were straining his
devotion to higher duty in a quite


_ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE,


CHAP. IX.





perilous degree. Men who cannot
steel themselves against such allure-
ments are not fit for the work of
God. Jesus is a very exigent Master.
What portrait of ourselves do we recog-
nise in these three disciples !— Dykes.


Enthusiasm, Reluctance, Compro-
mise. Three Types of Character.

I. Enthusiasm repressed. —The
prayer is not welcomed. The disciple
spoke unadvisedly, and was rebuffed
by Christ’s answer. We must not
diminish where Christ has spoken.
This is His own description of the
homelessness of His ministry. It isa
parable. Unrest is the trial of trials
to His people. To some the words
come true literally, to all spiritually.
Think of it ere thou speakest the
“whithersoever.” Jesus meets enthu-
siam with warning. None shall come
after Him by mistake or in misunder-
standing.

II. Reluctance stimulated..—The
direct opposite. Christ takes the
initiative here; summons to instan-
taneous decision. We know not the
reasons for this special peremptoriness ;
but He repels the disciple’s plea, and
claims pre-eminence for the reign of
God in man’s heart and life. Christ is
jealous of earthly duties, even the
most sacred. His mandate is stern
and imperious.

III. Compromise rebuked.—A_ won-
derfully composite character! He is
a volunteer, but he stipulates; an en-
thusiast, but he procrastinates. His
prayer is denied. Christ will not
allow natural affection to divert from
His service. What is there in your
home, your heart, your life that cannot
stay there with Jesus ? Count the cost.
Put the hand to the plough, and look
not back !—Vaughan.


Three Types of Character.—Each of
the three sayings of Christ brought
together in this place by Luke contains
a distinct principle applicable to a par-
ticular typé of character.

T. The word spoken to the scribe
suggested to an inconsiderate enthu-


Tt


siast the lesson that one must count
the cost before entering on the career
of a disciple.

II. The second word is adapted to
the case of a man thoroughly in
earnest, but distracted by a conflict
of duties, and virtually enunciates the
principle that in all collisions between
the duties we owe to the kingdom and
those arising out of natural relations,
the former must take precedence.

III. The third word meets the case
of a divided heart.—The ploughman
who looks back does not give his un-
divided attention to his task, and there-
fore fails to draw a straight furrow.
The man who desired to bid farewell
to his friends was hankering after
home enjoyments, and the reply to his
request taught the lesson that no one
who is drawn two ways by his affec-
tions is fit for the service of: the
kingdom, because it demands the
whole heart and mind. The very
harshness and inexorableness of Christ’s
sayings serve to show. how exacting
and inexorable is the demand of the
kingdom for heroic devotion.—Bruce.


The Three Disciples.

I. The self-confident disciple.—His
estimate of what Christ’s service re-
quired was far from complete.

II. The diffident disciple.—Finds
himself in a dilemma which seems to
warrant, if it does not necessitate, delay.
Our Lord teaches that every duty, no
matter how sacred or momentous, is
subordinate to the primary one of
following Him.

III. Offers like the first, but in
general character resembles the second.
—He is not constrained by any sense
of duty. He does not appreciate the
gravity of the moment, the pressing
and august character of our Lord’s .
work. ‘This is no time for saying fare-
wells. Love dictates the sternness of
our Lord’s words. He insists on whole-
hearted service —Moinet.


Christ wants Followers—
I. Who have counted the cost.
II. Who are ready to follow Him at
once.


273


OHAP. X.


III. Who will follow with an undi-
vided heart.—W. Taylor.


Ver. 57. The more eager the less
prepared.—We must bear in mind
that he was a scribe, who had been
accustomed to a quiet and easy life,
had enjoyed honour, and was ill-fitted
to endure reproaches, poverty, persecu-
tions, and the cross. He wishes, in-
deed, to follow Christ, but dreams of an
easy and agreeable life, and of dwellings
filled with every convenience ; whereas
the disciples of Christ must walk among
thorns, and march to the cross amidst
uninterrupted afflictions. The more
eager he is, the less he is prepared.
He seems as if he wished to fight in
the shade and at ease, neither annoyed
by sweat nor by dust, and beyond the
reach of the weapons of war.—Calvin.


Vers. 57-62. Three Would-be Fol-
lowers.—Christ deals with three pro-
posed followers: (1) the ambitious
self-seeker; (2) the procrastinating
time-server ; (3) the hesitating and
half-hearted compromiser.


Vers. 57, 58. An enthusiastic dis-
ciple checked.


Vers. 59, 60. A Jlaggard disciple
stimulated.


Vers. 61, 62. An irresolute disciple


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





summoned to choose between the world
and God.


Three Impediments.—The three im-
pediments are: (1) earthly desire; (2)
earthly sorrow; (3) earthly affection.


Ver. 60. “Go thow and preach.”—
Jesus forbade him to go, in order to
show that nothing, not even the most
important work of natural duty and
affection, is so momentous as care for
the kingdom of heaven, and that
nothing, however urgent, should cause
us to be guilty of a moment’s delay in
providing first for that.—Chrysostom.


Ver. 62. The True Follower.—The
true motive to follow Jesus must
absorb every other. 1. Renunciation.
2. Concentration. 3. Expectation.


“ Plough.” —An intimation that the
ministerial lite is like that of a tiller of
the ground (cf. 1 Cor. ii. 9). The
Christian minister is a feeder of sheep,
a dresser of a vineyard, a master-
builder, a watchman ; all these names
imply duties requiring diligence, vigil-
ance, and toil.— Wordsworth.


Reluctance for the Work.—Our Lord
knew quite well that if he went away
he would not come back again; it was
not so much love for those at home as
reluctance for the work that was in his
mind.


CHAPTER X.
CRITICAL NOTES.


Ver. 1. The mission of the seventy is peculiar to St. Luke.


We need not be surprised at


the silence of the other evangelists, as the office to which these men were called was not a


permanent one.


They were simply to prepare the people for Christ’s approaching visit, and


as it were for His last appeal to them. The instructions given to them correspond to those
given to the apostles (see Matt. x.), so far as concerns present duties. In contradistinction
to the temporary character of the mission of the seventy is that of the apostles, which, as
the above charge given to them, indicates “an office and ministry co-extensive with the
world, both in space and duration ” ( Alford).

Seventy also.—Rather, ‘‘seventy others,” 7.¢e. in addition to the twelve. The number
seventy may have had reference to the elders of Israel (Exod. xxiv. 1; Num. xi. 16). Some
MSS. read “ seventy-two,” which has been conjectured to be a traditional correction to make
the number correspond to that of the members of the Sanhedrim.,
mutual helpfulness, as in the case of the twelve (Mark vi. 7).
about to come” (R.V.).


274


Two and two.—For
Would come.—Rather, “ was


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. X.


oo eeeeeeseseeeeeSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSES


é Ver. 2. Send forth.—The word in the original may imply the ideas of urgency and haste ; it
is literally “drive forth,” but may have lost this special force of meaning in course of time.

Ver. 4, Neither purse, etc. —Cf. chap. ix. 1-6. Salute no man,—Not to waste time upon
secondary matters. Cf. 2 Kings iv. 29. Eastern salutations are, all from accounts, elaborate
and ceremonious.

Ver. 6. Son of peace.—J.e. one capable of receiving their message. “The meaning here is
that the disciples were to communicate their message of peace, as the prophet of old was
to communicate his message of warning (Ezek. iii. 17-21), to all, whether ‘ worthy’ or not.
And it is promised to them that even if theiz message falls on inattentive ears or stubborn
hearts, yet it shall not be fruitless, since the duty performed shall bring peace to themselves
—‘it shall turn to you again’” (Spcaker's Commentary).

Ver. 8. City.—The previous instructions evidently had in view villages and detached
houses. Eat such things, etc.—The reference probably is to the scruples felt by strict Jews
about eating with the Samaritans. Our Lord had no such scruple: see John iv. 8. St.
a gives a precept a wider scope by extending it to food in the houses of Gentiles: see
1 Cor. x. 27.

Ver. 12. More tolerable.—The principle on which judgment proceeds is given in
chap. xii. 47, 48.

Ver. 13. Woe unto thee, Ch: azin, ete.—These words were evidently spoken by Christ
more than once: we find them in another connection in Matt. xi, 21-24. They derive more
force here from having been spoken when Christ was at a distance away from them: the
guilt they had incurred by rejecting Him was like a burden upon His mind. Chorazin has
been identified with the ruined town two miles north of Capernaum (Tell Hum). There
is no record in the Gospels, apart from these references, of Christ’s work in Chorazin.
Bethsaida—on the western side of the Lake of Genncsaret, not far from Capernaum; the
birthplace of Peter, Andrew, and Philip.

Ver. 15. Capernaum exalted to heaven,—As being made the headquarters of Christ’s
ministry. Hell.—In the original, Hades, as the antithesis to heaven; the lowest as con-
trasted with the highest position. A better reading (followed in the R.V.) is, “Shalt thou
be exalted unto heaven? Thou shalt be brought down to Hades.”

Ver. 17. Returned.—The mission may not have occupied more than a few days: probably
a time and place of rendezvous had been appointed. Even the devils.—Their success had
exceeded the promise ; for the power over evil spirits had not been formally given to them.
Perhaps in their words to Christ they laid more stress upon “subject to us” tnan “in Thy
name.”

Ver. 18. I beheld.—It seems rather inadequate to understand by these words that Christ
had witnessed with exultation the victories over evil spirits gained by the seventy during
their mission. The comment of Alford on the passage is more in harmony with the
remarkable character of this utterance of our Lord’s: “ The truth is that in this brief speech
He sums up proleptically, as so often in the discourses in St. John, the whole great conflict
with and defeat of thc Power of evil, trom the first even till accomplished by His own
victory. ‘I beheld Satan,’ etc., refers to the original fall of Satan when he lost his place
as an angel of light, not keeping his first estate; which fall, however, had been proceeding
ever since step by step, and shall do so, till all things be put under the feet of Jesus, who
was made lower than the angels. And this ‘I beheld’ belongs to the period before the
foundation of the world when He abode in the bosom of the Father. He is to be (ver. 22)
the great Victor over the adversary, and this victory began when Satan fell from heaven.”
As lightning.—The suddenness of the fall, and the brightness of the fallen angel.

Ver. 19. I give.—Rather, “I have given” (R.V.). Power.—Rather, “ authority” (R.V.);
and this forbids our taking “ serpents and scorpions” in a literal sense. The words doubt-
less are a reminiscence of Ps. xci. 13.

Ver. 20. Rejoice not.—Success in doing Christ’s work is less a ground of rejoicing than
the consciousness of being His servants and of being saved by Him, Written in heaven.—
Cf. Ex. xxxii. 32; Ps. Ixix. 28; Phil. iv. 3; Rev. xx. 12, :

Ver. 21. Rejoiced.—Or, “exulted”: this element of joy in the Saviour’s life is but little
touched upon by the evangelists, and this notice of it here is therefore all the more precious.
In spirit. Rather, “in the Holy Spirit” (R.V.). The vast preponderance of MSS. is in
favour of this very peculiar phrase, which forms a notable addition to the classical passages
in which the doctrine of the Trinity is referred to. That thou hast hid.—The idea of the
passage is, “‘ That though thou didst hide from the wise, thou hast revealed unto babes.”
The joy is not on account of truth being hid from some, but on account of its being revealed
to those of susceptible hearts. Cf. Rom, vi. 17; Isa. xii. 1, for similar expressions which
demand the same kind of interpretation. In Matt. xi. 25-27 we have the same words as
here in vers. 21, 22. It seems probable that Christ used these words on more than one
occasion. Alford, who is not at all in favour of suggestions of the kind when used by
harmonists to overcome difficulties, is emphatically of the opinion that the method in question


275





CHAP. X, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE





is to be adopted here, The Johannine character of the passage, especially of ver. 22, is well
worth noticing.

Ver. 22. All things, etc.—As the margin indicates, some ancient MSS. preface the verse
Nive the words, “And turning to His disciples He said.” This reading is not followed by
the R.V.

Ver. 24. Many prophets and kings.—Jacob, Gen. xlix. 18; Balaam, Num. xxiv. 17; David,
2 Sam, xxiii. 1-5.

Ver. 25. A certain lawyer.—One whose business it was to teach the law. It was probably
in Judza that this conversation was held; as we read (ver. 38) that Jesus was on His way
to Bethany. Tempted Him.—The word seems to mean nothing worse than putting His skill
to full proof, ¢.¢. consulting Him on difficult questions. He probably wished to see if Jesus
would teach him anything new; and an air of self-conceit is manifest in what little is said
of him (see ver. 29). What shall I do, ete.—This question was put to Christ more than once:
see xviii. 18; cf. with them Acts xvi. 30, 31.

Ver. 26. How readest thou?—‘“A common Rabbinical formula for eliciting a text of
Scripture. What? not how? te, to what purport” (A/ford).

Ver. 27. Thou shalt love, ete.—Deut. vi. 5,x. 12; Lev. xix. 18. His answer was intelligent ;
his summary of duty such as Christ taught; it was in knowledge of himself that he came
short.

Ver. 28. This do, and thou shalt live.—“ True in all cases : any one who can and does love
God and his neighbour thus has already begun to live, has an earnest of eternal life”
(Popular Commentary).

Ver. 29. Willing to justify himself.—T.c. to declare his obedience to this summary of the
law, unless some other definition of ‘“ neighbour” than that which he held could be given—
his definition excluding Samaritans and Gentiles.

Ver. 30. Answering, said.—Lit. “taking him up”: it is perhaps not too much to say that
the phrase implies that Christ did more than answer him—made the answer the basis of
teaching which corrected his faulty ideas. A certain man,—We are to understand that he
was a Jew; but no stress is laid on this. The Samaritan saw in him simply a wounded man.
Perhaps this is not a fictitious story at all; it may be that the lawyer himself had been the
traveller, had received kindness from a Samaritan, which he had not repaid, and which had
not led him to form truer ideas as to who his neighbour was. Down from Jerusalem.— About
twenty-one miles, Jericho lying on a much lower level than Jerusalem. The road here
described was, and one might almost say is, haunted by robbers. Jerome says that in his
time it was called “the bloody way,” and that a Roman fort and garrison were needed there
for the protection of travellers. Fell among thieves.—Rather, “robbers,” “ brigands”: into
the midst of them, they surrounded him. Wounded him.—Rather, “beat him” (R.V.), lit.
“laying blows on him.”

Ver. 31. A certain priest.—Probably on his way home from duties in the Temple; for
Jericho was a priestly city. That way.—‘ Rather, ‘on that road,’ It is emphatically
mentioned, because there was another road to Jericho, which was safer, and therefore more
frequently used” (Farrar). Passed by.—Witout showing the mercy inculcated by the law
and the prophets (see Exod. xxiii. 4,5; Deut. xxii. 1-4; Isa. lviii. 7).

Ver. 32. The conduct of the Levite was rather worse than that of the priest.

Ver. 33. Had compassion,—It was this feeling which differentiated him from the priest
and the Levite; and from this feeling sprang his deeds and words of kindness to the
wounded man. }

Ver. 34. Oil and wine.—The usual remedy for wounds in the Hast. His own beast.—
Thereby depriving himself of the use of it. An inn.—Not a caravanserai, as in ii. 7,
but a house tor tlavellers kept by a host. Two different words are used in the respective
passages,

Ver. 35. Two pence,—The denarius was worth about eightpence halfpenny of our money,
and was the day’s wages of an ordinary labourer (see Matt. xx. 2). Probably the smallness of
the sum named is intended to suggest that the Samaritan was a poor man, and thus to bring
into clearer relief his generosity and kindness on this occasion,

Ver. 86. Was neighbour.—Rather, “ proved neighbour” (R.V.), lit. “became neighbour.”
“The neighbour Jews (priest and Levite) became strangers, the stranger Samaritan became
neighbour, to the wounded traveller. It is not place, but love, which makes neighbourhood ”
(Wordsworth).

Ver. 37. He that shewed mercy.—It may be that Pharisaic haughtiness led to this in-
direct answer, as though the lawyer disdained to use the hated name, “Samaritan.” But
no great stress need be laid on this. “The lawyer was taught how one really becomes the
neighbour of another, namely, by active love, irrespective of nationality or religion. His
question, ‘Who is my neighbour?’ was answered: He to whom you ought thus to show
mercy in order to become Ais neighbour is your neighbour. The question is answered once
for alg. All are our neighbours, when we have thus learned what we owe to man as man”


276


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. X%





(Popular Commentary). Go, and do thou likewise.—The question had doubtless been
asked in the spirit of hair-splitting casuistry ; Jesus gives the matter a practical bent.

Ver. 38. A certain village.—There can be no doubt that this was Bethany, and that the
persons mentioned were sisters of Lazarus. The names are not only the same, but the
words and actions of both are characteristic of the two sisters described in John xi., xii.
Bethany was an hour’s walk from Jerusalem, and was a favourite resort of our Lord, when
He was in the neighbourhood of the capital. Farrar considers that the phrases “a certain
village” and “a certain woman” are obvious traces of a tendency to reticence about the
family of Bethany which he thinks are to be found in the synoptic Gospels (Matt. xxvi. 6;
Mark xiv. 3). Such reticence he attributes to the danger to which more special notice of the
family might have exposed them—a danger which was probably long past when St. John
wrote his Gospel. This idea seems, however, to be far-fetched and baseless. The notices in
St. Matthew and St. Mark are definite enough; and here the vague phrase, “a certain
woman,” is followed by her name and the name of her sister. Probably Bethany was not a
name as familiar to Theophilus as it is to us. Martha.—The name is Aramaic, meaning
“lady.” She may have been a widow or a married woman; but we have no information on
the point.

Ver. 39. The character of Mary is suggested with wonderful skill and simplicity by this
description of her. Sat at Jesus’ feet.—As a disciple; not while He was reclining at table,
for the meal was being prepared.

Ver. 40. Cumbered.—Lit. ‘“ distracted,” drawn this way and that by a multitude of things
needing her personal supervision. Came to Him.—The word implies “suddenly appearing
before Him,” evidently coming from the room where the preparations were being made into
that in which Jesus was. Probably the homely phrase “she flounced in” would best describe
her action and mood

Ver, 41. Martha, Martha.—Kindliness as well as reproof is indicated in the repetition
of the name. Careful and troubled.—The one word indicates inward anxiety, the other
outward bustle.

Ver. 42. One thing is needful.—The food of the soul—feeding on the bread of life ; this is
“ the good part ”—the choice portion which Mary has chosen. A curious variation which is
founded on good MS. authority is given in the margin of the R.V.—“ but few things are
needful or one.” This evidently arises from a misunderstanding of Christ’s words, as though
by “the one thing needful” He meant one dish instead of Martha’s more bountiful provision ;
i.e. “there is need for few things, indeed one would be sufficient.” But apart from the
evident mistake as to Christ’s words, any reference of the kind to the literal food seems trivial.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—16.


The Heralds of the King.—The true preparation for work for Christ is the
clear sight and deep feeling of the immensity of the field, the consequent
pressure of need, and the small supply of labourers. These seventy had but a
few villages in a little strip of country. We have the world brought within
arm’s length, by steam and electricity, by commerce and rule. Seventy mes-
sengers to the people of Southern Palestine in our Lord’s time was a far larger
proportion than all Qhristian missionaries bear to the population of the world.
Such a realisation of the immensity of the work will first send a man to prayer.
God is the Lord of the harvest, and the fact that it is “ His” is the strongest
argument in the mouth of the faithful petitioner. Surely He will take means
to secure His own property. The inspiration to go forth must come from Him ;
put, note, that the man who prays must be ready to go himself, if he is sent,
To tell men that they are to be as sheep among wolves is strange encouragement
to begin work with. But “I send you” is safety. He will take care of His
servants going on His errands. se

I. Outfit.—They are to travel light and to trust. This provision was ex-
pressly declared by Christ to apply only to the present case (chap. xxii. 35); but
the principle underlying it is of perpetual validity. They who would do Christ’s

_work must be unencumbered, and should be free from anxiety.

II. Conduct on the road.—Eastern salutations were and are long-winded
affairs, and hollow to boot. Courtesy is not waste of time ; but much conven-
tionality has to be brushed aside when a man is in haste and pressed by some


217


CHAP. X. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


great duty. We ought to be misers of time in Christ’s service, and not allow
social ceremonies to rob us of too much of it.

III. Lodgings and entertainment.—Christ’s emissary is not to pick out the
best-looking house in the village, but take the first he comes to. A courteous
greeting is in place there, and prepares the way for the message. An obvious
desire for the welfare of those to whom we carry the gospel is the indispensable
condition of success. We must win confidence for ourselves before we can win
a higher trust for Jesus. But the messenger is not to expect that his greeting
will always be taken as he meant it. ‘The son of peace,” of course, means
one who has a nature akin to the peace invoked. Only such will receive the
blessing. If the lips to which it is offered will not drink, it shall not be as
water spilled on the ground, but will flow back to the source. No Christian
work is lost. It produces reflex blessedness in the doer. Kindly feelings, even
when spurned, warm the heart where they are kindled. Once in the house, the
messenger is to stop there, whether the accommodation be good or bad. There
must be a plain disregard of personal advantage, if any good is to be done.
“The labourer is worthy of his hire”; but he has “no purse,” so he cannot
take money ; and if he gets enough to eat, so that he can work, he is to stay
where he is, however plain the fare. If once the suspicion is raised that selfish
motives actuate the messenger of Christ, he may as well stop work. If the
labourer deserves his hire, it is equally true that the hire deserves labour, and
binds to toil, not to indolence.

IV. The work to be done.—The power of miraculous healing is given, and
the rousing message is to be delivered. Both work and word apply especially to
the seventy, but both point to present duties. Care for physicat well-being i,
part of the Christian’s work, and will help to get a hearing for his proper
message, as medical missionaries have proved.

V. The responsibilities incurred by those who rejected the message. —The
solemn command to leave the rejecting city with a last, repeated testimony
closes this charge. Wiping off the dust of the city was meant to symbolise the
rupture of all connection with it; but even after that the message was to be
repeated, if, perchance, some might hear at that last moment. How the yearn-
ing of the Divine love speaks in that command! Unbelief makes no difference
to the fact. The kingdom will come all the same, but the aspect of its coming
changes. It no longer comes as a blessing, but as a foe. The seventy had but
little time for their work ; for Jesus was close behind them, and they had to
leave unproductive fields more quickly than we are allowed to do. But even for
us times occasionally come when we have to give up efforts, and try whether
withdrawal may do more than continuance. The charge passes into the awful
declarations of judgment, first on the rejecting city, and then on the seats of our
Lord’s ministry in Galilee, which was now closed. Note the clear recognition of
degrees in criminality and retribution, measured by degrees of light. Note the
selection of the Gentile cities of worst fame: Sodom with her crimes, Tyre and
Sidon—the very emblems, in the Prophets, of proud enmity to God. And these
sties of lust and greed are to have a lighter doom than the cities of Israel.
Why? Because to reject Christ is the worst of sins, containing in its most
unmingled form the essence of all sin, and auguring such alienation and aver-
sion from the light as could only come from love of darkness. What must He
have thought of Himself who said that not to accept Him was the sin deserving
the deepest condemnation? Note, too, the deep pathos of this lament, drawn
like a sob from the heart of Jesus. The Judge weeps over the criminals, but.
His tears do not make Him falter in His judgment. Though Christ would—did—
give His life to avert the ruin, He cannot, when He sits on the great white throne,
turn the sentence away from those who have dragged it down on themselves by
turning away from Him, proclaimed in their unbelieving ears.— Maclaren.


278


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. X.





SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 1—16.


Vers. 1-16. Lessons from the Seventy.

I. Unknown workers.—They were
the first band of that vast army of
unknown Christian workers whose
names, though written in heaven, have
been scarcely known and never pre-
served on earth.

II. Instructions for Christian work-
ers.—1. They were to go “two and
two.” A hint that Christian workers
should work in sympathy and _ har-
mony. 2. “Before His face.” All
true Christian work is that of pre-
paring the way for Christ. He must
follow, or our work is vain. 3. Prayer
for the work itself, especially for
“labourers.” Do we thus pray daily ?
Or are we merely content with work-
ing ourselves, as though we could
accomplish all? 4. Courage — still
needed, for some will mock, others

_ will misrepresent our aim, and ques-
tion our sincerity and zeal. 5. Sim-


plicity of aim. Christian workers have —


not to study their own pleasure or
convenience or profit, but to work
with a single eye to God’s glory in the
salvation of souls.

III. The end of Christian work.—
We cannot heal the sick, but we can
discourage all which hurts the bodily
health of man. The great end, how-
ever, is to bring nigh to men “the
kingdom of God.”

IV. Some sources of consolation for
workers.—1. Success. Christ does not
tell us not to value success, nor for-
bid us to rejoice at it; but He tells
us not to rejoice in success as the
result of our own efforts or gifts.
Lest success should make us vain, He
tells us that it is better to rejoice most
of all in our relations to God, that by
His mercy our “‘ names are written in
heaven.” 2. Safety. ‘“ Nothing shall
by any means hurt you.” All things
will work together for our good.
3. Christ as our refuge and support.
He rejoices in our success. All things
we need are in Him. He will make
us see and hear things which many


saint of old have in vain desired.—
Taylor.


The Mission of the Seventy.—It is
remarkable that the comparative abor-
tiveness of the first evangelistic move-
ment by the twelve did not prevent
Jesus from repeating the experiment
some time after on a still more exten-
sive scale.

I. The motive of this second mis-
sion.—The motive was the same as in
the case of the first, as were also the
instructions to the missionaries. Jesus
still felt deep compassion for the
multitudes, and, hoping against hope,
made a new attempt to save the lost
sheep. He would have all men called at
least to the fellowship of the kingdom,
even though few should ke chosen to it.

Il. The results.—The immediate
results were promising. Christ was
gratified at this, albeit knowing from
past experience, as well as by Divine
insight, that the faith and repentance
of many were only too likely to be
evanescent as the early dew. When
the seventy returned to report their
great success, He hailed it as an omen
of the downfall of Satan’s kingdom,
and rejoiced in spirit.

Ill. Christ's warning.—After con-
gratulating His disciples on their
success, and expressing His own satis-
faction with the facts reported, Jesus
spoke a warning word. He gave a
timely caution against elation and
vanity. It is a word in season to all
who are very zealous in the work of
evangelism, especially such as are
crude in knowledge and grace. It
hints at the possibility of their own
spiritual health being injured by their
very zeal in seeking the salvation
of others. This may happen in many
ways. Success may make the evan-
gelists vain, and they may begin to
sacrifice unto their own net. They
may fall under the dominion of the
devil through their very joy that he
is subject unto them. They may


279


CHAP. X.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





despise those who have been less
successful, or denounce them as deficient
in zeal. They may fall into carnal
security respecting their own spiritual
’ state, deeming it impossible that any-
thing can go wrong with those who
are so devoted, and whom God has
so greatly owned: an obvious as well
as dangerous mistake ; for Judas doubt-
less took part in the Galilean mission,
and, for aught we know, was as suc-
cessful as his fellow-disciples in casting
out devils. Graceless men may be
employed for a season as agents in
promoting the work of grace in the
hearts of others. Usefulness does not
necessarily imply goodness. Christ’s
solemn warning is not meant to
discourage or discountenance zeal,
but suggest the need of watchfulness
and self-examination.— Bruce.


The Need of the Mission.—There
was need for such a mission, as the
district on the east of Jordan had
been little visited by Jesus hitherto.
These men are sent as lambs among
wolves, but two by two, for mutual
support. Much is made here of the
visible means they were to employ in
their mission.

I. Their message was urgent.—
“The kingdom of God is come nigh
unto you.”

II. Their manner of life was the
simplest.— “ Remain, eating and drink-
ing such things as they give.”

III. Their commission was authori-
tative.—“ They receive you not...
it shall be more tolerable for Sodom.”
This is a most impressive point. To
hear the gospel preached is not only
a great privilege, but a great responsi-
bility.— Hastings.


The Character of the Mission.—
Notice—

I. Its place in the Gospel.—The
three ‘ studies,” as we might call
them, of the varieties of would-be
ministers, are set, surely not by
accident, immediately before the mission
of the seventy.

II. The tenderness, the humanity,


280


of the “two and two.’—If it were
possible, we would always have it so.
What strength, what comfort, is in
the not solitary but sympathetic
ministry! What have some of us not
owed to the fellowship and the com-
munion of a brother !

III. The destination of the seventy.
—It is a parable for all ministers.
The seventy were not Christ’s sub-
stitutes—they were His forerunners.
They were not sent instead of Him—
they were sent whither He would
come. Has this trait of ministry been
prominent in our own? There is a
ministry—it is no imaginary thing—
which has no feature in it of the
precursorship of Jesus Christ. It
has no note of the voice, ‘ There
cometh One after me.” There is more
of parable still.

IV. The spirit of the seventy is
a spirit of intentness—‘“ This one
thing I do.” His heart is in his work.
He has no time for salutations.
King’s business requireth haste.”
Despatch, not loitering—and, in order
to this, a thorough faith in his mes-
sage, a deep conviction of its truth,
its urgency, and its power—the very
opposite of that uncertainty, of that
suspense, which the modern evangelist
too often counts the proof of intelli-
gence and wide reading, and an open
mind. Thus intent upon one thing—

V. The messenger is not fastidious
as to his quarters, his company, or his
fare.—There is a lesson in all this for
the ministry of our own age. How
prone it is to resent and exaggerate
inconveniences—to see the dark side,
which there ever must be, of the place
assigned, and of the circumstances
surrounding! How rash, sometimes,
is the first choice—how incessant,
sometimes, the restlessness afterwards !

VI. The message.—1. It is a mes-
sage of peace. We are to bring peace
into homes by bringing peace into
hearts. All that vexing and harassing
self-torture, which is, being inter-
preted, the heart at war with its God,
and therefore at war with itself and
with its brother—we bring the cure


“The


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. X.


Se tn we Ee al ad) en aes en aie 2


of it, and it is the very reason of
our coming. 2. The other word put
into our mouth is “kingdom ”—God’s
kingdom. To carry into a great law-
less earth the idea of a rule and the
tidings of a Ruler—to be witnesses to
an order and a harmony, a will and a
hand out of sight, so that we can tell
not only of a rest after death, and a
hope laid up in heaven, but even
realise it now,—what an office, what a
dignity, is this of Christ’s seventy, that
they should go into homes, that they
should commune with human beings, in
the tone not of conjecture but of cer-
tainty, and as speaking not of remote
possibilities but of instant and present
realities concerning a kingdom that is
already ruling over all and shall one
day ‘‘come”—come into sight, and
come in glory! This is the office of
the evangelist of the nineteenth age,
as it was of the seventy in the earliest.

VII. We are not overlooking the
supernatural endowments of the
seventy for their peculiar and excep-
tional mission. Miraculous gifts were
then and are no longer the accom-
paniments of the ministerial office.
What then? We go on our way
unencumbered by what would be to
us mere impediments and hindrances,
diverting the eyes of men from the
spiritual to the carnal, and contribut-
ing nothing to the real enterprise,
which is the turning from darkness
to light, and from the power of Satan
unto God. These things are more than
miracles; they are “signs” of Jesus
Christ, finger-posts pointing to the
invisible, coruscations of a world out
of sight, of a kingdom “nigh” and


“to come.”—Vaughan.


Ver. 1. “ Seventy.”—It may be that
the number ‘‘seventy” had reference to
the popular Jewish idea of there being
that number of nations and languages
in the world—an idea founded on the
enumeration of nations in Gen. x.
In that case, as the number of the
apostles corresponds to that of the tribes
of Israel, the choice of the seventy
would prefigure the evangelisation of


the world. ‘The seventy disciples
are to be regarded as a net of love
which the Lord threw out in Israel ”
(Riggenbach).


“Two and two before His face.”—It
is remarkable how little stress has
been laid on this statement. All we
know, however, is—

I. Their errand; and—

II. The fact that they were held
worthy, through their prompt and
obedient discipleship to the Master,
to be made forerunners of His own
ministry.—On what they actually did
or how they were received, on their
after-history, there is absolute silence.
But this single sentence contains two
or three principles of the Christian
life in man. 1. In order to the full
reign of Christ anywhere there must
be necessary preparation. All our
approaches to religious truth, to
spiritual power or holiness or peace,
are gradual, The best are not best at
once, any more than the very bad are
worst at once. 2. All personal efforts
for extending truth and increasing
righteousness in the world are really
parts of the Lord’s work, and are
dependent on His spiritual power.—
Huntington.


The Significance of the Number.
—As the number of the twelve
apostles appears to have reference
to the number of the patriarchs, so
do these seventy disciples recall the
number of the elders who were called
up into Mount Sinai to behold the
wondrous vision of God, and to eat
and drink in His _ presence—who,
moreover, assisted Moses to govern
the people.—Lurgon.


“Two and two.”—As they were to
bear witness of Christ, they would
fulfil the legal requirement, ‘‘ At the
mouth of two or three witnesses,” etc.
Where two are associated together
in the name of Jesus, there is a
“threefold cord which is not quickly
broken ” (see Eccles. iv. 9-12).


“ Whither He Himself would come.”—
281


CHAP. X.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





The seventy were sent to prepare the
inhabitants of towns and _ villages
throughout the land for the coming of
Christ. They were (1) to give in-
formation concerning Him, and (2) to
excite longing for His presence:
preparation of both mind and heart.


Ver. 2. ‘ The harvest truly is great.”

I, The inclination and desire of multi-
tudes to hear Divine truth is God’s
harvest.

II. It is only by manifold kinds of
labour that this harvest can be
gathered in.

III. Those only are effective workers
who have been sent forth by the Lord
of the harvest.


“Pray ye therefore.’—This we do
when we intelligently say, ‘ Thy king-
dom come.” The very sending out of
the seventy was of itself an answer to
the prayer, which on the occasion of
sending forth the twelve Jesus urged
His disciples to offer.


Vers. 3-9. Fireside Ministry.—These
verses are the pith and substance of
Christ’s counsels to “the seventy.”
They were to go forth on a perilous
but fruitful errand.

I. All really helpful human work
must be rooted and grounded in
loving friendship, and trust in the
men it seeks to cleanse and ennoble.
—IJnvite trust, win love, be not in a
hurry, make your mission domestic, be
sociable, friendly, and human. Stay
long enough to gain affection and
recognise brotherhood. This was our
Lord’s own method.

II. The next stage is that of
compassionate healing.—Supply phy-
sical aid to meet the acutest domestic
need. Display brotherly pity in the
form of restorative help to the afflicted.
No one can fail to trace the luminous
personality of the Master here.
Christianity, like its Author, is essen-
tially healing.

IlI. But the crowning service of
man to man is the interpretation of
life in the light of Divine ministration.


282


—The missioners did not reach the
climax of their work till they said,
“The kingdom of God is come nigh
unto you.” To this sympathetic
ministry of interpretation of the work
of the Spirit of God every disciple of
Christ has received an authoritative
call, and by the earnest discharge of
its various duties the demons of doubt
and despair are driven off the field,
and the kingdom of God is established
and extended.—Clifford.


Vers. 3, 4. Freedom from Anxiety.—
These messengers were (1) to have no
fears concerning their own personal
safety ; (2) no anxieties with regard
to the supply of their material neces-
sities ; (3) the ground of their confi-
dence was to be their trust in Him
who had sent them forth (“J” in
ver. 3 is emphatic).


Ver. 4. Three Sins to be avoided.—
Three forms of sin are to be specially
avoided by the minister of Christ:
avarice, luxury, and worldly anxiety.


Vers. 4, 5. Courtesy.

I. Courtesy is not to interfere with
duty.

II. Courtesy is itself to be conse-
crated into duty (the salutation on
entering a house).


Ver. 5. “ Peace.” —1. The heart of the
believer is filled by a peace which the
world can neither give nor take away.
2. The desire of the believer is to make
others partakers of this peace.


Vers. 5, 6. “ Peace be to this house.”
—The greeting of peace on the part
of Christ’s messenger is like a magnet
which draws to itself what is of the
same nature with it. Even when it
is not received the blessing comes back
to the giver—like the dove to the Ark.
The Spirit seeks what is akin to itself,
and where that is wanting finds no
abode.


Ver. 6. “Son of peace.”—The formal
benediction, like other means of grace,
depends for its efficacy on the temper


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


OHAP. X.





of those to whom it is given. The
message of peace is not defeated even
if it be rejected: the duty done in
proclaiming it satisfies the conscience
of the messenger and fills his heart
with a deeper peace.


Ver. 7. “‘ The labourer,” etc.—What
the minister of Christ receives for his
sustenance is not an alms: the message
he brings entitles him to it. The
minister of Christ is (1) neither to
seek for great temporal prosperity,
(2) nor from a false shame to refuse
adequate sustenance from those whom
he serves in spiritual things.


Vers. 10-12. Words of Menace.—
These menacing words concerning the
towns which, without regard to the
signs of the times, would reject His
messengers lead Jesus to speak of
those cities which have for so long
enjoyed His presence without profiting
by it. In leaving their neighbourhood
for ever He addresses to them the
warning that follows (vers. 13-16).—
Godet.


Ver. 11. “Js come nigh unto you.”—
The kingdom of God may come nigh to
us, and yet we may be “far from the
kingdom of God.” In the former case
we may remain passive or may offer
resistance; in the latter we begin to
yield to the Divine attraction »1d to
co-operate with God’s effort to save us,


Ver. 12. “ More tolerable... for
Sodom.” —Cf. Lam. iv. 6: “For the
iniquity of the daughter of My people
is greater than the sin of Sodom”
(RV.


Vers. 12, 13. ‘Sodom, Tyre, and
Sidon.”—The inhabitants of these cities
had been exceedingly debased by sensual
indulgences, but in two points the in-
habitants of the Galilean cities were
worse thanthem. 1. Their consciences
were seared and hardened by resistance
to spiritual influences. 2. Their hearts
were ossified by religious self-com-
placency and conceit.


Ver. 13. “ Sitting in sackcloth,” etc.—
After the manner of the older prophets
Christ personifies Tyre and Sidon, and
represents them as women clothed in
sackcloth and besprinkled with ashes,
and seated on the ground in sign of
mourning.


Vers. 13-15. Unrecorded labours of
Christ.

I. Note the hint here given of the
multiplicity of Christ's labours: these
were cities in which, as St. Matthew
says, ‘‘most of His mighty works were
done,” yet the Gospels preserve no
record of any one of them. ‘“ Many
other things Jesus did, the which, if
they should be written every one, I
suppose that even the world itself would
not contain the books that should be
written” (John xxi. 35).

II. The extent of Divine omni-
science.—Christ speaks as knowing not
only what has happened and what will
happen, but what would have happened.


Ver. 14. “ More. tolerable.”—Some
light is here cast upon the “in-
termediate state” of human souls.
Temporal punishment had been inflicted
on these guilty inhabitants of Tyre and
Sidon ; their final judgment was yet to
come.


Ver. 15. “ Capernaum.”—The in-
dignation of Jesus takes a deeper tone
as He thinks of the city which had
been most highly favoured, and upon
which His teaching and mighty works
had produced so little effect. He had
been so identified with Capernaum
that it was called His city (Matt. ix. 1);
He had made it the headquarters of
His work, and had spared no pains
to win its inhabitants to become His
disciples. The responsibility incurred
by refusal of His grace is proportioned
to the greatness of love He had
manifested.


Ver. 16. The Disciples are Ambassa-
dors of Christ.—As the disciples con-
fined themselves to reproducing in their
narratives the acts and teaching of


283


CHAP, X.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





Jesus, those who heard them virtually
saw and heard Jesus Himself; the
attitude, therefore, that was taken up
towards the messengers was an attitude
taken up towards Jesus Himself. In
the same way as Jesus did that which
the Father had shown Him, and
taught that which He had received
from the Father, acceptance or rejection
of Him was equivalent to acceptance
or rejection of God Himself: cf.
Matt. x. 40-42, and John xiii. 20,
where the same thought is applied to
the ministry of the twelve; and
1 Thess. iv. 8, where it is applied to
the preachers of the gospel in general.
—CGodet.


“ He that heareth you,” etc.—We, too,
should see in the messengers who come
to us in Christ’s stead (2 Cor. v. 20),
not the men, but the office.


The Office of the Ministry.—This is
a remarkable commendation of the
outward ministry.

I. Nothing ought to be a stronger
encouragement to us to embrace the
doctrine of the gospel than to learn
that this is the highest worship of
God, and a sacrifice of the sweetest
odour, to hear Him speaking by
human lips, and to yield subjection
to His word, which is brought to us
by men, in the same manner as if
He were descending from heaven, or
making known His will to us by
angels.

II. Our confidence is established,
and all doubt is removed, when we
learn that the testimony of our
salvation, when delivered to us by men
whom God has sent, is not less worthy
of credit than if His voice resounded
from heaven.—Calvin.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 17—24.


The Joy of the Disciples and the Joy of their Lord.—It is not easy to say
whether it is for the convenience of his narrative that St. Luke omits various
intermediate events and connects the return of the seventy directly with their
sending forth, or whether some of them returned so speedily that the historian
found nothing important to record as having happened in the interval. But,
whether sooner or later, these ambassadors of Christ returned again with joy.

I. The cause of their exultation—Our Lord had not given them, as He had
given the twelve, a commission to cast out devils; but some tentative efforts
of theirs, some ventures of faith in this direction, had been crowned with success.
An acknowledgment that this surpassed at once their commission and their
hopes seems to lie in their words: ‘‘ Lord, even the devils are subject unto us.”
Such exultation was most natural; yet was there in it something of peril for
those who entertained it, and for their own spiritual life. They lay, it is evident,
more stress upon “are subject unto us” than upon “through Thy name.” There
is no more perilous moment for any man than that when he first discovers that
he too can wield powers of the world to come—that thesc wait upon his beck;
lest he should find in this a motive to self-elation, instead of giving all the glory
to God. The disciples at the present moment were exposed to this temptation,
as is evident from the earnest warning which the Lord presently addresses to
them, suggesting to them a safer and a truer joy than that which they were
now too incautiously entertaining.

IT. The exultation of Jesus.—As Christ drew proofs of a victory over Satan,
which must have been accomplished by Himself, from His own expelling of
devils (Matt. xii. 28, 29), so He found proofs of the same victory in like works
done by His disciples. The power of the strong man could not but indeed be
broken, when not merely the Stronger Himself could spoil his goods at His
pleasure, but the very weaklings among His servants could do the same. These
successes of theirs were tokens, but nothing more, of the triumphant progress
of the work ‘This great triumph of the kingdom of good over the kingdom of


284


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. X.





evil in their respective heads, which Christ evermore in the spirit saw, at
certain moments of His life He realised with intenser vividness than at others,
And this moment of the return of the seventy was one of these solemn and
festal moments of His life. He employs the imperfect tense, to make clear
that He had foreseen the glorious issue even when He sent them forth. This
which they now announce to Him is even as He had surely expected: “I saw,
as I sent you forth, Satan fall like lightning from heaven.” Already He
beheld the whole idol-worship of the heathen world, whereof Satan was the soul
and infofming principle, giving way, its splendour departing, its oracles dumb,
and its temples forsaken,

III. The enlarged commission.—“ Behold, I give unto you power,” etc.
Hitherto He had not given them this power: they, as we have seen, had in
faith anticipated some portion of it; and He, finding they were the men to
make the right use of it, now imparts it to them in all its fulness, according
to that law of His kingdom, “To him that hath shall be given.” The poisonous
adder and stinging scorpion are symbols and representatives of all that has
most power and most will to hurt and to harm—of all forms of deadliest malice
exercised by Satan and his servants against the faithful. Amid all this deadliest
malice of the enemy they should go, themselves unharmed; and, shod with
the preparation of the gospel of peace, should tread it all under their feet;
‘and nothing shall by any means hurt you.”

IV. The word of warning.—‘‘ Notwithstanding in this rejoice not,” etc. They
were not forbidden altogether to rejoice in these mighty powers as exercised
by them—forbidden only to make them the chiefest matter of their joy. The-
reason is obvious. These a man might possess, and yet remain unsanctified still :
for was there not a Judas among the twelve? These at best were the privilege
only of a few; they could not therefore contain the essence of a Christian’s joy.
There was that wherein they might rejoice with a joy which should not separate
them from any, the least of all their brethren—a joy which they had in common
with all. There was that in which they might rejoice without fear—namely,
in the eternal love of God, who had so loved as to ordain them unto everlasting life.

The Lord has administered, where He saw this was needed, a wholesome
rebuke to that pride of which He detected the germs in His disciples ; but this
does not hinder Him from rejoicing in this new victory of the kingdom of light
over the kingdom of darkness—a matter of the greater joy, that it was these
“ babes” by whose hands this victory had been won; they of the household
were dividing the spoil. Christ here thanks His Father for two things: first,
that He has hidden from the wise and prudent; and, secondly, that what He
has hidden from them He has revealed to babes—the hiding and revealing being
recognised by Him as alike His Father’s work, and the judgment and the
grace alike matters for which He renders thanks. For a moment, as His
thoughts carry His mind up into heaven into the eternal counsels of the Father,
He remains in rapt but serene meditation, and words break from His lips
concerning the ineffable relations of the Father and the Son. Then turning
to His disciples, He confides to them the secret that He Himself is that perfect
revelation of the Father for whom all the sages and saints of the Old Testament
had longed.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 17—24.


Vers. 17-19. The Return of the ing, full of encouragement, for Christ’s
Seventy.—A beautiful and monitory ministers of this generation.
conclusion to the history, full of warn- I. I know not if we are in any


285


CHAP. X.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





danger from the particular feeling
which was their snare.—Some few of
us may have been privileged to see
fruits of our ministry. There have
been times when it was impossible to
disguise the consciousness of something
really done in the great war of good
and evil, of Christ and Christ’s foe,
when the minister would have been
an ungrateful rather than a humble
man if he had not paused to thank
God and take courage.

II. Christ recognises the blessed
achievement, and sees in it a sure
token of future triumph.—He does
not correct their exultation by pointing
to the small extent or the precarious
nature of such successes. His word
of correction takes a different turn.

III. He corrects the joy of success
by the joy of safety——Is there any-
thing of selfishness here ?—as though
He said, “Care not for the sheep;
think only of the shepherd: if his
name is safe in the writing of the
house of Israel, let the wolf wander at
will, let the wolf come and seize and
scatter”? Such a question may answer
itself, and leave us free to read the
gracious heart that spoke thus to His
own. Isit not too true that these hearts
and souls of ours are easily hurt and
spoiled by the contemplation of even
that which Christ Himself may have
wrought by us? There is an en-
feebling action in all standing still to
erect trophies. Therefore, while his
Lord recognises the work done, and
goes beyond His servants in estimating
its significance, He soon interposes His
“notwithstanding,” and with it His
gracious reminder of a joy entirely
wholesome—the joy of the personal
safety, and of the name written in
heaven. The reproof here is not for
the thinking too much, but for the not
thinking enough of the self’s self of
the man. It can never do us harm
to dwell on what Christ has done for
us. ‘He has written my name in
heaven”—there is no self-righteousness,
there is no self-complacency, in this
thought. It is He who has written
the name—it is He who bids me read it.


286


IV. But is my name written in
heaven?—How am I to know it?
These seventy were common men.
But one thing they had, and it was
their all. They had given themselves
to Christ ; they had left their all to
follow Him. Our names were written
in heaven when Christ shed for us
His precious blood—when He caused us
to be separately incorporated in His
Church-—when by the secret working
of His Spirit He convinced us of sin
and aroused us to flee from it. These
were real acts. In all those ways the
names were written. Rejoice in that
writing, and it is written for you.
Rejoice in it, and it is there still.
Rejoice in it, and walk warily as well
as thankfully in that joy.—Vaughan.


Ver. 17. “ Returned with joy.” —Had
they to report that their message had
been everywhere favourably received 2
Alas! they were not thinking so much
of that as of the glory they had won.
Christ had given them power to heal
the sick, without specially mentioning
the casting out of devils. Apparently
they had exceeded the letter of His
instructions, and He had graciously
given them success in their enterprise.
The joy of the disciples, though it
almost verged upon spiritual pride, is
communicated to the heart of Jesus,
where it takes a nobler and purer
form.


Ver. 18. “J beheld Satan . . . fall.”
—The victories of the disciples over
Satanic power was a presage of the
complete overthrow of the kingdom of
evil. In the deliverance of the pos-
sessed Jesus beheld the beginning of
the end, and spoke of the end as
already in view. Not only would in-
dividual souls be delivered from oppres-
sion, but the nations sunk in bondage
to the usurped authority of the evil
one would be freed from the yoke.


“As lightning.”—Wonder not that
the devils are subject to you, for their
prince is fallen from heaven. Although
men saw not this, I saw it, wao see


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. X,





what is invisible. He fell as lightning,
because he was a bright archangel and
Lucifer, and is plunged into darkness.
If then he is fallen, what will not his
servants (the inferior spirits) suffer !
—Theophylact.


“From heaven.”—I.e. from high
estate.—Cf. Isa. xiv. 12; Matt. xi. 23;
Rey, xii. 4.


Ver. 19. ‘“ Serpents and scorpions.” —
These are ever connected in Holy Scrip-
ture with what is noxious to man.
Gr Gonwimee. Reve “xi. 9) "xx, 2’
Nom? xxi 6; Acts “xxvii. 3; Ps.
xci, 13; Rev. ix. 3-10, etc.


Ver. 20. Two Kinds of Joy.—1. That
inspired by a sense of power, by attain-
ments in the spiritual life—a joy liable
to be mixed with pride and self-seeking
—and therefore dangerous. 2. That
inspired by a sense of God’s mercy and
love in Christ—a joy in which there is
no danger.


“ Names written in heaven.”—This
mode of speech is often found in Scrip-
ture. It occurs in the law (Exod.
xxxii. 32), in the Psalms (lxix. 28),
in the prophets (Isa. iv. 3; Dan. xii. 1),
and in the writings of the apostles
(Phil. iv. 3; Heb. xii. 23 ; Rev. xiii. 8).


The Book of Life.—\. There is a book
of life: an election of grace. 2. There
are names written in this book: it
is an election of persons. 3. We may
know that our names are written
in it, otherwise we could not rejoice.
4. We should give all diligence to make
sure of this cause of rejoicing.


Ver. 21. “ Hid from the wise.” —The
meaning is that no man can obtain
faith by his own acuteness, but only by
the secret illumination of the Spirit.


“ Wise and prudent.”—This refer-
ence suggests the thought that these
evangelistic efforts were regarded with
disfavour by the refined, fastidious
classes of Jewish religious society.


This is in itself probable. There are
always men in the Church, intelligent,
wise, and even good, to whom popular
religious movements are distasteful.
The noise, the excitement, the extrava-
gances, the delusions, the misdirection
of zeal, the rudeness of the agents, the
instability of the converts—all these
things offend them. The same class
of minds would have taken offence at
the evangelistic work of the twelve
and the seventy, for undoubtedly it
was accompanied with the same draw-
backs. The agents were ignorant ;
they had few ideas in their heads;
they understood little of Divine truth ;
their sole qualification was that they
were earnest and could preach repent-
ance well. Doubtless, also, there was
plenty of noise and excitement among
the multitudes who heard them preach ;
and we certainly know that their zeal
was both ill-informed and short-lived.
—Bruce.


“ Thou hast hid... hast revealed.” —
This implies—

I. That all do not obey the gospel
arises from no want of power on the
part of God, who could easily have
brought all the creatures into subjec-
tion to His government.

II. That some arrive at faith, while
others remain hardened and obstinate,
is accomplished by His free election ;
for drawing some, and passing by
others, He alone makes a distinction
among men, whose condition by nature
is alike.—Calvin.


“ Revealed . . . unto babes.”—There
is no hard-and-fast line between the
two classes; some of the “ wise and
prudent ” may by humility become as
“babes,” while some of those who
are really poor and ignorant may,
by being wise in their own conceit,
shut themselves out from the revelation
granted to “ babes.” Pride of intellect
is condemned to blindness, but to the
simplicity of heart which longs for the
truth a revelation is given.


“ Aid . . . revealed.” —The first clause
287


CHAP. X.


a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





is a stepping-stone to the second. It
is on the second that the Saviour’s
mind rests, as exhibiting the object
which He really had in view when
He praised His heavenly Father. He
would have rejoiced still more if the
wise and intellectual, as well as the
babes, had recognised His character
and accepted His claims. The sense
of the passage is: “I thank Thee,
that though Thou hast hidden these
things from the wise and prudent,
Thou hast revealed them unto babes”
(Morison).


Ver. 22. “ No man knoweth,” etc.

I. It is the gift of the Father, that
the Son is known, because by His
Spirit He opens the eyes of our mind
to discern the glory of Christ, which
otherwise would have been hidden
from us.

Tl. The Father, who dwells in in-
accessible light, and is in Himself
incomprehensible, is revealed to us by
the Son, because the Son is the lively
image of Him, so that it is in vain to
seek for Him elsewhere.—Calvin.


Knowledge of the Father and of the
Son.—I. There is in His existence as
_Son a mystery which the Father alone
comprehends.

II. The perfect knowledge of the
Father is alone possessed by the Son.

III. No man can partake of this
knowledge of the Father but by the
Son.


“ To whom the Son will reveal Him.”
—The future conquest of the world
by Jesus and His disciples rests on
the relation which He sustains to God,


and with which He identifies His
people. The perfect knowledge of
God is, in the end, the sceptre of the
universe. —Godet.


Vers. 23, 24. “ Blessed are the eyes,”
etc.—Yet certain generations of Israel
had seen very remarkable things: one
had seen the wonders of the Exodus,


and the sublimities connected with |


the law-giving at Sinai; another the
miracles wrought by Elijah and Elisha ;
and successive generations had been
privileged to listen to the not less
wonderful oracles of God, spoken by
David, Solomon, Isaiah, and the rest
of the prophets. But the things
witnessed by the twelve eclipsed the
wonders of all bygone ages; for a
greater than Moses, or Elijah, or David,
or Solomon, or Isaiah, was here, and
the promise to Nathanael was being
fulfilled. Heaven had been opened,
and the angels of God—the spirits of
wisdom, and power, and love—were
ascending and descending on the Son
of man.— Bruce.


Ver. 24. “ Kings.”—Such persons
as David, Solomon, and Hezekiah,
some of whom were both prophets and
kings. Of. Gen. xlix. 18, and the last
words of David, a royal prophecy of
Christ ; 2 Sam. xxiii. 1-5, especially
the close, ‘ For this is all my salvation,
and all my desire, although He make
it not to grow.” The blessing was not
in what the disciples obtained, but in
what they saw. The true knowledge
of God the Father, and of Jesus Christ
His Son, was the pledge of all other
blessings. —Popular Commentary.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 25—37.
Who 1s my Neighbour ? versus Whose Neighbour am I ?—This lawyer merely


wished to test our Lord’s orthodoxy.
do to inherit eternal life.
and practice, and that pinches.


He was quite sure that he knew what to
Christ shifts the question from intellect to conscience
The scribe’s wish to justify himself refers to


his failure in conduct, which, though unaccused, he tacitly confesses. The
obtuseness as well as sensitiveness of conscience is brought out by the fact that
he evidently thinks that he has kept the first requirement of perfect and all-
engrossing love to God, and is only sensible of defect in the second.


288


i a


>


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. OHAP. X.
ve A EE eae ee eee ed ee Se


I. The question, meant to excuse, but really condemning.—“ And who is
my neighbour?” ‘The lawyer pleads the vagueness of the precept, and wishes
a clear definition of terms, that he may know whom he is bound to love as
himself, and whom he is not. He fancies that love is only to run like a canal
in a straight, artificial cutting. He will try to love all within the circle, but it
must be clearly drawn ; and, in the meantime, he does not feel any stirrings of
love to anybody outside his own door. Is it not clear that to him love is simply
a matter of obligation? and does not such a conception show that he has no
notion of what it really is, nor has ever exercised it? ‘Tell me whom [ must
love” means, ‘‘ Tell me whom I may escape the necessity of loving”; and he who
says that has not a glimmer of what love is. In all matters of Christian living,
the anxiety to have the bounds marked within which the action of the Christian
spirit is to be confined, is a bad sign. It indicates latent reluctance and a total
misconception of the free, spontaneous, all-embracing outgoings of the life which
comes from Jesus.

II. The details of the lovely story.—It is not a parable which needs to be
interpreted; but a story framed as an example, and needing not to be translated
but copied. It gives three pictures—of the poor victim, the selfishly absorbed
passers-by, and the compassionate helper. The sufferer is “a man,” nothing
more. The others are designated by profession or nationality, but he has no
label round his neck to ticket him as “neighbour.” That is the beginning of
an answer to the lawyer. The picture of the man’s desperate condition as he
lay bleeding and insensible might well stir pity. What would the reality do?
The two companion sketches of priest and Levite tell us. It does nothing. A
glance, perhaps a thought of personal danger, but,.at any rate, no stirrings of
pity, and no pause, but, in the face of such a spectacle, they pass on. There
is no sign that they were hindered by any pressure of time or duty from
stopping to help. They did see, and it never struck them tnat they had
anything to do in the matter. Is it an exaggerated picture of the conduct
to which human nature is ever prone? How much less sorrow there would
be in the world if we were not all guilty in this matter, and had not left
misery which is forced on our notice to bleed or weep itself to death without
lifting a finger to prevent it! The capacity for ignoring wretchedness and
need is wonderful. Engrossment with self shuts eyes and heart to the piteous
sights that fill the world. Christ might have taught His lesson without
making the unsympathising pair a priest and a Levite. His boldness in thus
weighing His story with unnecessary offence is striking. He sharpens it to a
spear-point, and is careless about offending if He can reach the conscience.
Toothless generalities offend nobody, and therefore do nobody good. ‘Thou
art the man ” needs to be pealed into the ears of culprits. But the lesson was
not for the lawyer only. Formal religionists are always cold. It is possible to
be so busy investigating the groundseand limits of religious duty as to forget
to do it. So these heartless two teach us the terrible pitilessness of men, and
its cause in self-absorption, and the special danger, in regard to it, of formal
religion. The same boldness in bringing in causes of offence which might have
been spared appears in making the rescuer a Samaritan. Note the details of his
care. First, we have the source of all in compassion. He felt a shoot of love
and pity in his heart to ‘“‘ the man,” and that set all in motion. His conduct
may be taken as a picture of what true love to the neighbour should be. It is
prompt, thorough, spares no pains, acts with judgment, is generous and self-
denying (‘set him on his own beast,” while he trudged by his side), provides for
the future, and with all its liberality is not lavish, but thrifty and prudent.
The lawyer had not asked, What is the love which I am bound to show? But
Christ teaches him and us that it is not a mere lazy sentiment, but active, self-


U 289


CHAP. X. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


sacrificing, guided by common sense, and full of resources. It moves us to all
kindly offices, and makes the needy sharers in our possessions, since they share
our heart. But the nationality of the helper must not be passed by. Though
the lesson could have been taught without it, it makes the lesson still more
emphatic. It answers the question ‘““Who?” by brushing away all national
distinctions, all prejudices of race, all differences of creed, all enmities rooted in
history. It is the first dawning of that great thought which nineteen centuries
have been so slow to learn, the brotherhood of man. The very word
“humanity” is Christian. The idea of “philanthropy” is Christian. And
the practical realisation of the idea will only be attained when the great
fact on which it rests is received. ‘One is your Master, . .. and all ye are
brethren.”

III. Note Christ's inversion of the lawyer's question.—It makes a vast
difference whether we say, “ Who is my neighbour?” or “ Whose neighbour
am I?” for although the relation is, of course, mutual, to approach it on the
one side is selfishness, and on the other is love. The one fixes attention on men’s
claims on me, the other on my debts to them; and while these are the same,
they have a very different aspect from the two ends. The truth, therefore,
which Christ would have us learn is, that to be a true neighbour is to render
help, and that we are neighbours to all men in such a sense that our compassion
should go out to them all, and our practical aid be given, no matter what may
be the barriers of race, or creed, or colour, or distance. True love to men will
cut its own channels, will not wait to be commanded, nor ask how far it is
bound to go, but spontaneously and universally will own its kinship with all the
needy and sad, and will seek to be as wide and as deep as the love of God, of
which it is a reflection.—Maclaren.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 25—37.


Ver. 25. Questions put to Christ.—
Questions were sometimes put to Christ
(1) by meek, receptive hearers, like
Nicodemus, prepared to drink the sin-
cere milk of the word that they might
grow thereby; (2) by enemies, both of
the Pharisaic and Sadducean parties,
to ensnare and destroy Him; and
(3) as in this case, to put His skill
and wisdom to the test.


“ Do to inherit.”—The question as
the scribe intended was incongruous:
to ‘‘do” does not fit in with ‘to
inherit.” It is as if one were to ask,
What must I do to bring out sun-
shine? Without any bitterness, our
Saviour takes up the question of the
scribe in order to guide him to a
knowledge of the fact that it was
exactly that law of which he was so
proud of keeping which condemned
him. Our Lord wishes to teach him


290


that if he only in real earnest will try
to do, he will soon learn that he needs
a Saviour who will do for him and in
him what he himself cannot do.


“ To inherit eternal life.”—In Greece
men sought for truth: in Israel the
object of pursuit was salvation, and
righteousness as the means of attaining
it.—Godet.


“ Inherit.”—The phrase “ inherit”
alludes to possession of the land of
Canaan, which the children of Israel
had received as an inheritance from the
hands of God, and which remained in
Jewish thought as a type of Messianic
happiness.


“ What shall I do,” etc.—Of. the
answer given by St. Paul after the
Ascension (Acts xvi. 30, 31).—Farrar.


Ver. 27. “Thou shalt love,” etc.—As


HOMILETIC CUMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. X.


eee


this summary of duty is given by
Christ Himself on another occasion in
answer to a scribe, we may perhaps
conclude that it had become in the
Jewish schools an approved method
of declaring the essence of the law.
Otherwise it would be difficult to
reconcile the enlightened and spiritual
reply of this lawyer with the narrow
and bigoted tone of mind which he
manifested.


Two Great Commandments.—The
two great commandments of the law.

I. The duty of love to God.—l. A
divinely implanted principle in the
renewed hearts of believers. 2. It
implies a high esteem of God. 3. It
implies an earnest desire for communion
with God and the enjoyment of Him.
4, It is a judicious principle, and not
a blind enthusiastic feeling. 5. It is
an active principle. 6. It is also a
supreme love.

If. The duty of love to man.—1. It
is, too, a divinely implanted principle.
2. It implies benevolent dispositions
towards our neighbour. 3. Speaking
well of him. 4. Doing him all the
good offices in our power.—/oote.


The Service of God and Man.

I. The Christian religion is one
which most powerfully engages its
disciples to service.—It does so in two
ways: (1) it gives them a sense of
boundless obligation; (2) it exalts a
life of service as the highest ideal of
human. life.

II. The service to which the Chris-
tian religion engages its disciples is
the service of man.

Ill. The Christian religion brings
us a revelation which makes the
service of man hopeful. Brown.


“Thy heart,” etc.—The ‘“ heart” in
Scripture is the centre of the moral
life; from it branch out the “soul”
(the seat of feeling and emotion), the
wili (actual faculties), and the “mind”
(the faculties of intelligence). Moral
life proceeds from the heart, and dis-
plays itself in or by means of the


other three forms of activity—emotion,


energy (or “strength”), and know-
ledge.


Ver. 29. “To justify himself.”—
Aware that the test of charity would
prove unfavourable to him, he seeks
concealment under the word “ neigh-
bour,” that he may not be discovered
to be a transgressor of the law. ‘ But
who accused him? Not the Lord.
He had only said, ‘This do, and thou
shalt live.’ The man’s own conscience
was awakened and at work; well he
knew at that moment that he had
not done what his lips confessed he
should do; he had not loved God with
all his heart and his neighbour as
himself ” (Arnot).


“* My neighbour.” —The design of the
parable of the good Samaritan is to
explain the word ‘“ neighbour.”

I. The explanation is rather the
converse of what might have been
expected We might have thought
that the person who is beloved is the
neighbour; in the narrative the
“ neighbour ”-is the person who loves.
The fact is, the Samaritan and the
traveller were “ neighbours” equally,
each to the other—the word being
relative must be mutual; but the one
who recognised the relationship is
selected for the illustration, because
there lay the example and the lesson.
My “neighbour ” then is every one who,
in the providence of God, is brought
into such connection with me, that I
can and ought to affect him in some
way for good.

IJ. The course of events is always
being so ordered as to bring new per-
sons within our circle, that we may
act by them a neighbour's part.—There
may be a nation on the other side of
the earth with which to-day I have
nothing whatever to do; but to-morrow,
let a way of access be opened and pre-
sented to me, by which I could approach
that nation, and let an occasion arise
of doing it good which, in my con-
science, I feel to be providential, and
at once our neighbourhood is established


291


CHAP. X.


and complete, and I am constrained to
perform a neighbour’s, 7.e. a near one’s,
part, whether it be for their souls,
or whether it be for their bodies.—
Vaughan.


Ver. 29. The Law gave no Definition
of ‘* Neighbour.”—The scribe does not
think there is danger of his not loving
God, but thinks that the law is de-
fective in giving no exact description


of who is to be understood by one’s.


neighbour.


Vers. 30-37. The Good Samaritan.—
This parable reveals in the brightest
light—

I. The Christian’s heart.—It is like
the Samaritan’s.. It is full of compas-
sion. In.the priest and the Levite
prudence conquered humanity; in the
Samaritan humanity conquered pru-
dence, prejudice, and everything else.
We are weak and slow in Christ’s
work because we are weak in com-
passion. The religion of Jesus is the
religion of humanity.

II. The Christian’s hand.—It is the
ready agent of a compassionate heart.
First the heart, then the hand—that
is the order in the kingdom. Watch
the Samaritan’s hand. It is not the
hand of a sluggard. How quickly it
moves! He did not linger till com-
passion was chilled by worldly pru-
dence. First thoughts were best. I
dare say he did not think of it at all;
he just did it at once. Many a noble
purpose dies of cold and decay in its
infancy. It is not the hand of a
weakling. It is not easily tired. It
carries through what it begins, and
leaves nothing half done, though the
doing cost much. It is not the hand
of a hireling. The Samaritan was not
rich. He had one ass, and no servant.
But he believed that it was more
blessed to give than to receive. He
could not be repaid, and knew it.
Payment would have spoiled all his
pleasure in the deed. He had reward
enough in an approving conscience
reflecting the smile of God. It is not
the hand of earthly ambition. The


292


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


Pharisees gave alms to be seen of men.
Had the Samaritan been like them, he
would have passed by on the other
side. But there was nothing to feed
the hunger for earthly applause in
this adventure. And yet if he be a
real man, if this is history as well as
parable, what renown! Christ has
immortalised him.

III. The Christian’s sphere.—The
lawyer made it very narrow. He
loved his friends, and hated his enemies,
and was sure that the Samaritans were
no neighbours of his. But Christ
teaches that there is no limit or ex-
ception to the love of man; and that
the sphere of the Christian’s heart is
the whole world, and that the sphere
of his hand embraces every one he can
help. The Samaritan never asked,
“ And who is my neighbour?” Near-
ness and need constitute “ neighbour-
hood.” In every suffering stranger
there is a God-sent candidate for your
pity and aid. Be neighbourly in
Christ’s spirit. The home mission
spirit is the very genius of the gospel.
Be not content with sluggard sym-
pathies. Bea good Samaritan among
the needy in our land. Heathen
lands too are near us now, and every
year are coming nearer. The field
of Christian service is the world.—
Wells.


Ver. 30. “A certain man.’—This
answers the question, “Who is my
neighbour ?” No mention is made of
nation, tribe rank, or character; but
“a certain man,” some one or other.
It is as men that we are related and
owe love to one another.


Ver. 31. ‘ By chance.”—There is a
certain touch of irony in the phrase;
it was certainly not by ‘“ chance” that
the priest and the Levite came to
figure in the parable.


Chance a Nickname.—God’s unseen
providence, by men nicknamed Chance,
—Fuller.


Good Opportunities.—-Many good


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP, X.


a ee ee 5


opportunities work under things which
seem fortuitous.—Bengel.


A Test of Character.—This is a very
significant touch. The wounded man
was not carried to the priest’s door,
or did not even call aloud for aid,
or else it would have been morally
impossible to refuse to help him. The
chance encounter rendered it more
easy to deny the claim; in other words,
it served the more perfectly to test the
real character of the priest—to show
whether mercy was in his heart or not.


“ A certain priest.” Perhaps now on
his way to Jerusalem, there to execute
his office “in the order of his course ”
(chap. i. 8); or, having accomplished
his turn of service, now returning
home. But whether thus or not, he was
one who had never learned what that
meant, ‘I will have mercy, and not
sacrifice”; who, whatever duties he
might have been careful in fulfilling,
had “omitted the weightier matters of
the law, judgment, mercy, and faith.”
—Trench.


“ He passed by.”

I. All priests were not thus cold
and heartless.—lfinisters are generally
warm-hearted men. They ought all
to be so; they ought to be like Christ.
He was ever ready to help any in
trouble. Many of the Jewish priests
would be kind and generous. This
one was not. One may occupy a very
sacred place, and yet have a cold,
hard heart. It is very sad when it
is so.

II. This priest did not even stop to
look at the sufferer.Much less did
he ask how he came to be injured, or
to inquire what he could do for him.
Perhaps he even pretended not to see
the wounded man. He had doubtless
excuses enough to satisfy his own mind.
He was tired, or in a hurry, or it was
a hopeless case, or he could not bear
to look on suffering. But whatever
his motives—

III. Let us avoid repeating his
fault—Do we never pass by human


wants that we know well we ought to
stop to relieve? Do we never keep
out of the way of those who need our
help? This verse is an ugly mirror,
is it not? It shows us blemishes that
we did not know we had.—WMiller.


Excuses for Inhumanity.—¥ixcuses
for inhumanity are only too easily
found. The priest might allege—

I. That he was in haste—that his
business was urgent or sacred.

II. That the wounded man was past
hope of recovery.

III. That the robbers were not far
off, and that it was perilous to linger
near the spot.

IV. That another was coming along
the same road who might be able to
render more efficient help.





Vers. 31-33. Two Kinds of Holiness.
—1. The spurious holiness of priest and ~
Levite—sanctity divorced from charity.
2. The genuine holiness of the Samari-
tan—holiness inspired by love.—Bruce.


Samaritans and Levites.— All Sama-
ritans were not compassionate; all
Levites were not hard-hearted. They
were Samaritans who would not permit
Jesus and His disciples, when they
were weary, to pass the night in their
village (ix. 53); and he was a Levite
(Acts iv. 36) who was named Son of
Consolation, and sold his property that
he might distribute the proceeds among
the poor.


Ver. 32. “A Levite.”—The Levite
in his turn may have thought with
himself that it could not be incumbent
on him to undertake a perilous office,
from which the priest had just shrunk ;
duty it could not be, else that other
would never have omitted it. For him
to thrust himself upon it now would
be a kind of affront to his superior,
an implicit charging of him with
inhumanity and hardness of heart.
And so, by aid of these pleas, or pleas
like them, they left their fellow-
countryman. to perish.—7ench.


293


CHAP. X.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





“ Looked on him.”—There are very
few of us who have yet learned to
exert ourselves as we might do for
the relief of the general misery and
destitution which we cannot but see
about us. The world is full of it;
but it is not full of that heavenly
compassion which it was meant to call
forth.—Marrioté.


Ver. 33. “ Samaritan.”—He was
one of a nation with whom the Jews
had no dealings (John iv. 9), whose
name was a by-word of reproach
(John viii. 48), who were regarded by
them as aliens and foreigners (Luke
xvii. 18), and almost reckoned with
the very heathen (Matt. x. 5). The
wounded traveller could have no claims
on him; and many reasons might have
been found for passing him by.


The Law written in the Heart.—This
ignorant Samaritan possessed spon-
taneously (‘‘ by nature,” Rom. ii. 14)
the light which the Rabbis had not
found or had lost in their theological
investigations. There is a remark-
able agreement between the conduct
attributed by Jesus to the Samaritan
and the saying of St. Paul about the
law “written in the heart” and its
partial fulfilment by the heathen
(Rom. ii. 14-16).—Godet.


Heterodoxy and Orthodoxy.—We have
here heterodoxy with humanity, and
orthodoxy without humanity. Our
Lord has shown elsewhere, abun-
dantly, that He has no thought of
conniving at heterodoxy, or of dis-
paraging orthodoxy. Only He teaches
that humanity is better than ortho-
doxy, if only one may be had, and
that inhumanity is worse than hetero-
doxy, if one must be endured.—Schaff.


“ Had compassion.”—Moved with
pity as to the past, help for the pre-
sent, considerate care for the future.—
Stier.


A Mark of Genuine Love.—It is the
characteristic mark of genuine love


294


that it does not ask whether the
neighbour deserves love, but whether
he needs love.


Love of the Brethren and of One's
Neighbour.—There is a special dis-
tinction to be made between Christian
love of the brethren (John xiii. 34) and
the love of our neighbour.

I. Love of the brethren has for
its object the fellow-believer, the love
of Christ for its standard, and faith
in Him as its condition.

II. Love of our neighbour em-
braces all men, loves them as one’s
self, and is grounded on the natural
relation in which all sons and daughters
of Adam stand to each other as members
of one great family here on earth.—
Van Oosterzee.


Vers. 33-35. Characteristics of Love.
—True love renders help (1) with
promptitude, (2) with thoroughness,
(3) with self-denial, (4) with un-
wearying patience, (5) with tact, (6)
without sentimentality.


Vers. 34, 35. ‘ Bound up his wounds,”
etc.—He leaves nothing undone to
mitigate the miseries that excited his
compassion.

I. He applies healing remedies to
his wounds.

II. He is regardless of fatigue and
danger in ministering to the sufferer.

III. He leaves him in good keeping.

IV. He supplies his immediate
wants, leaves careful injunctions for
his treatment in the inn, and generously
promises to repay any expenses that
may be incurred.


Ver. 34. Manifestations of Love.—
The attentive look, the compassionate
heart, the helpful hand, the willing
foot, the open purse.—Van Oosterzee.


Ver. 35. ‘Take care of him... . 1
will repay.”—After having brought
the wounded man to the inn, the
Samaritan might have regarded him-
self as free from all further respon-
sibility in the matter—he might have


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. X.





left him to the kindness of his fellow-
countrymen, and have said to them,
“He is your neighbour rather than
mine.” But compassion, which has
prompted him to begin, compels him
to end.—Crodet.


“When he departed.”—This detail
gives vividness to the story: we see
him as it were already on horseback
and busied with giving the host in-
junctions as to careful treatment of
the invalid.





Ver. 36. Love like the Light.—The
Lord shows His questioner that love is
like light: wherever it truly burns it
shines forth in all directions, and falls
on every object that lies in its way.
Love that desires to limit its own
exercise is not love. One of love’s
essential laws is expressed in those
words of the Lord that the apostles
fondly remembered after He had
ascended, ‘‘It is more blessed to give
than to receive.” — Arnot.


“Which . . . was neighbour ?” —The
parable is a reply, not to the
question, for to that it is no reply,
but to the spirit out of which the
question proceeded. ‘You inquire,
Who is my neighbour? Behold a man
who asked quite another question, To
whom can I be a neighbour? and
then be yourself the judge whether
you or he have most of the mind of
God—which is most truly the doer
of His will, the imitator of His per-
fections.”—T'rench.


“ Was neighbour.” —Rather, “‘ proved
neighbour ” (R.V.) ; literally, ‘‘ became
neighbour.” ‘The neighbour Jews be-
came strangers, the stranger Samaritan
became neighbour, to the wounded
traveller. It is not place but love
which makes neighbourhood” (Words-
worth).


Vers. 36, 37. A Picture of Christ's
Redeeming Work.—The older commen-
tators find in this parablea typical repre-
sentation of Christ’s redeeming love.


The wounded traveller is man disabled
by sin; the priest and Levite represent
the law, which exercises no healing
power; the good Samaritan is Christ ;
the inn the Church, etc. The sug-
gestion is an ingenious one, though the
identification of some of the details
leads to grotesque results. We may,
however, see in the parable a faint
and unintentional reflection of the
Saviour’s work. The wounds of
the sick (Isa. i. 6), which they who
sat in Moses’ seat left undressed, He
whom they reviled as a Samaritan
(John viii. 48) bound up with oil and


wine.


Ver. 37. “ He that shewed mercy.” —
He will not name the Samaritan by
name, the haughty hypocrite !—Luther.


“Go, and do thow likewise.”—The
lesson derived from the parable by
our Lord Himself is not that “ every
one who needs our mercy is to be
taken for our neighbour.” Nothing
of the kind. Christ closes the con-
versation by proposing the conduct of
the Samaritan—the active benevolence
which he displayed even towards an
enemy—as a model for imitation.
Thus the practice of religion is revealed
as the best help to the understanding
of it. The attention is diverted from
considering who is the fit object of
love, and guided instead to the ewercise
of love itself. As in every other part
of the Bible, the object proposed is
to school the heart, not to inform the
understanding. —Burgon.


A Reproof to our Shortcomings.—We
should never read the story of the good
Samaritan without thinking of it as a
type of deeds of holy love done by many
who may be grievously deficient in
religious knowledge, and as a reproof
to our shortcomings.


Love and its Reward.—Love of man is
(1) entirely unfimited ; (2) it reveals
itself in unrestricted helpfulness ; and
(3) its reward is in an approving
conscience, the praise of those who


295


"


tn


a


,


CHAP. X.


ope ae


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





witness it, and of the Lord Himself.
It is true that mere kindness does not
earn eternal life—that even if we
perfectly fulfil the second table of the
law, we are guilty of so many offences


against the first table as to forfeit
eternal life. But it is also true that
he who violates the dictates of kindly
feeling is not on the road that leads to
faith and salvation (1 John iv. 20, 21).


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 38—42.


Jesus in the Family Circle—This is one of the few passages in the life a


oe Saviour in which we are Miritted to view Him in t eo


life—in which we see Him as a


is_d


and a friend, receiving hospitality, and
by gentle words allaying the angry feelings which are so apt to spring up from


eace of the home.


He had arrived at


the trivial causes, and mar_the
Bethany” perhaps unexpectedly, and evidently accompanied by some of His


sciples, and thus occasioned some little stir in the household there.


Martha


was_naturally anxious to provide fitting entertainment for such an honoured
Guest. For a time, apparently, Mary had assisted her in making-the needful


preparations for the supper, but after a little had stolen away_to sit_at the feet


of Jesus and listen to His words.


Probably she felt that there was a reasonable


limit to the work of providing for material wants, and that it was making good
use of the precious time of Christ’s sojourn with them to allow Him to minister
to them as well as to be ministered to by them.

I. Martha’s complaint.—She is angry and put about by ashe to serve


alone, and in her hastiness she falls into various mistakes.


an undue impor


to the kind of work she was en
her sister’s employment as mere waste of time.


l.»She attaches
aged in. C2.,She regards
She accuses the Saviour


of be eaey aan eae dness to_shirk her share of the work. Specially


censurable is her endeavour to get the Saviour to take her part in this difference


with her sister.
take a side in a family dispute.


For it is always very embarrassing to a guest to be asked to


II. The reply of Jesus.—He reminded Martha that she was distressing and


harassing herself about many trivial things, but that Mary’s a


ed upon the one thing of supreme Tmporte


or Supreme importance,


nti


The slight degree of blame


implied in the answer, and in the repetition of her name, was no ; doubt robbed


of its sting by the gentle tone of voice and the kin
this was not an occasion when ‘anything like severity was called for.
Stipleof the Saviour; and He was as considerate to


fF the one, as s pleased with the pure and intense


We have ‘here ae a warning against’ allowing—our






sisters werefrient


the weaknesses and foibles







aim i


For
oth


he Speaker.


g ay a statement of the


pectt OFA re Bods aaba pence Those that ursue various “aims are drawn
hither and thither by conflicting cares_and duties : those that have the one true
view rise above all that is superficial and trifling, and e
which the-world can neither give nor take away.


njoy a peace


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 38—42.


Vers. 38-42. Martha, Mary, and
Lazarus.—Let us regard this incident
as illustrative of a few practical
considerations. Observe—

I. The absence of all reference to
Lazarus in this narrative—Is this


296


because he was younger than the
sisters, and of least account in the
household? In John’s Gospel, too,
Lazarus brings up the rear. Many
think that he was the young ruler
who came to Christ and went away


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. X.





sorrowing. Whatever be the truth on
this point, Christ loved this “weak
brother.” He seems to have lacke
orce of character, decision, readiness
to sacrifice for Christ’s sake. Such a
man may certainly be saved, but he
misses much.


I, The distinguishing character of


Martha, who carries her peculiariti¢s
into her friendship with and _ her
loyalty to Jesus Christ. This is quite
right. Christ does not take from us
our individuality. He does not want
every one to be a Martha or every one
to be a Mary. There was variety of







her own bustlin
despise” her sister’

to recelye_i This example
warns us that, in doing what is right,
we must take care not to think more
highly of ourselves than of others,—
Calvin.





qe sisters, and our Lord’s treat- Vers. 38, 30. tint nd Cane
ment of them.—We have the acting “Tanglin?” We find in Martha the
i dt


type of a life busily devoted to externals,


such as is frequently exemplified in this


oO a certain ex-
tent both tendencies will be combined
in each believer, but it is not to be


passing world; in Mary, the type of
uiet self-devotion to the Divine as the
one thing needful


character among the twelve. Varied overlooked that there are different
services are needed. Jesus Christ, vocations, and many are better fitted
neede ili for busy outward laboyr than an
earner cart Sri i ie re ao VEE although

ary in listening.) The danger is that the must be from the


one kind of worker thinks that the only
service that should be rendered to


Jesus Christ is i or i
rendering. Those who are active are


apt to be h

so_ active as they are, or in the ‘way
which they approve. Christ taught
Martha ings. ;
to the one gr ing—love to _Him-
self. Let all learn the lesson of serving
the Master in the sphere for which we
are be-t fitted, and withal be tolerant,


yea appreciative of those who _ serve


Him in different ways.— Davies.
Te ree


Lhree Faults of Martha.—Though the
hospitality of Martha deserved commen-
dation, and is commended, yet there
were three faults in it which are pointed
out by Christ.

I. Martha
beyon r ; for Christ

ould rather have chosen to be enter-
tained in a frugal manner, and at
moderate expense, than that the holy
woman should have submitted to so
much toil.

II. Martha, by distracting her
attention, and w i


than was necessary, ser sack .
the a 0 Tist's
III. Martha was so delighted with


carried


depths of his soul given up to the Lord,
an C) ntemplation must
consecrate his energies tothe advan¢e-


ment of God’s kingdom.—Olshausen.


Ver. 39. nswer to the Question
as to ¢ —This in-
cident gives a clear and certain answer


to the question of the scribe as to


inheriting eternal life: it is telistem to ez, _.






shall_not be taken away.


“Sat at Jesus’ feet.” —This is a living
commentary on the words, “ Yea, He
loved the people; all His saints are in
Thy hand: and they sat down at Thy


feet; every one shall receive of Thy
words” (Deut. xxxiii. 3).


Absence. of Censoriousness.—Mary sits
quiet and silent at His foot, and it
never occurred to her to be discon-
tented and to exclaim, ‘ Master, tell
my sister to come and listen’ too with
me.”


“ Heard His word.” —As the tender
flowers love to-open_to_the—rays-of-the


sun and silently absorb.itslight. Jesus
had not come to be served, but to
serve.


297


‘


CHAP. X.


Vers. 39, 40. Characteristic Conduct
of the Sisters. —The respective char-
acters of the two sisters again come
clearly into view on the visit recorded
by St. John (xii. 2, 3). There it is
said that ‘ Mart ” and that


Martha served,
Mary anointed the fect of Josys, and
wiped His feet with her hair.”
Mary commits her cause to the Judge,
and He becomes her Advocate.
—Augqustine.


Christ defending  His__Discisles. —
The Gospels record various instances
of Christ thus taking the part of them
who trust their cause to Him. Cf.
chaps. vi. 2, 3, vii. 39, 40; Matt.
xxvi. 10.


Pleasur
With 1a the pleasure o
much to Jesus is pre-eminent :
feels the necessity of ivi


Vers. 41, 42. “Many things . . . one
thing.” —Note the coatiast between
corsaTnasabaut many things and the
riéedtulnes> ess of _but one. hen we


possess God in Christ, we have the one
thing n to (1) @ true life, (2) a
true_growth, (3) a true service, (4) a
true happiness.


Ver. 42. “ But one ihing is_ needful,”
—Needful for what? For rightly
receiving the Saviour—the disposition
which Mary was manifesting at this
moment, the sitting at the feet of
Jesus, the receptivity for hearing and
laying up the words of eternal life.—
Van Uosterzee.


“ That »—Why was Mary’s
choice better? Because “it shall
not be taken away from her.” From
thee the burden of business shall one
time be taken away; for when thou
comest into the heavenly country,
thou wilt find no stranger to receive
with hospitality. But for thy good it
shall be taken away, that what is






298






HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


better may be given thee. Trouble
shall be taken away, that rest may be
given thee. But in the meantime
thou art yet at sea ; thy sister isin port.
—Augustine.


“The good part.”—Mary’s choice is
commended. The object of her choice
is characterised and commended as


“the one thing needful,” “the good


part.” ‘True religion is—


I. Indispensably needful.
II. Perfectly good.

III. Absolutely inalienable.

Its claims are paramount. Heaven
is gained ; hell is avoided. It is not
only “good” in name, but in reality.
It wears, lasts, satisfies. It is the
only possession that is inalienable.
Honour, wealth, reason, health, home,
friends, all may go. This abides.—
Morris.


I. The essence of the Christian
religion is that it is a religion of
receiving.€Martha desired to give,
Mary to receive.'° Mary was praised ;
Martha was reproved. “The ‘leadin
Christ's feet. Those please God most
who take in most.

II. Mary’s spirit rested.—Martha
worked anxiously. The difference be-
tween them was greatest, not-so- much


in what they did, as in the spirit in
wilh theese Dein a eee
peace. Be a little child.

III. Mary had learnt to concentrate


her mind.—Martha could not do this.
Mary gathered all to a sing j
and_that_point was Christ. TRE re
was full of di ting and unnecessar
are the same. What vain solicitudes!
What is the use of it all? What is
the remedy? Simplify. Throw out
what is wrong, what is trivial, what is
underweight. ‘ One thing ” is all that
will be left. To find, to love, and to
enjoy the Saviour. There is nothing


else. This is “the good part.”—
Vaughan.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XI.
a


CHAPTER XI.
CRITICAL NOTES.


Ver. 1. The time and place when this incident occurred are indefinite, but there can be no
doubt that we have not here part of the Sermon on the Mount, put out of its place. The
form of prayer here given differs very considerably (by omission) from that in Matt. vi. 9-13;
as given in the best authorities it runs as follows: “Father, Hallowed be Thy name, Thy
kingdom come. Give us day by day our daily bread. And forgive us our sins; for we our-
selves also forgive every one that is indebted to us. And bring us not into temptation.” It
is almost certain that both the longer and shorter forms of the prayer were given on separate
occasions, with the exception of the doxology, found in St. Matthew, which dates from the
time when the prayer came into liturgical use.

_In a certain place.—If this incident took place shortly after that last recorded—the
visit of Jesus to Bethany—this place may be the Mount of Olives or Gethsemane, As John.—
This fact is not elsewhere recorded.

Ver, 2, Hallowed be Thy name.—God’s name is not merely His appellation, which we
speak with the mouth, but also and principally the idea which we attach to it—His Being, as
far as it is confessed, revealed, or known” (De Wette). Hallowed.— “ Kept holy,” “sanctified
in our hearts.” Thy kingdom come.—The spread of Christ’s kingdom on earth and His
triumphant reign hereafter (His second coming).

Ver. 3. Daily bread.—No better English word than “daily” can be got to render the
peculiar Greek word found only here and in Matt. vi. 11, but considerable diversity of
opinion has existed as to the precise signification of the term employed. Some have
rendered it “sufficient,” “ proper for our sustenance ”; others, “for the coming day” ; others,
“spiritual bread” (Vulg. supersubstantialem). But all these meanings are to some extent
implied in our phrase “ daily bread”—suitable for our necessities, and provision for the
immediate future; and though the primary reference is to literal food, reference to spiritual
nourishment is not excluded.

Ver. 4, Forgive.—Two words are used—“ sins” and “ debts” (“every one that is indebted
to us”); we cannot forgive sins, but can release others from their obligations to us, As.—
I.e., “in the same manner as,” not “to the same extent as,” nor “because.” Lead us not into
temptation.—God does not tempt to evil, but He may place us in circumstances in which we
may feel our weakness and be in danger of yielding to temptation This is virtually a prayer
for some way of escape to be opened up to us.

Ver. 5. At midnight.—In the East people often travel by night, to avoid the heat.

Ver. 7. My children, etc.— Ze., “my children, as well as I, are in bed.”

Ver. 8. Importunity.—Lit., “‘shamelessness,” “impudence ”—i.e., continued knocking and
asking. For importunity in prayer see Isa. lxii. 23-33; Gen. xviii. 6, 7; Matt. xv. 27, 28.

Ver. 9. And I say unto you.—The parable is not a conclusive argument. We know that a
man can be harassed into giving, but how can we know that importunate prayer can prevail
upon God? We know it upon Christ’s authority : He here pledges His word that it is so.

Ver. 11. Bread.—There is a certain resemblance between the things asked for and those
which might be substituted for them—a stone like bread, a fish like a serpent, an egg like a
scorpion. No father with ordinary human feeling would mock his child by giving him
useless or hurtful things in place of food.

Ver. 13. Holy Spirit.—The best of all gifts. St. Matthew says “good things ” (vii. 11).

Ver. 14. Casting out a devil_—There seems to be little doubt that this miracle is the same
as that in Matt. xii. 22, as wrought apparently in Galilee. In St. Matthew’s Gospel there
is, however, no precise mention of time or place. It is quite hopeless to attempt to fix the
exact order in which the events occurred. Dumb.—And blind (Matt. xii. 22).

Ver. 15. Some of them,—“ Pharisees ” (Matt. xii. 24), ‘scribes which came from Jerusalem ”
(Mark iii. 22). Beelzebub.—The form of the name in Greek is Beelzebub; the original
Hebrew word is Baal-zebub, the form of Baal worshipped at Ekron. The meaning of the
latter name is Baal or Lord of the fly, a designation which has parallels in classical myth-
ology. The meaning of the form of the name Beelzebub is either Lord of dung, so called in
derision by the Jews, or Lord uf the dwelling, as prince of the lower world (cf. Matt. x. 25,
“Master of the house”), or Lord of idols, and therefore, as here, “ the chief of the devils.”’

Ver. 16. A sign from heaven.—In proof of His Messiahship, Perhaps a portent like those
foretold by Joel (ii. 30, 31).

Ver, 17. Every kingdom.—The kingdom of evil as an organisation with a personal head


299


mse a


cHar.xi.  HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: S1. LUKE.





may be torn by discords, but being wholly evil must be unanimous in its opposition to the
kingdom of God. ‘An organisation which acts against itself, its own distinctive aims, must
destroy itself.” The same reasoning is applied to the case of a house and of an individual
erson.

: Ver. 19. Your sons.—J.¢., your disciples. The Pharisees countenanced cases of exorcism
wrought by spells and incantations, and perhaps in some instances actual miracles of the
kind were accomplished by faith in God and by invocation of the Divine Name. Christ by
no means seems to deny the validity of all the cures. As matters stood, therefore, collusion
with Satan was not the necessary explanation of casting out devils; and the holiness of
Christ’s character, as well as the air of authority with which He wrought miracles, were
additional reasons against such a dishonourable explanation of His mighty deeds. ve

Ver. 20, The finger of God.—An allusion to Exod. viii. 19. St. Matthew has “the Spirit of
God” (xii. 28), which is practically the same thing. ;

Ver. 21. A strong man.—An illustration possibly taken from Isa. xlix. 24. The strong
man is Satan; He that overcomes him is Christ.

Ver. 23. He that is not with Me.—There is no middle course between Christ and Satan.

Ver. 24. Dry places.—Desert regions. According to Jewish ideas the special abode of
demons. Seeking rest,—In misery when he is not tormenting a man.

Ver. 25. Swept and garnished.—But empty, and inviting the re-occupation of the evil
spirit.

ic 26. Seven other.—The number suggests completeness—every form and variety of evil.
Worse than the first.—Cf. Heb. vi. 4-6, x. 26-29; 2 Pet. ii, 20,21. “The parable was an
allegory, not only of the awful peril of relapse after partial conversion, but also of the history
of the Jews. The demon of idolatry had been expelled by the Exile, but had returned with the
sevenfold virulence of letter-worship, formalism, exclusiveness, ambition, greed, hypocrisy,
and hate; and on the testimony of Josephus himself, the Jews of that age were so bad that
their destruction seemed an inevitable retribution ” (/arra).

Ver. 27. A certain woman.—This incident is peculiar to St. Luke. The arousal of ignorant
enthusiasm in the mind of a hearer, on these stern and authoritative words being spoken, is a
very natural circumstance. Probably the woman caught sigut of “His mother and His
brethren ” on the outskirts of the crowd, as St. Matthew speaks of their presence in connec-
tion with this discourse (see Matt. xii. 46-50). Of the company.—Rather, ‘‘ out of the multi-
tude” (R.V.)

Ver. 29. Were gathered thick.—Rather, “ were gathering together unto Him” (R.V.).
Jonas the prophet.—Omit “the prophet,” taken probably from the parallel passage in
St. Mattnew.

Ver. 30. A sign.—T.e., by his three days’ and three nights’ entombment in the fish (Jonas
i, 17).

Ver. 31. The queen of the south.—1 Kings x. 1-13. The Queen of Sheba; supposed from
this passage in St. Luke to be Yemenin Arabia. A greater than Solomon.—Lit., “‘ more than,’
“ somewhat greater.” So, too, in the next verse.

Ver. 32. They repented. — See Jonah iii. 5.

Ver, 33. No man, etc.—The connection of vers. 33-36 with what precedes them is some-
what obscure. Jesus had been assailed by His enemies, both with the charge of performing
mighty works by the aid of the powers of evil and witi a clamour for a sign from heaven to
prove the celestial source of His mission, and of the miraculons powers whicl seemed to
authenticate it. Jesus answers in effect, ‘‘The sign for which you ask will be given. Jonas
was a sign to the Ninevites, and so shall the Son of man be a sign to this generation.” The
sign shall be open, public, capable of being read by all men. This is part of the very nature
of a sign: no man, when he has lighted a candle, conceals it; that is no sign which is not
seen. But in order that a sign may convince, the minds of those to whom it is given must
be healthy and unbiassed. The light which is given to all can only profit those whose vision
is healthy and natural; and so only those who are free from prejudice can appreciate the
spiritual light” (Speaker's Commentary). Lighted a candle.—The figure is one several times
used by Christ in different connections, Cf. Matt. v.15; Luke viti.16; Mark iv 21. A secret
place.—Rather, ‘a covered place,” ‘a cellar” (R.V.). A bushel.—Rather, “the bushel”
(R.V.); so also “the stand” (R.V.), reference being made to the well-known utensils to be
found in an ordinary Eastern house.

Ver, 34. The light of the body.—Rather, “the lamp of the body” (R.V.). The eye here
means the conscience. Single.—Not distorted by prejudice.

Ver. 36. If thy whole body, etc.—‘“ Only when thy body is wholly illumined, without having
even an obscure corner left therein, will it become so bright and clear as if the full brilliancy
of a bright lamp illumined thee; in other words, thou wilt be placed in a normal condition
of light” (Van Oosterzee). A gradual growth in purity and holiness: is depicted, which
results in the removal of everything that hinders the reception of Divine truth, and in the
subjection of every part of the being to that truth,


300


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XI.





Ver. 37. Besought.—Simply, “asked” (R.V.). To dine.—Rather, “that He would breakfast
with him.” The word used means a noon-day meal = our late breakfast or luncheon.

Ver. 38. Washed.—The washing was a ceremonial act, and cleanliness was not the object
of it. The ablutions, which had become most elaborate and frivolous, were not based even
upon Levitical law, but upon Pharisaic tradition and the so-called Oral law.

Ver. 39. Now.—J.e., “as things are.” Make clean, etc.—In Matt. xxiii. 25 a similar figure is
used. There is, however, this difference : there the inside of the cup and platter are said to
be full of extortion and wickedness—i.e., got by wrongful means and used profligately ; here
it = to the inward part—the spiritual condition of the men themselvyes—that reference is
made.

Ver. 40. “Did not He who made the body (that which is without) make the mind and soul
also (that which is within)?” What folly to attend to the cleanness of the one and to ignore
the foulness of the other!

Ver. 41. Give alme of such things as ye have.—Rather, “give for alms those things which
are within” (R.V.). Christ returns to speak of the literal contents of cup and platter: “ Be
not anxious about the outward part, but rather attend to its contents, and do but give alms
therefrom, and the food and everything else shall be pure to you” (Bloomfield). A deed of
unselfishness and goodwill would make a change in the whole inward condition.

Ver. 42. Tithe mint, etc—As commanded in Deut, xiv. 22. No proportion was observed
between greater and less commandments—those based on eternal principles and those of a
local or temporary character. Judgment and the love of God.—Hebraism for justice and
equity (cf. Micah vi. 8).

Ver. 43. The sin of pride is rebuked ; the desire to be prominent and to secure reverent
salutations from their brethren. The places in the synagogue nearest to the reading-desk,
where the elders sat, were specially coveted.

Ver. 44. Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites !—Omit these words; omitted in R.V. Taken
probably from the parallel passage in Matt. xxiii. 27. Graves.—Unsuspected pits of cor-
ruption. The figure in St. Matthew’s gospel is somewhat different—* whited sepulchres,”
outwardly beautiful.

Ver. 45. One of the lawyers.—This man felt that his official ecclesiastical position should
shield him against such reproaches. As a class the lawyers, or scribes, were inclined to
Pharisaism.

Ver. 46. Burdens grievous.—The details of ceremonial obedience were multiplied and
became an intolerable yoke (cf. Acts xv. 10); and some of those who laid stress upon them
were guilty of the inconsistency of neglecting them themselves.

Ver. 47. Build sepulchres.—J.c., ostentatiously separate themselves from the sins of their
ancestors in rejecting the prophets, and yet are guilty of the same wickedness in rejecting
John the Baptist and Christ.

Ver. 48. Ye allow.—J.e., “consent to” (R.V.). In a sense, respect for the dead prophets
was in itself an offence against the living. Instead of hearkening to the voice of living
representatives of the Divine will, they set up against them the reputation and authority and
teaching of those who had long passed away.

Ver. 49. The wisdom of God.—This is a very peculiar phrase, and has excited considerable
controversy. There is no passage in the Old Testament which corresponds verbally with this
apparent quotation. There can be no doubt, however, that Christ alludes to 2 Chron.
xxiv. 20-22, and more especially to xxxvi. 14-21 of the same book. It may be that since
there is not formal quotation this peculiar phrase is used: the method of Divine procedure is
described rather than the historical examples of it cited. ‘The wisdom of God” is probably
equivalent to “the wise God.” God, in His wisdom, sees fit to follow such and such a course,

Ver. 51. Abel.—The first martyr in the strife between holiness and unrighteousness whose
history is found in the first historical book of the Old Testament. Zacharias.—2 Chron.
xxiv. 20, 21: the last historical book of the Old Testament.

Ver. 52. The key of knowledge.—Cf. Matt. xiii. 52, xvi. 19. Knowledge, #.¢., of God, of
which the Scriptures were the key. ‘The scribes, by arrogating to themselves exclusive
authority to interpret the Scriptures, while they did not interpret them truly, either for their
own use, or for the good of those whom they instructed, kept the key of knowledge shut up
and useless” (Speaker's Commentary).

Ver. 53. And as He said these things unto them.—Rather, “and when He was come out
from thence” (R.V.). Began to urge Him.—Or, “to press upon Him” (R.V.). “They
surrounded Him in a most threatening and irritating manner, in a scene of violence perhaps
unique in the life of Jesus” (Farrar).

Ver. 54. That they might accuse Him.—Omitted in R.V. ; but evidently the words are a fair
description of the motives of His adversaries, though not part of the text of the Gospel.


301


CHAP. XI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—13.


Christ Teaching how to Pray.—St. Luke seems to preserve the original setting
of the Lord’s prayer, and St. Matthew the full liturgical form of the prayer.

I. Note the mould for the disciples’ prayers.—It is properly not the ‘“ Lord’s
prayer,” but the servants’ prayer. It is not a formula, but a pattern. All the
essentials are preserved in this shorter version. 1. Invocation. There is first
the child’s cry to the Father. All Christian prayer bagins with that, and Christ
makes it possible so to begin, by giving to those who believe on His name power
to become sons of God. Consciousness of sonship, confidence in the Father’s love,
the child’s yearning towards Him, and the assurance that He hears, are all
expressed in that one word, and without these our prayers are of small account.
2. Petitions. Those bearing on God’s glory must be first, and those bearing
on ourselves second. God’s “ name” is His revealed character. It is ‘‘ hallowed”
when worthy thoughts of Him and corresponding emotions dwell in men. God’s
kingdom comes where His name is hallowed. It is that order or constitution of
things in which He rules, not over ignorant tools or reluctant slaves, but over
willing, because loving, sons. Its seat is within; its manifestation is outward.
All social and individual good is comprehended in that prayer, for the hallowing
of the name of the Father is the sole foundation of glad obedience to His sway,
which is love, joy, and peace, for men and nations. The second class of desires—
those for the supply of the suppliants’ wants—begin at the bottom and climb up.
Mark that we are not to say “my” but “our.” Brotherhood follows sonship.
Bread, not dainties; bread sufficient, not superfluous; bread for to-day, not for
to-morrow ;—how many would be content with that? The prayer for God’s glory
comes first, because that is greatest ; but that for bread comes first in its series,
because it is least. The need for pardon is as universal and more crying than
that for bread. It is the beginning of the spiritual life, but in this connection is
meant for all stages thereof, and implies some previous experience, inasmuch as it
makes our forgiving the reason for our being forgiven. While it is true that we
cannot receive pardon into an unmerciful heart, a prior truth is that we must
have experienced that pardon before becoming truly and habitually merciful.
An unforgiving Christian is a monster, and will turn out unforgiven; but a
heart that forgives, and has never sought and found God’s pardon, is as much of
a contradiction.

II. A parable of prayer.—The central point of it is the power of persistent
importunity, which is illustrated by a seemingly most incongruous narrative.
The man in bed with his children, who gets up at last for as selfish reasons as
had kept him lying, is a repulsive picture of selfish indolence, both when he
refuses and when he gives. But the very contrast between that temper and the
love of the Father, to which prayer appeals, is the point of the story. “It”
such a miserable creature, ‘* being evil,” is conquered by persistence, “ how much
more shall your heavenly Father give?” is the lesson here too. The contrast is
complete. Selfishness and perfect love, slothful indifference to need and un-
wearied, all-embracing, never-resting beneficence, a yielding at last to save
annoyance and get rid of an unwelcome presence and a yielding which has been
delayed for our good, and gives joyfully as soon as we are capable of receiving.
But is not the story so violently unlike God as to lose its power for the intended
purpose? Not if we keep in mind the “How much more.” Persistent asking
can melt even such a rock as that. What can it not do when it appeals to an
infinite pity anda Divine desire to give?

III. The confidence of prayer.—Our Lord adds to the parable His assurance
of the power of persistent prayer, and confirms it by an analogy which sets the
parable in its right light. “Ask” “seek” and “knock,” perhaps, express a


302


> earnestness.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XI.





gradation. Desires breathed to God are not in vain, but they must be accom-
panied with seeking which is effort. Knocking implies repetition as well as
Here, then, is another lesson to the disciples, teaching them
how to pray. Prayer is to be accompanied with appropriate efiort, and to be
persevering. But in what region of experience are these unconditional promises
fulfilled? Surely not in this world of bitter disappointments, and baffled desires,
and frustrated quests! It would be a questionable blessing if all our desires in
regard to outward benefits were granted, and the Father in heaven would be less
wise than many an earthly father, who knows that an indulged child is a
“spoiled” child. The abounding promise is true absolutely in the spiritual realm,
where fuller knowledge of God, a more Christ-like character, and more blessed
communion with Him, wait for all who desire them and seek them in God’s way.
The closing analogy lifts the child’s prayer to its true place. Mark the parallel
between the “ which of you” in the parable, and the “of which of you” in ver.
11 (R.V.). By the former our experience as petitioners is brought to illustrate the
truth taught; by the latter, our experience as givers. Fatherly love is taken
for granted ; the thing enforced is confidence in fatherly wisdom. Jesus charges
“evil” on all men, and emphatically exempts Himself. And then He bids us
not to think that the grudging giver of the parable represents God, but to take
the purest, most unselfish love which we know, and purify it yet more by taking
away all taint, and to think of that asa dim shadow of the infinite love and
wisdom which in the heavens hears and answers our poor cries.—Maclaren.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 1—13.


Ver 1. Before the Lord’s Prayer. not waiting to be made sons, but em-


“ As He was praying.”’—This prayer
preceded the giving of His own prayer
for the perpetual use of His Church
and people below. It is impossible
for us to exaggerate the import-
ance of the occasion. Was not the
occasion worthy of a special prayer


of Christ to consecrate it? We must
not presume to speak confidently
where God has not spoken. But not


on that account should we shrink from
a serious pondering of mysteries too
high and too deep for us: may it be
but with reverence that we turn aside
to see this great sight, the Saviour
rising from His own prayer to give
inspiration for ever to the prayer of
others. Might not He be praying, in
that prayer of preface and prelude,
that the spirit of the prayer He was
about to prescribe might be indeed the
spirit in all future ages of His disciples
and of His Church? That the filial
heart might be the religion of His
people—the filial and the brotherly?
That sinners might be enabled to view
aright their own standing—as sinners,
yet sons; sons still, however sinful ;


boldened to claim and to exercise a son-
ship, which is theirs by birth, in right
of a Divine creation, a Divine redemp-
tion, and a Divine evangelisation ?
That in this sonship, of right theirs,
yet all of grace, they might see and
feel to be included all mankind, how-
ever widely severed and dissociated by
birth and place, by thought and phrase,
by habit and custom in things secular
or in things sacred? That His Church
might ever be interested in the work
of God, His cause and His glory, and
might ever give the first place in its
prayer to that which concerned these?
That the great message of the forgive-
ness of sins might be so written upon
the hearts of His people that they
might be able to use it with quiet-
ness and confidence for their daily
comfort and strengthening, forgetting
the things behind and reaching forth
always to the things before? That
thus His Gospel might approve itself
to the conscience and heart of man-
kind, as indeed the power of God unto
salvation, a religion of light, life, and
love, spreading blessing everywhere


303


CHAP. XI.


7? 2445 Jen a
"_


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





around it, and, like the crucified Lord
whose living witness it is, lifted above
earth while planted upon it, drawing
all men unto it, and so unto Him ?—
Vaughan.


Vers. 1-13. Lessons on Prayer.

I. The need of help in-prayer.

II. The pattern prayer.—It is full
of simple trust; it is unselfish ; it is
simple ; it is reverent ; it is spiritual.

III. Importunate prayer.

IV. Promises for prayer.—7Zaylor.


Ver. 1. “ When He Ceased.”—While
continuing His journey, the Lord re-
mained faithful to His habits of
personal devotion. He did not content
Himself with that constant direction
of the soul towards God, which has so
often been supposed to be the meaning
of the precept, ‘‘ Pray withont ceasing.”
There were in His life special times,
positive acts of prayer. This is indi-
cated in the words that follow: “ when
He ceased.” —Godet.


Prayer the Distinguishing Mark of
God’s Children.—Speech distinguishes
men from animals; speech rising into
prayer distinguishes the children of God
from the children of this world.


A Desire to be Like Christ.—They
observed in their Master, while He
prayed, a strange separation from the
world, a conscious nearness to God, a
delight in the Father’s presence, and
a familiarity in communion with the
Father, which seemed to them like
heaven upon earth. Fondly desiring
to partake of these blessed privileges,
they besought their Master to show
them the way.—Arnot.


“ Teach us to pray.’—We forget that
we are to learn to pray; and that
prayer is to be learned, as all other
things, by frequency, constancy, and
perseverance.—Law.


Social Prayers of Jesus.—The request
and its occasion, taken together, convey
to us incidentally two pieces of informa-


304


tion. From the latter we learn that
Jesus, besides praying much alone,
also prayed in company with His
disciples, practising family prayer, as
the head of a household, as well as
secret prayer in personal fellowship
with God His Father. From the
former we learn that the social prayers
of Jesus were most impressive.
Disciples hearing them were made
painfully conscious of their own in-
capacity, and, after the Amen, were


ready instinctively to proffer the re-


quest, “ Lord, teach us to pray,” as if
ashamed any more to attempt the
exercise in their own feeble, vague,
stammering words.—Bruce.


The Disciples’ Request.—The request
was brought before the Lord Jesus
on a remarkable occasion, or at least
at a moment of great solemnity. The
Lord was praying in a certain place.

I. Perhaps it was a fixed place, an
understood place, which He had chosen
for the purpose.

II. It appears, too, that He was oc-
cupied in this way for some time. This
seems to follow from the expression
“when He ceased.”

III. It is evident likewise that while
He was so occupied they watched and
waited. No one ought, if it can be
avoided, to be interrupted during the
exercise of prayer.

IV. But there was more than this
in the case of Jesus. They were mani-
festly filled with reverential awe.

V. Yet they longed to learn some-
thing of this power of intercourse with
our Father in heaven. They remem-
bered, too, how John the Baptist had
spoken of this intercourse—how he
had given instructions to his disciples
concerning prayer—and when the Lord
had ‘“‘ceased” they laid their request
before Him : “ Lord, teach us to pray.”

VI. It was a request which led to
great results. Never was a question
which brought an answer more prolific
of benefit to mankind.— Howson.


A New Stage in the Life of the
Disciples—The disciples had, doubtless,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


=





been accustomed to pray, but it was a
new and further stage in their disciple-
life when they thus expressly asked
some further and fuller teaching in
prayer. It was one thing to pray; it
was another thing to feel their need
and defectiveness in this so much that
they directly ask for help, not only to
pray better, but, as it now seemed to
them, to pray at all. “Lord, teach
us to pray” is always a new stage in
disciple-life.— Maccoll.


“As John also taught his disciples.” —
In this beautiful half sentence we learn
something concerning the Baptist which
we should never have known otherwise,
something which may teach us for our
own benefit.

I. We have abundant information
in the Gospel narrative respecting the
Baptist’s sternness, courage, faithful-
ness, his summoning all men to re-
pentance, his self-denial, his fearlessness
in rebuking sin in high places, his utter
devotion to Christ, his deep humility,
his censciousness that he was only a
messenger preparing the way for One
greater than himself. But these for
the most part were severe qualities,
containing even what we may call an
element of harshness. Where in all
this do we perceive any traces of that
tenderness and patience which are
implied in the statement that he
“taught his disciples to pray ” ?

II. Let us look at the matter from
another point of view. St. John is
named in the New Testament beyond
the limits of the Gospel History. His
great shadow is, indeed, cast across all
the Scriptural narrative of the history
of the earliest Church. But all this
does not touch in the least what we
fid in this beautiful half-sentence of
our text. Nay, the very grandeur of
John the Baptist seems, at first sight,
almost in contrast with the other im-
pression. For in teaching how to pray
there is personal sympathy, minute
attention, consideration, and gentle-
ness. We hardly expected to find this
in the Baptist, but we do find it; and
is it not a great example ?—Howson.


CHAP. XI.


Vers. 2-4. The Warrant and the Liturgy
of Prayer.

I. The Lord’s Prayer is Christ’s
warrant for prayer.—It settled, once
for all, the great question of praying.
“When ye pray ”—as, of course, you
do pray. Prayer is sometimes called
an instinct. It is an instinct of the
original nature—the nature made in
God’s image, after God’s likeness—
would that the fallen being always
found it so! Certainly prayer has no
exemption from the assaults of a scoff-
ing generation. Thankful ought we to
be that we have our Saviour’s express
warrant for it. The Lord’s prayer is
that first and before all else. His ex-
ample would have been something.
His permission, His encouragement,
His‘command to pray, would have been
more. But this form of words is a
sort of sacrament of prayer, an outward
visible sign presenting to the very
senses the assurance of the inward
spiritual grace attending and following.

I}. The Lord’s Prayer is the one in-
spired liturgy of the Christian society.
—‘‘When ye pray, say,” 1s a warrant
for the lawfulness of forms of worship.
As such, it supplies a want. It
guarantees uniformity, so far as uni-
formity is a condition of unity. The
Lord has in it instituted a liturgy
for the perpetual security of har-
mony and sympathy in the addresses
of His peopie to the God and Father
through Him. Let us make much
of this gift of gifts as a substantial
bond of union among all Christian
people, however widely, in other re-


spects, divided and separated. They
have a common prayer, if not a
Common Prayer-Book. They who


unite in the Lord’s Prayer join in the
one liturgy which has come down from
heaven.


Beauty and Value of the Lord’s Prayer.
—The beauty and value of the lessons
in the Lord’s Prayer arise from: 1. The
tone of holy confidence. It teaches
us to approach God as our Father
(Rom. viii. }5), in love as well as holy
fear. 2. Its absolute unselfishness. It


305


CHAP. XI.


is offered in the plural—not for our-
selves only, but for all the brotherhood
of man. 3. Its entire spirituality.
Only one petition is for any earthly
boon, and that only for the simplest.
4, Its brevity, and absence of all vain
repetitions. 5. Its simplicity? which
requires, not learning, but only holiness
and sincerity, for its universal compre-
hension.—Farrar.


The Lord's Prayer.

I. Contents.—1. Christ teaches us
to pray as well for temporal as for
spiritual necessities. 2. But still more
for spiritual than for temporal. One
petition only for daily bread; five are
devoted to higher concerns. 3. The
glorifying of the name of God must
stand yet more in the foreground than
the fulfilment of our necessities.

II. Frame of mind.—The Saviour
here teaches us to pray: 1. In deep
reverence. 2. In child-like confidence.
3. In a spirit of love for others.—Van
Oosterzee.


I. The address.—1. The filial relation
to God. 2. The fraternal relation to
our fellow-men. 3. Heaven our destina-
tion (faith, love, and hope respectively,
all combining to bring us into a true
frame of mind).

II. The petitions—1. Those which
concern the glory of God. 2. Those
which express the wants of men.


Devotion to God and Acceptance of
His Gifts.—Devotion to God and accept-
ance of His gifts are contrasted in the
Lord’s Prayer.

I. Devotion to His name, to His
kingdom, and to His will.

II. Acceptance of His gifts in re-
ference to the present, the past, and the
future.—Lange.


The Petitions.—Having risen to what
forms the highest and holiest object of
believers, the soul is engrossed with
its character (first petition), its grand
purpose (second petition), and its moral
condition (third petition); in the fourth
petition the children of God humble


306


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


themselves under the consciousness of
their dependence upon Divine mercy
even in temporal matters, but much
more in spiritual things, since that
which, according to the first por-
tion of this prayer, constituted the
burden of desire, can only be realised
by forgiveness (fifth petition), by gra-
cious guidance (sixth petition), and
deliverance from the power of the devil
(seventh petition).—Meyer.


God and Man.—The prayer sets forth
(1) God’s relation to man, and (2) man’s
relation to God.

I. Petitions which have to do ex-
clusively with God. 1. Thy name be
hallowed. 2. 7Thy kingdom come. 3.
Thy will be done. These occur in a
descending scale—from Himself down
to the manifestation of Himself in His
kingdom; and from His kingdom to
the entire subjection of its subjects, or
the complete doing of His will.

II. Petitions which have to do with
ourselves.—1. “Give ws our bread.”
2. “ Forgive us our debts.” 3. “ Lead
us not into temptation.” 4. ‘ Deliver
us from evil.” These occur in an
ascending scale—from the bodily wants
of every day up to our final deliverance
from all evil.— Brown.


Ver. 2. “ When ye pray, say.” —That
briefest, tersest, fullest of all forms of
prayer, the only exhaustive one, the
only perfect and sutlicient, because all-
embracing and all-comprehending, one.
How can we put into words all that
the Lord’s Prayer had in it for the
Church and for the Christian? I do
not believe that childhood or youth, or
even middle life, or anything short of
old age, can at all fully appreciate the
Lord’s Prayer. It is condensed, it is
deep, it is difficult. No commentary
and no catechism can elucidate without
diluting, or improve without spoiling
it. Not until that age comes which
demands above all things the real and
the strong and the substantial, the
thing that can be leaned upon and
rested upon and (when the time comes)
died upon, can any man know in him-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XI.





self aJl that the great Lord did for us
when He answered that request, “Teach
us to pray,” and answered it in the
particular form to which eighteen
venturies have appropriated the grand
title ‘The Lord’s Prayer.” . Let us
earnestly ask ourselves whether we
have been faithful to the precept,
When ye pray, say”? Do we make
full use of ourselves of the prayer?
Do we, in our use of it, think into it,
and think out of it, some of its hidden
treasures of grace? Do we take liter-
ally enough its companion words in St.
Matthew, ‘‘ When ye pray, use not vain
repetitions . . . your Father knoweth
what things ye have need of before
ye ask Him... . After this manner
therefore pray ye”? Is not the old
weary round too often trodden in our
praying, as if indeed the Lord’s Prayer
were not !—Vaughan.


Our Intercessor—Just as we have
our Saviour as our Intercessor in
heaven, so we, in our prayers on earth,
take the words of our Intercessor to
help us.—Cyprian.


“ Our Father, who art in heaven.” —
This implies (1) that we have access to
God, and (2) that we may rely on Him
with full and unshaken confidence.


“ Our Father.”—Not ‘“‘ My Father.”
The plural reminds us (1) of our
brotherhood in Christ, and (2) of the
duty of common prayer. God is our
Father (1) because He is our Creator
and Sustainer, and (2) because we are
His adopted children by faith in Jesus
(Gal, iii. 26).


A Personal God.—This phrase is a
denial of Atheism, Pantheism, and
Deism, for it recognises a God, a
Personal God, who is our Father
through Christ.


“Hallowed be Thy name.” — Cf.
Mal. i. 6. A son honoureth his
father, and a servant. his master; if,
then, I be a father, where is Mine
honour ? and if I be a master, where is
My fear?


General Character of the Prayer.—
The prayer is that the existence of
God may be believed, His attributes
and perfections adored and imitated,
His supremacy acknowledged, and His
providence owned and trusted in.—


Bloomfield.


Fulfilment of this Petition. —We can
fulfil this prayer (1) by joining with
our brethren in the public worship of
God; (2) by reverence of demeanour
in the house of God; (3) by refraining
from sinful and profane talk; and (4)
by reverencing everything belonging
to God—His word, His day, His sacra-
ments, His ministers, and His people.


“Thy kingdom come.”—1. God’s
spiritual rule over the souls of men.
2. The extension of His Church, as of
His visible kingdom. 3. His heavenly
kingdom, which is to come after the
resurrection, and to endure for ever.


“ Thy will be done.”

I. Because it is the will of the
author of our being and the fountain
of all existence.

II. God’s will should be done by us
because it is supported by the whole
constitution of things.

III. God’s will is to be done by us
because it is a perfect will, a righteous
and loving will, the will of a father.

IV. God’s will is to be done because
it rests on perfect knowledge and the
widest survey of things.— Leckie.


Submission of Our Wills to God’s Will.
—Our wills are to be sacrificed to the
will of God; we are (1) to obey . His
commandments, and (2) to suffer what
He may lay upon us with faith and
submission and contentment.


“ Asin heaven.” —“ Bless the Lord, ye
His angels, that excel in strength, that
do His commandments, hearkening unto
the voice of His word” (Ps. ciii. 20).


The Trinity.—The first three petitions
are inseparably triwne: the name to
be hallowed, of the Father just invoked,


207


CHAP. XI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





of the Son whose kingdom is to come,
of the Spirit through whose inworking
the children of God are disciplined
and enabled to do His will.—Stzer.


Ver. 3. “Give us day by day our
daily bread.” —This teaches us (1) that
everything we enjoy is the gift of God ;
(2) that as God is willing and able to
give, we should not be overwhelmed by
earthly anxieties and cares; (3) that
our desires should be modest and reason-
able; and (4) that we should ever be
thankful for having received from God
so much more than daily bread.


“ Give us.” —The prayer (1) acknow-
ledges that we are indebted to God for
our simplest boons ; (2) asks for them
all; (3) asks them only day by day ;
(4) and asks for no more (cf. Prov.
xxx. 8).—Sarrar.


The Present, the Past, and the Future.
—As the prayer for daily bread raises
us above care for to-day, and the
prayer for the forgiveness of sins is
meant to quiet us concerning the past,
so is the prayer against temptation a
weapon for the uncertain futwre.—Van
Oosterzee.


Ver. 4. “ Forgive,” etc.—The last
three petitions have regard to (1) the
beginning, (2) the progress, and (3)
the end of spiritual life in the world;
the worshipper confesses his guilt, de-
precates danger, and asks for deliver-
ance from the evils to which he is
exposed.


“ For we also forgive.”—As the
first invocation put away all idolatry
and image-worship, so is all murder,
and anger, adultery, stealing, slander-
ing, and whatever other evil to our
neighbour there may be, put away
from the heart and will of him who
prays the fifth petition and abides in
it.— Stier.


“ Indebted to us.”—We cannot for-
give sins, as such—that belongs to God ;
but only as obligations from man to


308


man, represented by the commercial
phrase “ indebted.”


“ Tead us not.’—The memory of
past faults suggests the idea of present
weakness, and excites a fear of falling
into sin in time to come.


Opportunity and Desire.—Our prayer
is, Let not the tempting opportunity —
meet the too-susceptible disposition.
If the temptation comes, quench the
desire; if the desire, spare us the temp-
tation.—/arrar.


“ Deliver us from evil.”—The ex-
pression is a military term, which de-
scribes the deliverance of a prisoner
who has fallen, or who is on the point
of falling, into the power of the enemy.
The enemy is the Evil One, who lays
snares in the path of the faithful.
They, conscious of the danger which
they run, and of their own weakness,
ask God not to permit them to be taken
in. the snares which may have been
set for them by the adversary.—Godet.


“ Temptation ... evil.” 1. Concealed
pitfalls. 2. Open dangers. The peti-
tion teaches us (1) Aumilty—we are
to ask for help against al/ temptations,
even the smallest, and not to be led
near them ; and (2) cauwtion—for if our
prayer is to be effcctual, we must shun
evil and the appearance of evil.


Vers. 5-13. The Efficacy of Prayer.—
This is proved by—

I. An example of how importunity
avails, even in the case of a disobliging
neighbour.

II. Daily experience (vers. 9, 10).

III. The fatherly character of God
(vers. 11-13).


Ver. 5-10. Indifference overcome by
Prayer.—After Jesus had taught His
disciples how to pray, He went on
to speak to them in a parable that
seems to cast a new light on some of
those relations of man to God which
are to be affected by this mysterious
agency. For instead of representing


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


CHAP. XI.





the Divine nature as openand tremulous
to our cry, it is represented to us here
as if wrapped in a slumber heavy as
midnight, and only to be awakened by
our persistent and most urgent en-
deavour. The same view of matters is
presented in the parable of the Im-
portunate Widow and the Unjust
Judge. The first feeling we have about
the matter is either that there has been
some mistake in the way these parables
are reported or that it is hopeless for
try to understand them. We say,
“This householder asleep at midnight !
What can this mean?” I think the
meaning is that Jesus would teach us in
this way what we are learning in many
other ways—that the best things in the
Divine life, as in the natural, will not
come to us merely for the asking ; that
true prayer is the whole strength of
the man going out after his needs, and
the real secret of getting what you
want in heaven, as on earth, lies in the
fact that you give your whole heart for
it, or you cannot adequately value it
when you get it. So, ‘Ask, and it
shall be given you; seek, and ye shall
find; knock, and it shall be opened
unto you” means, “ Put out all your
energies, as if you had to waken heaven
out of a midnight slumber, or an in-
difference like that of the unjust judge.”
The parable teaches something in our
life we seldom adequately consider—viz.,
what might be called the indifference of
God to anything less than the best there
is inman—the determination of Heaven
not to hear what we are not determined
that heaven shall hear.—Collyer.


Vers, 5-8. Duty of Hospitality and
Neighbourliness.—We are here taught
incidentally : 1. The duty of hospitality,
and that not grudgingly, or of necessity,
but cheerfully shown. 2. The duty of
friendly and neighbourly accommoda-
tion,


Vers. 5-7. A Contrast.—All the cir-
cumstantial features form a contrast to
the Friend in heaven, who never gives
such an answer (though it may at first
seem so to unbelief), God does not


sleep, He never shuts His door against
us; He has no favourite children who
divert His attention from us; He does
not think it a trouble to hear, and to
grant. And though man sometimes is
really not able to help, yet God is
always both willing and able.—Stier.


A Parable on Importunate Prayer.—
Jesus was well aware how God often
shows Himself so little like a father
that those who trust in Him are
tempted to think Him rather like a
man of selfish spirit, who cares only
for his own comfort. Such precisely
is the representation of God as He
appears in the parable of the Selfish
Neighbour.

I. The relevancy of the parable re-
quires that His character should be
regarded as representing God—not as
He is, indeed, but as He seems to tried
faith.—It is thus tacitly admitted by
Jesus that, far from giving His children
what they need before they ask, God
often delays for a lengthened period
answers to prayer, so as to present to
suppliants an aspect of indifference and
heartlessness. The didactic drift of
the parable is: You will have to wait
on God, but it is worth your while to
wait. Man can be compelled to hear
by importunity and excessive knocking.
God is not a man to be compelled, yet
it may be said that the apparent re-
luctance of Providence can be overcome
by persistent prayer which refuses to
be gainsaid or frustrated, continuing to
knock at the door with an importunity
that knows no shame. In other words,
with full consciousness how much there
is in the world which seems to prove
the contrary, Jesus asserted the reality
of a Paternal Providence continually
working for the good of those who
make the kingdom of God their chief
end.

If. It must be observed that, while
giving this assurance to His disciples
that God would attend to their spiritual
welfare, Jesus did not lead them to ex-
pect that in this sphere there would be
no occasion for exercising the virtue of
patience.—On the contrary, it is clearly


309


CHAP. XI.


implied in the parable that the delays
which make God assume so untoward
an aspect take place in connection
with all the objects referred to in the
Lord’s Prayer: the advancement of
the kingdom, daily bread, the personal
spiritual necessities of disciples. Hence
we learn that even the Holy Spirit may
not be given at once in satisfying
measure to those who earnestly desire
it, though sure to be so given eventually.
The Holy Spirit is given in ample
measure to all earnest souls, but not
even to the most earnest without such
delays as are most trying to faith and
patience.— Bruce.


J. This ever-mindful God, our loving
Father, has a way of His own, and we
must meet Him in His own way.—He
is very willing to give good gifts—more
so than our earthly fathers. But He
must be entreated to give them.

II. Ye shall receive, but not with-
out asking. And then, too, not always
at once.—This is the lesson of the
parable. Because of His importunity,
the man got what he wanted. He
would not be put off. He asked till
he got.

III. How much more will our
Heavenly Father give good gifts.—
especially that best gift, His own Holy
Spirit—the Spirit of Christian peace,
and joy, and love, and holiness—if we
ask, and ask again, and will not let
Him go until He blesses us !—James
Hastings.


How God Appears to the Timid Mind.
—tThe parable is intended to set forth,
not the actual way in which God ought
to be regarded, but how He may be
represented to a man, by his ignorance
and fear, by one who is in need, and
has ventured at some midnight hour to
knock at God’s door. Now that He
has begun to ask, why should he leave
off? Let him continue to ask. Impor-
tunity and a little delay will do him
good in this first venture. He will
come back more confidently next time,
for God will seem more a friend than
He was before.—Maccoll.


310


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


Utter Selfishness Depicted.—The utter
selfishness of the man to whom the
appeal is made is vividly depicted.
1. Though addressed as “ friend,” he
omits any such appellation in his reply.
2. His first words are rude, surly, and
abrupt. 3. He details the obstacles
that stand in the way of granting
the request—the trouble involved in
opening the door, and the risk of
awakening the children.


Ver. 5. “At midnight.”-—He de-
signed us to understand that if a man,
unwillingly roused from his sleep by
some petitioner, is compelled to give,
with how much greater kindliness we
may expect bounty at the hands of
Him who “never slumbereth” and
who is the very person who rouses us
to call us upon Him.—A ugustine.


“Three loaves.” —I.e., cakes of bread.
There is no mystical significance in the
number—it is simply an appropriate
detail in the parable: one loaf for the
guest, one for the host who sits down
at table with him, and a third in re-
serve.


Importunate Faith —W henthe heart,
which has been away on a journey, re-
turns suddenly at midnight (in the time
of greatest darkness and distress)
home to us—that is, comes to itself
and feels hunger—and we have nothing
wherewith to satisfy it, God requires
of us bold, importunate faith.—Meyer.


Ver. 7. “ Trouble me not.”—The re-
luctance is real: but God’s reluctance
is apparent only, and even this appear-
ance arises from reasons which work
for our best good.


Ver. 8. “ Importunity.”—T.e., shame-
lessness. How expressive the word, and
how instructive! It teaches us the
nature of true prevailing prayer. The
prayer which gains its end is prayer
which knocks till the door is opened,
regardless of so-called decencies and pro-
prieties, which it seeks till it obtains, a,
the risk of being reckoned impudent,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XI.





which simply cannot understand and
will not take a refusal, and asks till it
receives.— Bruce.


Importunity in Prayer Reasonable,
and Incumbent upon us.

I. Because of the majesty and holi-
ness of Him whom we address, and our
own weakness and sinfulness. In-
difference and lukewarmness are out of
place.

II. Because of the great value of
the spiritual deliverances and blessings
we implore.


Encouragements to Importunity in
Prayer.

I. It tends to quicken our desires.

II. Such prayer has the promise of
being answered.

IIf. The record in Scripture of suc-
cessful importunate prayers.—Jacob,
Elijah, the Syro-phenician woman, St.
Paul, and Christ Himself.


Ver. 9. “ I say unto you.” —A marked
distinction is to be drawn between the
use of this phrase in the preceding verse
and that made of it here. The former is
unemphatic—any one would admit that
such ‘‘ shamelessness ” would be likely
toprevail in the circumstances described;
any one could say, ‘“‘ He would be sure
to rise and give whatever was asked.”
But in this verse Christ emphatically
assures us on His own testimony that
like importunity does avail in prayer
to God. Our warrant for believing
in the efficacy of importunate prayer
rests, not upon analogies or arguments,
but upon the testimony of Christ Him-
self.


1. Asking, Seeking, Knocking.—We
ask for what we wish. 2. We seek for
what we miss. 3. We knock for that
from which we feel ourselves shut out.
—Brown.


“ Tt shall be opened.”
“ Fervent love,
And lively hope with violence assail
The kingdom of the heavens, and overcome
The will of the Most High; not in such sort


As man prevails o’er man; but conquers it,

Because ’tis willing to be conquered, still,

Though conquered, by its mercy conquering.”
Dante (Parad, xx.).


Ver. 10. Receiveth ... findeth...
at shall be opened.” —Two of the verbs
are in the present, the third is in the
future; and this last is because the
opening of the door is not the action
of the person who knocks, but of
another within.


Asking Apparently in Vain.—If any
complain that they have “asked,”
“sought,” “ knocked in vain,” Jet them
be reminded—

I. That prayer is not always
answered immediately. —The reason
why God sometimes delays His gifts
may be because that which is long
looked for is sweeter when obtained,
but that is held cheap which comes at
once.

II. That is often an act of the truest
love to withhold a favour, however
earnestly prayed for.

III. That prayer, though sometimes
actually refused, for merciful reasons,
at the time, is sometimes, perhaps
always, eventually answered in a
different and far higher sense than
was expected or desired.—_Burgon.


The Most Wonderful of the Parables.
—In some respects this parable and
that of the Unjust Judge, are the more
wonderful and precious of all the
parables. The rest present such views
of Divine grace as may be shadowed
forth by the ordinary manifestations of
human character and action—such as
a shepherd bringing back his sheep, or
a sower casting his seed into the ground;
but these two go sheer down through
all that lies on the surface of human
history—down through all the upper
and ordinary grades of human ex-
perience—and penetrate into the lower,
darker, meaner things at the bottom,
in order to find a longer line wherewith
to measure out greater lengths and
breadths of God’s compassion.— Arnot.


Vers. 11, 12. Bread, Fish, Hggs.—
311


CHAP. XI,


The three articles of food are not
taken at haphazard. Bread, hard-
boiled eggs, and fried fish, are the
ordinary articles used for food by a
traveller in the East.

The outward resemblance between
the wholesome articles of food and the


useless or hurtful substitute, renders _


the form in which the lesson is cast all
the more picturesque and happy.


Ver. 11. God’s Giving.—God gives us
(1) more than we ask, (2) what we
cannot ask; (3) against our asking.


Ver. 13. “ Being evil.”—Original sin


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


No Flattery of the World in Scripture.
—Scripture does not commend itself te
the world by speaking well of it ; more
wonder is it that Scripture has been
received by men as God’s Word.—
Wordsworth.


Christ Implies His own Sinlessness.
—Not ‘we being evil”: an indirect
but unmistakeable testimony to His
own sinlessness.


“ How much more.”—He has both
(1) will to give, and (2) wisdom to give
good things only. He will give us as
largely as we can receive of His own
Holy Spirit.


is here very distinctly implied.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 14—36.


Neutrality Impossible in Religion.—This miracle of casting out the devil
from the dumb man served to bring the claims of Christ before those who
witnessed it. They were, as it were, compelled to make up their mind to accept
Him or to reject Him as their Saviour and Lord. He was evidently armed
with supernatural power, and admission of this fact should naturally have
led to an acceptance of His teaching. The kingdom of God had come, and
men were called to choose what attitude towards it they would take up. Yet
the minds of the people were undecided ; some were merely astonished at the
prodigy they had witnessed, others demanded a further sign of His Divine
authority, while a third class boldly accused Him of collusion with Satan—of
being aided by Satanic power in order to deceive the people more completely.
Our Lord refuted this calumny by appealing to the teaching of common-sense,
and by pointing out that all successful exorcism was performed in the Divine
name and by the power of God—the strong being overcome by One yet stronger.
He then declared that those that were not with Him were against Him, or, in
other words, that there is no neutrality possible in matters of “religion.

I. Absence of positive attachment to Christ involves hostility to Him.—As
head of the kingdom of God and in conflict with the powers of evil He represents
a cause which concerns every living man. There is no alternative between
accepting Him and rejecting Him—between being on the side of holiness and
being opposed to it. Men may stand outside of other movements—political,
social, artistic, literary, or philosophical—and assert that they are incapable
of judging between the merits of contending parties, or that they are not
interested in the questions debated. But in the strife between good and evil
none can be neutral: to do evil and to acquiesce in evil done are treason against
God. There is but a difference in degree of culpability between those who
openly range themselves on the side of evil and those who refuse to take a place
on the side of righteousness. Distaste for holiness is akin to positive love of sin.
Christ here brings this home to the consciences of men. Love for God is
inextricably involved with allegiance to the Son of God manifest in the flesh,
and those who reject Him who was sent, reject Him by whom He was sent.
The rejection may be accompanied with malignant feelings and with open
outrage, but it is none the less rejection if the summons to follow Him is declined
in the most courteous terms.


312


HOMILETIC. COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XI.
————— eee


II. A pretended neutrality is only a prelude to a worse state.—The heart
of man is like a house prepared for habitation ; if it is not occupied by a. spirit
of holiness it will be seized upon by an evil spirit. That which is strongest will
hold it. The appearance of neutrality between good and evil may for a time
be kept up; there may be an absence of openly vicious tendencies in the life, as
well as of faith in the Saviour and loyalty to His person. But this mere varnish
of decency and respectability will not strengthen the character and enable it to
stand against a renewed and more determined assault of evil. Forces are at
work that will inevitably degrade the nature that is not consciously in communion
with God and Christ, or that deliberately refuses the better part. “The last
state of that man is worse than the first.”


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 14—36.


Ver. 14. The Dumb Spirit—It is of his Master. What name can we
thus still. While the devil has pos- give to that use of speech which leaves
session, the man is dumb.’ Only when out or refuses this high object? With


the devil is cast out by the word of
Jesus can the dumb speak. The in-
dication of possession in this instance
was the silence. There is a very true
sense in which every man naturally,
and without God, has in him a dumb
spirit, and can only lose that spirit
under the healing touch of Christ.

I. The curse of a bad temper.—The
sullen silence, the overcast brow, the
morose reserve, the speechless dis-
pleasure, priding itself on its tenacity
and perseverance—is not this indeed an
example of possession by a dumb spirit ?
At such times you are under Satanic
influence.

II. The pre-occupied, self- engrossed
life—Excluding others from all con-
fidence, having in reality no partner
and no associate, giving out in social
converse the merest superficialities of
thought, and in domestic intercourse
the veriest dregs and refuse of one’s
being. Does the description sound
unamiable? It is so. This is not the
man for love, for love is not in him.
But is the description exaggerated ?
Has it no counterpart! Alas! too
often is it to be found. The lips may
speak, but the soul speaks not: the
devil that possesses is not only de-
basing, but dumb.

IIJ. A more nearly universal ex-
perience.—The absence of spiritually
helpful speech. The silence of most on
the highest themes. A true Christian
will use his gift of speech in the service


most, alas! as to any value or blessing
bestowed on others by our gift of
speech, we might as well have been
bereft of it. The spirit possessing us
has been no better than a dumb
spirit.

IV. It has been so towards men.—
We have done no good with our speech.
And how has it been towards God ?
Our text stands in immediate connec-
tion with a passage on prayer. Pos-
session by the evil one makes us dumb
Godward. We all, naturally, hang
back from prayer. Is prayer a com-
mand? We disobey it. Is it a
privilege? Wescorn it. Any excuse
is enough to put it aside. Books,
amusements, are welcome to us
if they come instead of, and form an
excuse for, neglecting prayer. How
can you doubt being under some
malign influence if you are prevented .
from holding communion with your
heavenly Father ?

V. But the gospel of Jesus Christ
comes to our help.—It humbles, that
it may raise. The text which condemns,
also promises. ‘When the devil was
gone out, the dumb spake.” Has it
not been found true a thousand times!
The profane, the deceitful, the blas-
phemous, the frivolous, the impure,
have learned to pray, and to praise.
There is magic in the contact of
Christ’s power. It transforms souls,
and fulfils the words “ When the devil
was gone out, the dumb spake. And


313


CHAP. XI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





all the people gave praise to God.”—
Vaughan.


“ Tt was dumb.”—As if the miracle
were done as a sign illustrative of this
teaching to pray. For this is the real
difficulty that many have as to prayer.
They are dumb, at least to God, because
an evil spirit has got possession of them,
and another spirit is needed, that they
may begin thus to speak. The very
readiness to pray, although long dumb,
may be the first sign of such a wonder,
as the gift of the Holy Spirit, silently
wrought. It is the very finger of God
that casts out of men this dumb,
prayerless spirit, and all others of the
same evil class.—Maccoll.


* Dumb.”——This man, possessed by a
devil, was both dumb and blind (Matt.
xii. 22). Some of Christ’s cures were
wrought (1) on persons who appealed
for help; (2) on some, as the paralytic,
who, with their own consent, were
brought to Him ; (3) on some whom He
chanced to meet (chap. vii. 12; John v.
5); and (4), in this instance, on one
brought to Him without his own
consent.


Three Classes of Spectators.—Three
classes of people behold this miracle :
1. Those who are for Christ, and
marvel as they recognise the Divine
power manifested by Him. 2. Those
who are against Him, and ascribe the
work to the powers of evil. 3. Those
who are neutral, and ask a fresh sign,
to convince their wavering minds.


Vers. 14-16. A Terrible Accusation.
—The cure having been immediately
and completely successful, those present
expressed their feelings. From the
midst of this multitude, plunged in
astonishment, some are heard to state
a most terrible accusation. There
was, they said, collusion between Jesus
and Satan: Satan, in order to secure
credit for Him, has given Him this
power over the possessed. Others,
more moderate in appearance, demand
that Jesus, to free Himself from such


314


a suspicion, should work a miracle of
a kind different from these cures—
a sign proceeding undeniably from
heaven, the seat of Divine power;
then it will be evident that His power
is derived from a holy source.— Godet.


Ver. 15. “ But some of them said.” —
It is as if the cast-out devil had just
entered into these, to make them blind
with a more wicked blindness, and,
from being a dumb devil, had, for a
change, become one speaking blasphe-
mously..— Stier.


“ He casteth out.”—It is well worthy
of notice that the enemies of Christ do
not deny the fact of the miracle having
been wrought, though their hatred of
Him led them to draw this injurious
inference from the fact.


“ Through Beelzebub.”—The imputa-
tion was that Satan had, as principal,
entered into a compact with Jesus, as
subordinate. He had entered into this
compact, it was insinuated, for the
purpose of putting down the inestim-
ably beneficent influence of the
Pharisees. Hence, it was alleged, all
the strictures and criticisms of Jesus
on the godly ways of the godly people!
Power was given from beneath, power
even to cast out demons, so that the
people might be thoroughly deceived.
—Morison.


Ver. 16. “From heaven.”—Such as
the manna from heaven given by
Moses: the fire called down by Elijah.
A sign was offered by Isaiah to Ahaz
“either in the depth or in the height
above” (Isa. vii. 11). The demand was
akin to the third temptation in the
wilderness.


Vers, 17-26. The Accusation Refuted ;
the True Explanation Given.

I. Jesus refutes the blasphemous ex-
planation of His cures (vers. 17-19).

II. He gives the true explanation
of them (vers. 20-26).


Ver. 18. “ Divided against himself.”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XI.





—The assertion of the Pharisees as-
sumed that there was an organised
kingdom of evil with a personal ruler.
Our Lord uses this assumption as a
terrible fact, which, however, proves
the absurdity of the charge made
against Himself. This organised
kingdom of darkness, because it is
only evil, is racked with discords and
hatred, but against the kingdom of
God it is a unit. The point of the
argument here is, not that discords
are fatal, which is not always the case,
but that an organisation which acts
against itself, its own distinctive aims,
must destroy itself.—Popular Com-
mentary.


“ How shall his kingdom stand ?”—
Satan would, according to their sup-
position, have been exerting his power,
not only to set this particular person
free from his dominion, but to confirm
the whole doctrines and precepts of
Christ, which were all directly opposed
to the kingdom of Satan, and calculated
and destined to overthrow it. Such a
supposition, therefore, was quite in-
consistent with the craft and sagacity
of the devil, and was altogether un-
tenable.


Ver. 20. “ With the finger of God.” —
An allusion to the ease and despatch
with which His mighty works were
done.


Vers. 21-23. Entire Moral Indepen-
dence is Impossible-—The palace is
freed from the usurped dominion of the
strong man, only to become the willing
recipient of the Stronger than he.
But subjection to Christ is no bondage ;
it is the very law of liberty.—Brown.


Vers. 21, 22. The Two Warriors.—
This figure of the two warriors, one of
whom takes up his stand fully armed
on the threshold of his castle, ready
to defend it, and the other comes
suddenly and beats him down and
divides the spoil among his followers,
is taken from Isa. xlix. 24, 25; the
prophet applies it to Jehovah deliver


ing His people from the hands of the
heathen oppressor. There is a truly
epic majesty in the picture of the
two adversaries, and there is no other
saying of Jesus which gives such a
striking impression of His conscious-
ness of the sublimity of His position
and the greatness of His work.—
Godet.


Christ the Conqueror of Satan.—One
of the most comprehensive of the
Saviour’s titles. There are five steps
by which our Lord advances to this
victory over Satan.

J. When He vanquished him in
Himself.—Through the body, through
the mind, through the spirit—in the
wilderness.

II. By His works.—Not only by His
bodily healings, where He dispossessed
Satan, but in those cases where the
devil himself was present in the
struggle. Those who were possessed
by demons, and delivered from them,
were the most outstanding monuments
of Christ’s power and mercy.

Ill. By His death.—By submitting
to death He redeemed us. His death
availed as an atonement for the sins of
men; it removed the obstacle of un-
forgiven and uncancelled guilt which
was the very strength of Satan’s king-
dom. Since then the kingdom of the
devil has become contracted in’ its
limits, and weakened in its dominion.

IV. By His life.—His heavenly life,
into which His resurrection introduced
Him, and to which the ascension
sealed Him. As the living, enthroned
Saviour, He imparts the life-giving
Spirit. The Spirit alone can extirpate
evil, and break the power of Satan in
the individual life. This is the indi-
vidual victory in the case of each
separate redeemed soul.

V. By His future judgment.—In
the consummation of all things, Satan
and his angels will be adjudged to
their final doom by the enthroned
Saviour.— Vaughan.


Ver. 22. The Strong Man.—The
strong man has indeed been overcome,


315


CHAP. XI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





and his power to harm diminished.
Yet ought we not therefore to be
careless, for here the Conqueror Him-
self pronounces him to be strong.


Ver. 23. Decision.—Our Lord has
been exposing the folly and perverse-
ness of those who would ascribe His
power over evil to a compact with evil.
He shows that there is a natural and
an irreconcileable antagonism between
evil and good, between the Saviour and
the enemy of man. And He says that
each particular person must take a
side in that conflict. Whoever does
not take the one side, as a matter of
course takes the other. By not siding
with Christ he sufficiently indicates
that he sides against Him. It is a
lesson of judgment, to guide us in
our estimate of ourselves. It says:
“ Remember the necessity of de-
cision between Christ and evil.
Do not suppose that a merely nega-
tive state will suffice for salvation.
If you are not: with Christ He must
look upon you as against Him ; prac-
tically you are so, and in the final
judgment such will be your doom.”
Do the words sound harsh and over-
strained? Severe though they may
sound in connection with religion, I am
sure that we feel the force of our Lord’s
words in connection with human life.

I. With its business.—How worth-
less is half-hearted co-operation! We
reject vague, vacillating support. It
is almost more provoking than direct
opposition. A man ought to know his
own mind, To be destitute of the
quality of decision and determination
is to be useless.

II. With life’s friendships What
is a friend worth who is distrustful
and doubting? You expect loyalty
towards yourself, even against ap-
pearances.

III. So must it be with Christ.—
He looks for decision in aim and affec-
tion. He is worthy of it. And,
having made up our minds about Him,
we ought to be bold, resolute, un-
flinching in our avowal of love and
loyalty. ‘‘ He thatis not with Me” is


316


His own description of a half-Christian.
Such an one never seeks His company,
is never truly ‘“ with Him.”

Vv. But to be with Christ means
more—it means to be on His side.—In
the daily strife we have chosen to be
on Christ’s side. We are in the
struggle, and Christ is concerned in |
that struggle, interested in its prc gress
and in its end. We cannot be neutrals.
If we try to be so He speaks of us in
this sad fashion: “ He that is not with
Me.”

VI. This does not necessarily imply
active opposition to Christ.—The ex-
pression is negative. It implies the
absence of interest, of cherishing faith
and love, of claiming your position as a
son, and living up to it. It implies
that it has not been a great and con-
stant object with you to gain heaven,
and here to live as an expectant heir
of heaven. And for practical pur-
poses, and so far as the final personal
issue is concerned, the faint-hearted,
cowardly, treacherous soldier of Christ
is rather an enemy to Him than a
friend.— Vaughan.


None can be Neutral.—Every one
must take part in the contest. Neu-
trality is impossible. To attempt to
stand by and merely watch the work
of Christ is at once to join the other
side. There are two scales of the
balance, and there is nothing but these
two. Any weight withdrawn from
the one scale, of necessity goes into
the other. The declaration is one
of the most solemn and far-reaching
statements in the whole of the Bible.-—
Plummer.


“He that is not with Me.”—Our Lord
has proved that He is the stronger,
that He is the Messiah, working
miracles by the spirit of God; the
alternative is therefore presented in a
new form: Christ or Satan. The
Pharisees decided for Satan, and were
consistent in their opposition. Senti-
mental admirers of Christ are simply
inconsistent enemies.—Popular Com-
mentary.


|


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XI.


a a eee


False Prudence.—A false Gamaliel-
prudence thinks to save itself by
saying, “If only we are not fighting
against God,” and leaves the kingdom
and work of God to take its course,
without helping it by confession or by
action, and thereby coming to the
knowledge that it is from God. Let
the indolent and undecided only not
mock, not persecute, that is thought
to count for something in their favour.
But this is the middle party of whom
Christ knows nothing, and of whom
He makes no account; them He con-
demns and hands over to His enemies.
—Stier.


Two Classes of Men.—There are
three classes in every community: the
friends of Christ, the foes of Christ,
and the neutrals. The Bible, however,
recognises but two classes: good and
bad, sheep and goats, children and
rebels.

I. What is it to be with Christ ?—
It is (1) to have sympathy with the
principles for which His kingdom
exists, and (2) to be identified with
Him in carrrying out those principles.
Many are for Him in proportion to
those who are with Him.

II. The evils of neutrality.—1. The
neutral man hangs as a dead weight
upon the Church. 2. He paralyses
those who are in active service. 3, In-
decision leads not unfrequently to an
utter betrayal of Christ to the enemy.


Vers. 24-26. The Perils of a Vacant
Heart.—It will never do to wish for
the absence of evil, and yet not to
desire the presence of God.

I. We must never, in any work we
try to do in God’s name, set before
ourselves, or others, a negative aim.

II. We should realise the spiritual
capacities of the human heart, that it
may become the throne of God.

III. There is great need of patience
to bring the life more and more per-
fectly in subjection to the love of God.
— Paget.


The Parable of the Demon's Return.—


The parable grows out of the previous
declaration, ‘‘ He that is not with Me,
js against Me.” It illustrates, in a very
vivid way, the impossibility of deserting
Satan without joining Christ, the im-
possibility of keeping aloof from Christ
without falling into the power of
Satan,

J. Christ is not contrasting the im-
perfect and uncertain methods of
Jewish exorcists with His own.—-This
interpretation is read into the narra-
tive. It is not found there. We do
not need to concern ourselves with the
literal truth of a parable such as this.

II. The expelled spirit is restless
and ill at ease.—He can only be at
rest where he can inflict harm. He
still calls the man’s soul “ my house.”
He knows in what condition the
house is likely to be. He speaks of it
as a sure possession, and a return to
the former abode shows that this ex-
pectation is correct.

III. The house of the soul is empty.
—This is placed first as the main evil,
and the chief cause of the ruinous end,
There is a grievous defect in this con-
dition. The man is well satisfied with
himself. There is no humility, no fear
of being enslaved a second time, and
so, no earnest seeking for Divine sup-
port, no imploring of the Holy Spirit
to come and dwell in the heart from
which Satan for the moment has
departed. The aversion to sin is
merely temporary; there is no yearning
after holiness. An attempt is made to
occupy an untenable position, to re-
nounce the devil without becoming the
bond-servant of Jesus Christ.

III. The return of the foul spirit.—
As there is no protection against un-
worthy tenants, the evil spirit seeks
some choice companions to come and
share in the work of destruction, and
they quickly make the ruin complete,
Is there not written here very plainly
the history of many a human soul?
Though we renounce the devil, he will
not renounce us. He watches his
opportunity, and comes back with
sevenfold subtlety and violence, and
quickly has us more completely in his


317


CHAP. XI.


power than before. He comes this
time to stay. It is, perhaps. not our
old sin that at once begins again ; but
new forms of sin, less conspicuous,
perhaps, but just as fatal, beset us—as
the Jews, cured of the worship of idols,
took to the worship of the letter of the
law, and to covetousness, which is
idolatry ; or as a man, who has con-
quered intemperance in drink, falls a
victim to pride and intemperance in
language and conduct. The experience
of thousands has proved that forces
which are quite sufficient, even singly,
to induce a man to abandon some
sinful course, are unable, even when
combined, to keep him in the right
way. It is only when Christ, through
His Holy Spirit, is made a welcome
tenant that the liberated soul is secure.
Safety from Satan’s bondage can be
made sure in no other way than by
abiding under the sway of Him whose
service is perfect freedom.—Plummer.


Three Stages in the History of a
Soul.

I. A change for the better—A
partial, temporary reformation.

II. It becomes again a prepared
and inviting habitation for the un-
clean spirit.—Since it is empty,
swept, and garnished.

Til. The last and worst state——
Evil habits resumed having sevenfold
power, and deliverance from them
hopeless.


Three pictures.
I. A dilapidated dwelling-house.
II. The return of the tenant.
III. The last plight of the tenant
worse than the first.


Three Lessons.—1. Men can make
new circumstances, but circumstances
cannot make new men. 2. An increase
of material and intellectual resource
adds to the perils of humanity unless
accompanied by a restoration of the
soul which inherits and dominates the
larger possession. 3. In proportion as
life’s environment is enlarged and
enriched, the urgency of spiritual re-


318


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,


generation is intensified and increased.
— Berry.


Two Things Needed.—Two things are
wanting to make the state of improve-
ment or reformation permanent. 1,
The unclean spirit has not been con-
quered and bound; he has only gone
out, and can return when he will. 2.
The house is not inhabited by a new
and stronger power; the Spirit of God
has not taken the place of the evil
spirit now for a time away from his
habitation,


Ver. 24. “Dry places, seeking rest.”
—He has a certain pleasure in all
that is waste and desolate, in ruined
paradises, and overthrown glory. How
can a devil find rest, which the
creature can find only in God? He
has lost it for ever ; he seeks it in vain,
in all waste places, which otherwise
please him; he seeks it especially in
vain, there, where God the Lord of
creation will have His rest, and where,
therefore, the devil also, if he can
force an entrance, finds himself rela-
tively best—namely, in man.—WStier.


“Seeking rest.” —“ Rest” and “quiet-
ness,” ‘‘sitting still,” “patient abiding,”
is the portion of the good; but “ the
wicked are like the troubled sea when
it cannot rest.” “There is no peace,
saith my God, to the wicked.” The
unclean spirit ‘goes to and fro in the
earth, walks up and down in it,” rest-
less and miserable. He seeketh rest,
but findeth none.


Ver. 26, “ More wicked.” —Not more
depraved, for they are all equally
depraved, but worse in their power to
destroy and in their consequent obsti-
nacy (cf. Mark ix. 29).


“Enter in and dwell there.”—Had
that house been guarded by watch-
fulness and prayer, this sad _ result
had been impossible. The goodman
watching against the thief’s approach
would not have suffered his house to be
broken through ; and the devil, resisted


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XI.


SSS eS eee eee eee


by the prayer of faith, would have fled
away. The soul, aware of its weak
points and those parts of its nature
against which old sins might most
easily direct their attacks, should have
kept vigilant guard.—Burgon.


“ Last state is worse.”

I. The specific application to the
Jews.—The first possession, the early
idolatrous tendency of the Jews; the
going out, the result of the captivity
in Babylon; the emptying, sweeping,
and garnishing at their return (Phari-
saism, a seeming reformation, but
really an invitation to evil influences) ;


fatuated condition of the Jews after
they had rejected Christ.

II. Application to the history of
Christianity—The reformation, the
casting out of the evil spirit of idolatry,
permitted by Rome—the house empty,
swept, and garnished ; swept and gar-
nished by the decencies of civilisation
and discoveries of secular knowledge,
but empty of living and earnest faith.
The re-possession, the final development
of the man of sin.

III. An application to individuals.
—External reformation, without per-
manent spiritual results, leading to a
“worse state.” —Popular Commentary.


the last state, the terrible and in-


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 27—36.


The Secret Cause of Unbelief.—It is evident that the incident recorded in
vers. 27, 28, interrupted the discourse of Jesus, for after gently checking the
unwise enthusiasm manifested by this hearer He resumed His teaching, and
replied to those who had asked for a sign from heaven (ver. 16). We may take
those who proffered this request as typical of persons who profess to be hindered
by intellectual difficulties from accepting Christ, and who require these difficulties
to be solved before they will take any further step. It is quite reasonable to
regard them in this light, for they profess to be unconvinced by what they know
of Him, and speak of attaining conviction if a sign which they can weigh and
estimate is granted to them. Their minds are, they imply, undecided ; further
evidence of a kind fixed by them would turn the scale—produce and strengthen
faith. In Christ’s reply He reveals to them that their unbelief springs from an
evil condition of heart.

I. The revelation given in Christ is sufficient of itself to kindle and confirm
faith.—To the candid and unprejudiced mind it brings abundant proof of its
authenticity and authority. Christ Himself is God manifested in the flesh and
is His own best evidence; His holy life, His teaching, His death of self-sacrifice,
and His glorious resurrection, are the central facts of Christianity. And to those
who are unaffected, by them, no more convincing revelation could be given. They
display a Divine purpose to redcem mankind aud exhibit Christ as the conqueror
of sin and death. ‘They do not, indeed, solve all the intellectual questions that
the mind of man can raise, but are amply sufficient to satisfy the longings and
aspirations of the human heart. To those who turn aside from this revelation
of God in Christ nothing further will be given.

II. The necessary preparation for receiving Christ is a sense of need and a
consciousness of sin.—To those who are self-satisfied and self-righteous the gospel
is unmeaning. Christ here contrasts the conduct of the queen of the south,
who was attracted by the wisdom of Solomon, and that of the Ninevites, who
repented at the preaching of Jonah, with that of those to whom He now spoke.
The latter were lacking in the sense of ignorance and sin which the former
displayed, and were therefore indifferent to the presence of one greater than
Solomon and than Jonah. .Consciousness of need would draw them to seek the
heavenly wisdom that was in Him; conviction of sinfulness would dispose them
to obey His summons to repentance.


319


CHAP. XI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





IIl. A darkened heart the secret of unbelief.—It was not that light had
been withheld from those to whom He spoke, and that thus they were still in
darkness of error and unbelief. The light was shining and being displayed in
the most conspicuous manner. But for the apprehension of the light a healthy
eye was needed, Those, therefore, of prejudiced and wicked hearts were wanting
in the very organ that would enable them to see the truth as it is in Jesus. On
the other hand, a mind and heart enlightened and free from those prejudices
which darken and make blind the soul will direct all our faculties and inclina-
tions, and all the actions of the life, aright, as a light does the man who is
travelling at night.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 27—36.


Vers. 27, 28..I. The woman’s ex-
clamation.—The blessedness of the
Lord reflected on His mother.

II. Our Lord’s amendment on it.—
It teaches us: 1. That the happiness
of Mary herself consisted rather in her
being a believer in Christ than in her
being the mother of Christ. 2. That
all true believers, as such, are more
blessed than Christ’s mother, as such.
3. That those who are believers are
more blessed on that account than on
any other.—/oote.


Ver. 27. “A certain woman.”—This
woman truly represents devout Roman
Catholics in their adoration of the
virgin. The Ave Maria, as they use
it, is but a repetition of her words,
and their religious enthusiasm too often
manifests the same unintelligent wonder
which is here kindly reproved by our
Lord.—Popular Commentary.


The Way of Obedience—How many
women have blessed the Holy Virgin
and desired to be such a mother as she
was? What hinders them? Christ
has made for us a wide way to this
happiness, and not only women, but
men, may tread it—the way of
obedience. This it is which makes
such a mother, and not the throes of
parturition.—Chrysostom.


Ver. 28. Our Lord's Reply.—Our
Lord’s reply is indeed wonderful.

I. In reproof.—He corrects in her
the unapprehensiveness of His word,
which had caused her to go no further
into the meaning of it thanthis ordinary


320


eulogy imparted, and gives her an ad-
monition how to profit better by it in
future.

II. In humility—He disclaims all
this kind of admiration for His hu-
manity, and says, not “ My word,” but
“the word of God,” which is, in fact,
the same, but takes the view off from
Him, in His abasement, unto the
Father who sent Him.

III. In truth.—He does not deny
the honour thereby pronounced on His
mother, but beautifully turns it to its
true side—viz., that which was given
her long since (chap. i. 45). Her
blessedness consisted not so much in
being His mother as in her lowly and
faithful observance of the word of
the Lord spoken to her (cf. chap. ii.
19, 51). Nor, again, does He deny
that to have borne Him was an
honour—“ yes, indeed, but.”

IV. In prophetic discernment.—It
will be seen that this answer cuts at
the root of all Mariolatry, and shows
us in what the true honour of that
holy woman consisted—in faith and
obedience.—A ford.


Vers. 29-32. “ They seek a sign.”—
The only sign from heaven that would
be given would be no mere empty
display of supernatural power; but in
the course of the ministry of Christ an
event would happen which would recall
the history of Jonah. As the Hebrew
prophet, after his deliverance from
death, preached repentance to the
Ninevites, so Christ, after resurrection,
would proclaim salvation to the world,
That it is the resurrection and not’ the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XI,


Sa ee eee eee


preaching of Jonah that is the point
of comparison is evident from the use
of the future tense.

The mere presence of Christ should
have secured credence for His teaching.
Solomon did no miracles. neither was
any prodigy wrought by Jonah at
Nineveh. The wisdom of the one and
the earnest preaching of the other were
sufficient to attract and to persuade
their contemporaries.


Ver. 29. “Sign of Jonas.”—The
history ot the Old Testament presents
no more striking example of a wonder-
ful preservation from certain death
than that of the prophet Jonah; nay,
it is singular in its kind, inasmuch as
the prophet, although, as it were, shut
up in death, and buried, yet, came forth
again to life. Therefore is this history
recorded as a similitude and type of
the resurrecéion of Christ, as, in the
sphere of the type, a resurrection of
one really dead was not yet possible.
—Stier.


Vers. 31, 32. “ The queen of the south
- . - the men of Nineveh.”—1. Love of
truth—manitested by the Queen of
Sheba. 2. Repentance of sin and fear
of the Divine judgment—manifested
by the men of Nineveh. These con-
trast forcibly with the ir difference and
insensibility of those whom Christ now
addressed.


“A greater than Solomon...
than Jonas.”—1. A greater person.
2. A more important message, 3. A
profounder wisdom.


Ver. 31. The Contrast.—1. A heathen
woman and the Jewish people. 2.
“The utmost parts of the earth” and
“here.” 3. Solomon and the Son of
man.—Godet.


“ The queen of the south.” —This inci-
dent is contrasted with the journey of
Jonah. She came from the utmost
parts of the earth—from the country
that bounded the known world—to
seek out the anointed of the Lord


who was so much renowned, while
Jonah went to the Ninevites to their
own country.


Ver. 32. Christ's Power and Wisdom.
—The Nineveh of this Jonah will be
Rome, whose power will bow before
the sign of the cross; and Greece will
seek and find in this Solomon the
true wisdom.—WStier.


Vers. 33, 36. ‘ See the light.” —They
wished a sign; a greater sign than
Jonah is granted them, but to perceive
it they must not (as they do) cover the
light with a bushel, shut the eyes of
their understanding.

On the one hand, by the resistance
of the heart to Divine truth the sou)
gradually becomes darkened until it
loses every trace of light. .On the
other hand, by receiving the truth
into the heart the nature is gradually
purifid and enlightened, until it is
transfigured and filled with a Divine
glory, like that of Jesus on the Mount.
The connection of this discourse with
what precedes it is as follows: “I am
not in collusion with Beelzebub; on
the contrary, the kingdom of God has
appeared among you. If you loved
the truth, no startling miracle would
be needed to convince you of this fact.
Those whose vision is healthy see it at
a glance; and their whole being will
be enlightened and transformed by
receiving the revelation I bring.”

The heavenly light fails of its
purpose (1) when it is set under a
bushel ; (2) when it falls on blind or
diseased eyes.


Ver. 33. Lamps and Bushels.—The
saying is a favourite and familiar one
of our Lord’s, occurring four times in
the Gospels.

I. A lesson as to the apparent ob-
scurities of revelation, and our duty
concerning them.—There are no gra-
tuitously dark places in anything
that God says to us. His revelation
is absolutely clear. We may be sure
of that if we consider the purpose for
which He spoke at all. There are


321


‘CHAP. XI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


er”


dark places, there are great gaps: but
His own great word remains true, “I
have never spoken in secret, in a dark
place of the earth.” If there be, as
there are, obscurities, there are none
there that would have been better
away. For the intention of all God’s
hiding—which hiding is an integral
part of His revealing—is not to conceal,
but to reveal. It is good that there
should be difficulties. He is not a wise
teacher who makes things too easy.
Patient attention will ever be rewarded.
The desire to learn will not be frus-
trated.

II. The saying gives us a lesson as
to Himself and our attitude to Him.—
In the figure thus applied we have the
thought that the earthly life of Jesus
Christ necessarily implies a subsequent
elevation from which He shines down
on all the world. God lit that lamp,
and it is not going to be quenched in
the darkness of the grave. He is not
going to stultify Himself by sending
the light of the world, and then letting
the endless shades of death muffle and
obscure it. But, just as the conclusion
of the process which is begun in the
kindling of the light is setting it on
high on the stand, that it may shine
over all the chamber, so the resurrection
and ascension of Jesus Christ, His ex-
altation to the supremacy from which
He shall draw all men unto Him, is
the necessary and, if I may so say, the
logical result of the facts of His
incarnation and death.

III. A lesson as to the duties of
Christian men as lights in the world.


—This metaphor frequently occurs in
Scripture. The general teaching of
such references is that Christian men,
not so much by specific effort, nor by
words, nor by definite proclamation, as
by the raying out from them in life
and conduct of a Christ-like spirit, are
set for the illumination of the world.
God’s act of lighting indicates His
purpose of illumination. What are we
Christians for? To go to heaven?
To be ourselves forgiven? Certainly.
But is that the only end? By no
means. He gave you His Son that
you may give the gospel of His Son
to others, and you stultify His purpose
in your salvatiou unless you become
ministers of His grace, and manifesters
of His light. —Maclaren.


Ver. 34. “The light of the body is the
eye.’—The eye gives light which it
receives from without, and is not light
itself, So the conscience lights the spirit
by light from above.

It is plainly declared here that the
truth revealed to man in the gospel is
not something entirely foreign to his
nature—something over against and
outside of him—but akin to him, as
the eye and the light are, as it were,
made for one another. The same truth
is taught in other parts of Scripture:
the heavenly graft is akin to the tree
in which it is inserted, or else it would
not be assimilated to it (James i. 21);
the leaven is not foreign to the meal
in which it is hidden, or else it might
as well be set in sand (Matt. xiii. 33).


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 37—54.


Besetting Sins of Religious Leaders and Teachers.—The Pharisees aimed at
setting before the people an example of holiness which it was their duty to
imitate ; the scribes assumed to themselves the task of instructing them in the
law of God. The one showed them what they should do, the other taught them
what they should believe. And then, as now, the position of those who were set
apart, or who set themselves up as leaders and teachers, was attended with no
little spiritual danger. They were apt to become arrogant and self-complacent,
and to affect an outward austerity very much at variance with their inward
condition of heart and character. All through His earthly ministry the kind of
righteousness which Christ taught and exemplified was antagonistic to that of


322


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP, XI.





the Pharisees and scribes, and therefore we need not be surprised that on some
occasions, as in the present, He came into direct collision with them.

I. The first fault with which He charged the Pharisees was hypocrisy (vers.
39-42).—They acted the part of righteous men, without being righteous at heart,
and hence they laid stress upon all such practices as appealed to the outward
eye, and were indifferent to the spiritual requirements of the law of God. Just
as an actor assumes the dress of the character he wishes to portray, and adopts
a tone of voice suitable to the part, and appropriate gestures, attitudes, and
speeches, so did the Pharisees assume the outward guise of those who were intent
upon honouring and serving God. They were zealous in practising all kinds of
ceremonial purification, and in payment of tithes, and went, indeed, beyond the
requirements of the law of Moses. Yet their fault did not consist in their
extreme scrupulousness, but rather in neglect of moral and spiritual obligations.
Beneath the pious exterior lay greed, and injustice, and hardness of heart, and
self-indulgence. The sin they were guilty of is only too easily possible in
Christian society—that of combining a sanctimonious profession of religion with
a very lax moral practice.

II. The second fault with which Christ charged the Pharisees was that of
vainglorious ambition (ver. 43).—They loved the praises of men, and sought to
gain and wield power for the gratification of their own pride and vanity. Their
motive was an evil one, and vitiated the influence for good which their profession
of zeal for the honour of God might have exercised. For when the mask was
taken away from their characters it became evident that they were seeking to
promote their own self-advancement, and not the interests of true religion. The
teaching of Christ, therefore, distinctly warns us that holiness does not consist
merely in the performance of certain actions, but in the pure and righteous
character of the motives that govern the life. His words on this occasion, too,
describe the hurtful influence exercised by all spurious forms of religious life
(ver. 44). Not only do they fail to promote righteousness, but they are like a
poisonous contagion. The corruption is all the more deceptive because it is con-
cealed, and it infects those who ccme into contact with it.

Tll. A characteristic favlt of the scribes was their laying stress upon the
letter of God’s Word rather than upon the spirit of it (vers. 45, 46).—This is
akin to the reproach addressed to the Pharisees, for literalism is closely allied to
formalism. They rendered the Scriptures an oppressive burden by the minute
rules which they deduced from them, and which they imposed upon all those whom
they instructed. But for their own part they substituted knowledge for practice.
Probably in all ages of the Church’s history those may be found who perpetuate
this fault—who set up their own interpretations of Scripture and deductions
from it as of co-ordinate authority with the Word of God. And those who are
most peremptory in insisting upon acquiescence in their rigid interpretation of
Seripture generally enjoy a freedom which they deny to others. Their work
seems to be that of imposing burdens, and not of sharing burdens.

Iv. Another characteristic fault of the scribes is their rancorous orthodoxy
(vers. 47-51).—They are in antagonism to living piety, and persecute it. They
set up over against those who are the present mouthpieces of God’s Spirit the
authority of earlier teachers, whose opponents they would have been if they had
lived in their times. And by their resistance to God’s messengers they approve
themselves as children of those who in earlier ages killed the prophets. God
leaves no generation of men without His witnesses, and those who resist them
share the guilt of those who were persecutors in times long past, even though
they may sincerely believe that they abhor their actions. Such orthodoxy, which
manifests itself in the statement and defence of a creed which is more a matter
of the intellect than an inspiring influence upon the life, is a positive hindrance


323


CHAP. XI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





to religion (ver. 52). It is like taking away the key of a door and hindering
both ourselves and others from entering in.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 37—54.


Vers. 37, 38. A Violation of Hospi-
tality.—There can be little doubt that
this Pharisee violated the laws of
hospitality by inviting Jesus to his
house for the purpose of watching
Him, and of founding some accusation
against Him. Others of the guests
had the same hostility towards Him
in their minds (vers. 45, 53). This
fact explains the severity of tone mani-
fested by Jesus throughout the scene.
Except for grave reasons, He would not
have spoken as He did in the house of
His entertainer. There are times when
higher obligations than the rules of
good society must be respected.


Vers. 39, 40. The Pharisees Rebuked.
—The Pharisees are rebuked (1) for
being addicted to meaningless rites—for
lustrations which had been instituted
for the purpose of suggesting moral
purity lost their significance when
practised for their own sake; (2) for
attending merely to external appear-
ances ; (3) for the folly of imagining
that God was such an one as them-
selves, and would be satisfied with a
mere pretence and show of righteous-
ness ; and (4) for the covetousness and
greed by which they had enriched
themselves, and which made them
indifferent to the claims of the poor
and unfortunate.


Ver. 41. “Give alms.”—There is no
question here of the intrinsic merit of
good works: Jesus is simply contrast-
ing the positive value of a kindly deed
with the worthlessness of mere out-
ward observances,


“All things are clean wnto you.”
—Let them do one single loving, un-
selfish act—not for the sake of the
action itself, nor for any merit inherent
in it, but out of pure good-will towards
others—and their whole inward con-
dition would be different. Let those


324


things, which had been the materials
and instruments of sin and selfishness,
become the instruments of love and
kindness, and all things, both that
which is without and that which is
within, would be at once purified for
them. In other words, as the cup and
the platter, the outside of which they
cleansed so scrupulously and sedulously,
were defiled by the bad means by which
their contents were procured, or the
evil uses to which they were put, so
they would be purified, not by any
formal outward acts, but by that spirit
of love which would dictate a right
and charitable destination of their con-
tents.—Speaker’s Commentary.


Ver. 42. Two Marks of Hypocrisy.
—1. To be more exact in and zealous
for the observance of ritual and the
traditions of men, than in and for the
observance of the moral law of God.
2. In matters of morality to be more
exact and strict in and for little things,
than for things more grave and weighty.
There is no commandment of God that
we are at liberty to despise: yet we
should have more regard to greater
than to lesser duties.


Judgment and the Love of God.—The
reference is to Micah vi. 6-8, where the
prophet makes all acceptable religion
to consist in “doing justly, loving
mercy, and walking humbly with God.”


Not to Leave the Other Undone.—The
moderation and wisdom of Jesus shine
out in these words ; He does not at all
desire prematurely to break the legal
mould in which Jewish righteousness
was cast, provided that it was not
maintained at the expense of the real
contents of the law.—G@odet.


The First and The Last.—By all
means be most minutely conscientious,
But then see to it that ye do not (1)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XI.





put the last first, and (2) put off and
put out the first altogether, contenting
yourselves with the last and _ least.
See to it, on the contrary, that (1) ye
put the first first, and that then (2) ye
do not put off and put out the last,
but bring it in and yet keep it last.—
Morison.


Ver. 44. Whitewashed Tombs.—Jews
had a custom of whitewashing sepul-
chral stones once a year. At the time
when our Lord used this metaphor to
characterise the scribes and Pharisees,
the tombs about Jerusalem had been
recently whitewashed, and so were
beautitied for a season. As He spoke
in the open air, the white stones must
have been conspicuous on every side.
The object of this whitewashing was
not to embellish, but to point out the
gravestone to the passer-by, that he
might not tread on it or touch it.
Later casuists pronounced the man un-
clean who casually stepped on a grave
or touched a tombstone. This explains
the saying of our Lord in the text.
It amounts to a charge against the
Pharisees of concealing their true charac-
ter from the people, and spreading con-
tamination while no one suspected them
of evil.— Fraser.


Ver. 45. “ Reproachest us also.”—
In what a grievous state is that con-
science which, hearing the Word of
God, thinks it a reproach against itself ;
and, in the account of the punishment
of the wicked, perceives its own con-
demnation !—Bede.


Vers. 46-52. Besetting Sins of Theo-
logians.—The besetting sins of theo-
logians: 1. Harshness and insincerity
(ver. 46). 2. A rancorous and persecu-
ting spirit (vers. 47-51). 3. Arrogance
and exclusiveness (ver. 52).


Ver. 46. Knowledge Substituted for
Practice.—Very rigid principles com-
bined with very lax conduct. Uncue
attention to the intellectual side of
religion is generally found accompanied
by this moral deficiency.


“ Touch with one of your fingers.” —
This is opposed to taking up the burden
upon the shoulders.


Vers, 47, 48. “ Ye build the sepul-
chres.” —Ye build their tombs and adorn
their monuments, but ye do not imitate
their example; ye disobey their pre-
cepts, and slight their warnings, and
rebel against their God, who has sent to
you His Son, to whom all the prophets
bear witness. And thus ye show your-
selves the children of those who killed
the prophets, and are even worse than
your fathers, because ye add hypocrisy
to impiety.


Resisting the Prophets. — Ask in
Moses’ time, Who are the good people?
They will be Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob ; but not Moses—he should be
stoned. Ask in Samuel’s time, Who
are the good people? They will be
Moses and Joshua; but not Samuel.
Ask in the times of Christ, and they
will be all the former prophets, with
Samuel; but not Christ and His
apostles.— Stier.


Ver. 51. Abel. . . Zacharias,—The
murder of Abel was the first in the
strife between unrighteousness and
holiness, and as these Jews represent,
in their conduct, both in former times
and now, the murderer of the first,
they must bear the vengeance of the
whole in God’s day of wrath. Our
Lord mentions the murder of Zacharias,
not as being the last, even before His
own day, but because it was connected
specially with the cry of the dying
man: “The Lord look upon it, and
require it” (2 Chron, xxiv. 22).—
Alford.


“ This generation.”"—A great and
rapid river, which should, for thirty or
forty years together, have its current
violently stopped—what a mass of
water would it collect in so long a
space; and if it should then be let
loose, with what fury would it overrun
and bear down all before it 1—J.
Taylor.


325


CHAP. XII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





Accumulated Guilt.—It belongs to
the fearful earnestness of the Divine
retributive righteousness that when a
generation concurs in heart with the
wickedness of an earlier generation,


it receives, in the final retribution .


of the accumulated guilt, as well the
punishment for its own as also for the
former sins which it had inwardly


scribes to lead the people into it, but
they had locked the door and kept
possession of the key. This key is the
Word of God, the interpretation of
which the scribes planned exclusively
for themselves.—Godet.


Keeping the Key.—The scribes, by
arrogating to themselves exclusive


made its own.—Van Oosterzee. authority to interpret the Scriptures,
while they did not interpret them
truly, either for their own use, or for
the good of those whom they instructed,
kept the key of knowledge shut up and


useless.


Ver. 52. “Key of knowledge.”—
Jesus represents knowledge of God and
of salvation under the figure of a
sanctuary: it was the duty of the


CHAPTER XII.
CRITICAL NOTES.


Ver. 1. An innumerable multitude of people.—‘ The many thousands of the multitude”
(R.V.) ; lit. “the myriads of the multitude.” The discourse in this chapter is evidently in
continuation of what has just been recorded: the cardinal sin of the Pharisees is dealt with,
and freedom of speech is commended, in spite of the dangers which it provoked. Unto His
disciples first of all.—Opinion is about equally divided as to whether the words should be
thus rendered, or “say unto His disciples, First of all, beware ye.” The former is retained
in the R.V. So far as internal evidence is concerned, Christ’s words seemed to be addressed
to His disciples rather than to the multitude; and this distinction harmonises rather with
the rendering of our version than with the other, which some editors prefer. The leaven of
the Pharisees.—Cf. Matt. xvi. 6-12. The characteristic spirit of the Pharisees, which issued
in a general corruption of the characters of those influenced by it. Leaver is most frequently
used in Scripture as a symbol of evil. Hypocrisy.—The word “ hypocrite,” in its original
sense, means an actor; one who assumes a part and adopts a name, dress, and manner of
speaking, in harmony with it. The appropriateness of the figure for those who assumed an
austerity and goodness which were foreign to them, for the sake of imposing upon others, is
obvious.

Ver. 2. For there is nothing covered.—Hypocrisy is not only sinful, but wseless: all secret
words and sayings will one day be made public and open. The words have a different
application in Matt. x. 26. There the reference is to the public proclamation of what the
disciples have learned in secret from the Master.

Ver. 3. In closets.—‘“ In the inner chambers” (R.V.); “in the store-rooms,” the most secret
part of the house. The same word is used in Matt. vi. 6, xxiv. 26. Upon the house-tops.—
So that all in the streets can hear, “These sayings have a strong Syrian colour. The
Syrian house-top presents an image which has no sense in Asia Minor, or Greece, or Italy, or
even at Antioch. The flat roofs cease at the mouth of the Orontes; Antioch itself has
inclined roofs” (Renan).

Ver. 4. My friends.—An unusual phrase. Cf. John xv. 13-15.

Ver. 5. I will forewarn you.—Rather simply “I will warn you” (R,V.). Fear him, which
after, etc. Who is the person here referred to? Strangely enough, the words have been
interpreted both of God and of Satan. The opinion of the majority of commentators is that
God is meant as the “ almighty dispenser of life and death, both temporal or eternal.” But,
on the other hand, Christ is here speaking of enemies; He warns His disciples not to fear
those who can only hurt the body, and says there is reason to fear One who has power to
“ cast into hell,” or, as St. Matthew says, “to destroy both body and soul in hell.” If Satan
is an enemy of the souls of men, and if those who yield to his solicitations share his punish-
ment, there can be no difficulty in understanding this passage as alluding to him. Fear (or


326


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LURE. CHAP. XIt,


Gu... Sawa


terror) of a spiritual enemy of real power and malignancy is evidently meant here. No such
emotion is represented in the Scriptures as belonging to man’s relations with God. Alford
understands the words as referring to God, and endeavours to draw a distinction between
the phrase used in ver. 4 and that in ver. 5 to denote “ fear ”—in the one case the preposition
amé (fear of something coming from such and such a quarter) being used, and in the other
case the simple verb—and understands by the one, “ terror,” and by the other the nobler
“fear of God” so often commended to us in the Scriptures. But he does not support his
argument by adducing any examples of the words being used to denote these varying ideas.
Hath power.—Or “authority” (R.V. margin). The word is appropriate for indicating
authority which may be used in subordination to a higher rule, and so is in harmony with
the above interpretation. Hell—Lit. “Gehenna,” the place of punishment, as distinguished
from Hades, the abode of the dead. Gehenna means simply the Valley of Hinnom, outside
Jerusalem, so called apparently from the name of the original inhabitants or owners of it
(Josh. xv. 8). It was polluted by the worship of Moloch (Jer. vii. 31), and was afterwards
used as a receptacle for the rubbish and filth of the city. Large fires were kept burning in
it, to prevent pestilence.

Ver. 6. Are not five sparrows ?—St. Matthew speaks of two being sold for one farthing
(x. 29). Evidently if four were bought at one time, a fifth was thrown in for nothing; yet
not even one of these insignificant creatures is “ forgotten before God.”

Ver. 7. Hairs of your head.—Evidently a proverbial expression. Cf, 1 Sam. xiv. 45;
1 Kings i. 52; Luke xxi. 18; Acts xxvii. 34.

Ver. 8. Before the angels of God.—Allusion is here made to the last judgment, at which
the angels of God are generally represented as present. The phrase in the parallel passage
in St. Matthew is, ‘‘ Before My Father which is in heaven.”

Ver. 10, It shall be forgiven.—/.¢., on repentance. Blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost.
—A wilful and deliberate state of sinning, against the clearest light and knowledge, which,
from the very nature of things, must exclude from forgiveness. These words were spoken
to encourage the disciples ; they give assurance that God will be with them in their work,
and that obstinate opposition to it would be severely condemned by Him.

Ver. 11. Synagogues.—The officials in each local synagogue had certain judicial powers.
Magistrates and powers.—J.e¢., higher tribunals, either Jewish or Gentiles.

Ver. 12. For the Holy Ghost.—This mention of the Holy Ghost as Paraclete, or Advocate,
closely corresponds with Christ’s teaching as recorded in St. John’s Gospel, and is an
interesting testimony to the historical character of the latter.

Ver. 13. One of the company.—Rather, “one out of the multitude” (R.V.). Perhaps the
mention of magistrates and powers suggested to him Christ’s acting as a judge and giving a
decision in his favour. Divide the inheritance.—See Deut. xxi. 15-17. Whether the claim
were just or not cannot be inferred from the narrative.

Ver. 14. Man.—Apparently in reproof. Cf. Rom. ii, 1, ix. 20. A judge or a divider.—
The one may mean an ordinary judge, the other an arbitrator specially chosen to decide
conflicting claims. There is no doubt an allusion to Exod. ii. 14.

Ver. 15. Beware of covetousness.—A better reading and translation is: “keep yourselves
from all covetousness” (R.V.), 2.¢., from every kind: the unlawful desire, the selfish enjoy-
ment, of earthly goods. For a man’s life, etc.—The passage is a peculiar one, and might be
rendered, “for not because one has abundance does his life therefore depend on the things
which he hath.” “The meaning is, that abundance is not a necessary condition of existence:
a man lives on what he possesses; all that is needed is a mere sufficiency” (Speaker’s
Commentary).

Ver. 16. The ground, etc.—This is not a case of riches acquired in any unlawful manner,
but of riches derived from industrious labours and the bounty of heaven. Mere multipli-
cation of his wealth, and selfish enjoyment of it, take upall his thoughts. My fruits.—Notice
also in ver. 18 “my barns,” “ my fruits,” “my goods,” and in ver. 19 “my soul”; as though
this last were a possession of which he was equally sure.

Ver. 18. All my fruits.—‘“‘ Not a word of the poor” (Bengel). The word in the original is
a different one from that in ver. 17, and may be rendered “my produce” or “my corn”

R.V.):
: VoD 19. Take thine ease——The gathering together of his wealth, and his schemes for
hoarding it (ver. 17), had disquieted him ; he would now make his wealth the basis of rest
and enjoyment. In the original there are simply four words, four verbs in the imperative,
for the second half of this verse. The conciseness of style gives additional vividness to the
icture.

Ver. 20. Thou fool.—Lit. “senseless ”—wise though he was in worldly wisdom and in
management of his property (ver. 18). This night.—As contrasted with “many years.”
Shall be required of thee.—As contrasted with “I will say to my soul,” Lit. “ they require
thy soul; i.e., either the angels of God as ministers of death, or, it may be, robbers who deprive
him of life and carry off his wealth. No great stress need be laid on this, as the “ they” is


327


cHAP.xu,  HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





not emphatic: the verb is impersonal. Whose shall those things be 1—“ Not that it matters
to him into whose hands they pass: it is only an emphatic way of saying that they will not
be his” (Bloomfield).

Ver. 21. For himself.—Z.e., for himself only. Rich toward God.—Elsewhere described as
‘‘Jaying vp treasures in heaven,” by almsgiving and benevolence. ‘“ He that hath pity upon
the poor lendeth unto the Lord ” (Prov. xix. 17).

Ver.-22. Take no thought.—Rather, “be not anxious” (R.V.). The meaning of the word
“thought” has changed since 1611. Then it meant “anxiety ” (see 1 Sam, ix. 5).

Ver. 23. Is more.—J.e., is a greater gift. He who gave the greater may be relied upon
to provide the less.

Ver. 24. Consider.—The word is a strong one: “ observe carefully,” “study.” Ravens. —
Cf. Ps, cxlvii. 9; Job xxxviii. 41. Sow... reap... storehouse... barn.—In reference
to the parable of the Rich Man: fe perished in spite of all his labour and anxiety ; they live
without labour or anxiety.

Ver. 25, Thought.—As in ver. 22. Stature.—Rather “age.” The word means either the
one or the ther; but prolongation of Jéfe is the idea of the passage here. It would be a
great thing to add a cubit to one’s stature, while this is spoken of as a slight and insignifi-
cant trifle.

Ver. 26. The application of measures of space to time is not uncommon. See Ps. xxxix. 5;
2 Tim. iv. 7. A cubit is a foot and a half.

Ver. 27. Lilies.—Supposed by some to be the crown imperial lily, which grows wild in
Palestine, by others the amaryllis lutea, by others the Huleh lily. Of the last Thomson says:
“It is very large, and the three inner petals meet above, and form a gorgeous canopy, such
as art never approached, and king never sat under, even in his utmost glory. And when I
met this incomparable flower, in a!l its loveliness, among the oak woods around the northern
base of Tabor, and on the hills of Nazareth, where our Lord spent His youth, I felt assured
that it was this to which He referred” (“ The Land and the Book”). Solomon in all his glory.
—Cf. Cant, iii. 6-11. :

Ver. 28. The grass.—The flowers mown down along with the grass. Oven,—‘ A covered
earthen vessel; a pan wider at the bottom than at the top, wherein bread was baked by
putting hot embers round it, which produced a more equable heat than in the regular oven”

Alford).

: Ver. 29. Doubtful mind.—Tossed about between hope and fear. The figure is that of a ship
raised aloft, at one moment on the top of the wave and then sinking down into the deptus—
an apt metaphor for anxiety. :

Ver. 30. Your Father knoweth.—An additional reason for banishing undue anxiety about
worldly things.

Ver. 32, Little flock.—The word for “ flock” is itself a diminutive: the double diminutive
is an indication of the deep feeling with which the words were spoken. Christ here presents
Himself as the Shepherd (John x. 1 ff). The kingdom.—If the higher and spiritual blessings
are given, anxiety concerning food and raiment may well be banished. Preparation for this
kingdom is commended in the verses that follow.

Ver. 33. Sell that ye have, etc.—Addressed to officers of the kingdom who were to be
altogether free from earthly ties ; though in a certain sense all should provide for themselves
a “ treasure in the heavens,” That faileth not.—J.¢., that is inexhaustible.

Ver. 34. Where your treasure is.—The affection of the heart is not to be divided, but is to
be concentrated on one object (cf. Matt. vi. 24).

Ver. 35. Loins girded.—An allusion to the long robes of the Hast, which those who wear
them must bind up before they engage in any active employment. Lights burning.—The
same lesson as in the parable of the Ten Virgins.

Ver, 36. Men that wait.—This is a different figure from the parable just named: servants
waiting at home for their master’s retwn from the wedding. Wedding.—The word may
mean a feast or entertainment ofany kind. No stress, therefore, need be laid upon the kind
of feast.

Ver. 37. Gird himself, etc.—A prophetic view of this great act of self-abasing love is given
in John xiii. 17. In the Roman Saturnalia masters and servants exchanged places for the
day; but on that occasion the boon was granted to all servants, good and bad. This which
Christ speaks of is an honour to faithful and vigilant servants. In Rey. iii. 20, 21, the
figure is carried stillfurther, and the promise is given of sharing His throne

Ver. 38. The second watch.—J.e., from nine to midnight. According to the Roman
custom, adopted at this time by the Jews, the night was divided into four watches : from
six till nine, from nine to midnight, from midnight to three, and from three to six. The first
watch is not here mentioned, as return during it would be no test of the servants’ vigilance,
and as probably the feast would then be in progress. The fourth watch is not mentioned,
as by that time the feast at which the master was detained would have been long over, and
the day would then be breaking.


328


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XII.





Ver. 39, And this know.—Rather, “this ye know” (R.V. margin), An appeal to common-
sense. The figure is changed; the sudden and unexpected coming of the Son of Man is com-
pared to the approach of a night-robber (cf. 1 Thess, v. 2; 2 Pet. iii, 10; Rev. xvi. 15).
Goodman,—An archaic phrase. The paterfamilias. R.V. “tue master.” Broken through.—
Lit. “ dug through ”; of mud walls.

Ver, 41. Then Peter said.—The high reward promised, rather than the duty enjoined, was
in Peter’s thoughts, and involved a certain measure of danger against which Christ warns
him. It isnoticeable that his question isnot answered directly, but by implication. ‘“ Jesus
continues His teaching as if He took no account of Peter's question ; but in reality He gives
such a turn to the warning which follows about watchfulness, that it includes the precise
answer to the question ” (G'odet), Cf. chap. xix. 25,26; John xiv. 22, 23,for a similar mode
of answering questions. The reply of Christ is virtually that the larger the powers and
opportunities entrusted to any servant, the greater is the degree of watchfulness which he
needs to exercise, lest he should either neglect or abuse them.

Ver. 42. Portion of meat.—Cf. the description ofthe duties of presbyters, or elders, in
Acts xx. 28.

Ver. 44. Ruler over all.—Probably referring to the history of Joseph (Gen. xxxix. 4).

Ver. 46. Cut him in sunder.—J.e., put him to death in this manner. Cf. 1 Chron. xx. 3;
Dan. ii. 5. Unbelievers.—Matt. xxiv. 51 has “ hypocrites.”

Ver. 47, Prepared not himself—Rather, “made not ready ”—i.e., the things required

R.Y.).
. We 48. But he that knew not.—The justice of the procedure is not quite so obvious in
this case as in the preceding. ‘Such a servant cannot remain unpunished—not because he
has not obeyed his Lord’s will (for that was unknown to him), but because he has done that
for which he deserved to be punished” (Meyer). Ask the more.—ZJ.e., than from others to
whom less has been entrusted. Cf. with the teaching of this passage Rom ii. 12-15, in which
the principle it states is applied to the Gentile world.

Ver. 49. Iam come.—Rather, “I came” (R.V.). The tense refers to the historical fact of
the Incarnation. Note in this the consciousness of pre-existence, as also of a heavenly origin
jn the last clause of the verse. Fire.—As a symbol of discord and violence. What will I,
etc.—It is difficult to make out the precise meaning of the words. Probably the best
rendering of them is—“ And what will 1?” (what do I desire now?) ‘O that it were already
kindled !”

Ver. 50. A baptism.—Cf. Matt. xx. 22. To be plunged or immersed in sufferings.
Straitened.—Pressed, distracted. Cf. John xii. 27. A premonition of Gethsemane and
Calvary.

Ver. 51. Division —Matt. x. 34 has “a sword.”

Ver. 52. For from heaceforth.—A better reading is, “ For there shall be from henceforth
five in one house divided,” etc, Three against two, etc.—J.c., the younger generation against
the older.

Ver. 53. The father, etc.—The five members of the household are here specified: father,
mother, son, daughter, and daughter-in-law.

Ver. 54, To the people. —Rather, “to the multitudes ”; from which we would understand
that the preceding words had been specially addressed to the disciples. He warns them
also that the time is critical, upbraids them with spiritual blindness, for not being able to
see it (vers. 54-57), and irges them to make, each one, at once, his peace with God
(vers. 58, 59). A cloud, Peruaps, rather, “the cloud,” the well-known prognostic of rain
(1 Kings xviii. 44). In Palestine the rains come up from the Mediterranean. Straightway.—
Rapid and certain conclusion as to the weather.

Ver. 55. South wind.—Coming across the desert. Heat.—Rather “a scorching heat”

R.Y.)s
: ve 56. Hypocrites.—The insincerity lay.in the fact that they chose not to see signs
which were equally visible w.th those of the weather. “Among these signs were miracles
(Isa. xxxv. 4-6); the political condition (Gen, xlix. 10); the preaching of the Baptist ”
(Matt. iii.) (Farrar). : ;

Ver. 57. Yea and why.—‘ Even apart from signs, from the declaration of prophets, ye
might, from what ye hear and see, recognise the signs of the times, and the person of the
Messiah in Me” (Bloomfield). : ; :

Ver. 58. When thou goest, etc.—The figure is that of coming to an agreement with a
creditor on the way to the court, Officer.—The gaoler, lit. “the exactor,” whose duty it was
to compel payment of the debt.

Ver. 59. Mite——The smallest Greek coin then in use.


329


CHAP. XII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—12.


The Disciples Encouraged.—The hostility manifested towards Christ, as
described in the closing paragraph of the preceding chapter, was calculated to
intimidate weak and wavering disciples, and even to shake the courage of the
bravest amongst them. For it is evident that a large proportion, at any rate, of
the crowd now assembled sympathised with the attitude towards Jesus taken up
by their leaders. Accordingly our Lord, in the very presence of His enemies,
addresses His disciples and encourages them to steadfastness in their allegiance
to Him and His cause. By various kinds of inducements Jesus would now lead
them to banish their fears.

I. The promise of victory (vers. 1-3).—The first encouraging fact on which
Jesus laid stress was that in due time the hypocrisy of their enemies would be
unveiled and the triumph of the gospel be complete and final. At the present
time the teaching of the Pharisees, and the rules of conduct laid down by them,
had great weight in Jewish society. But the day would come when the mask
would be torn away; the corruption hidden beneath a pretence of piety would be
brought to light, and the authority of these present guides and rulers of public
opinion would crumble away. On the other hand, the disciples of Jesus, who
were now abashed in the presence of their enemies, and who, as it were, scarcely
dared to whisper in secret the truth they had learned from Him, would become
His heralds, and proclaim to a listening world the teaching which He had
entrusted to them. This assurance of future victory was a timely word of
encouragement to the followers of Jesus. Just as there is nothing more likely
to damp enthusiasm and to diminish activity than a dread of defeat, so the
anticipation of winning the day gives fresh spirit and strength to the soldier in
the midst of the fight. The same ground of encouragement which Jesus then
gave to His disciples, exists still. All who are endeavouring in His name to
overcome the ignorance and sin and misery that afflict human society, have
reason to believe that the time will come when their efforts will be crowned with
complete success.

II. Assurance of Divine protection (vers. 4-7).—In the second place Jesus
encourages His disciples by assuring them that they were the objects of God’s
providential care. All the evil that man could do to them was, even at its
worst, but trifling and insignificant. Man had power only to injure the body,
and even that power could only be exercised within the limits fixed by the Divine
decree. They should, therefore, be freed from all fear. The enemy, whom they
had reason to dread, was one who might find an ally in their own hearts. The
solicitations of the enemy of their souls to save their lives in the hour of danger,
by renouncing their Saviour, were indeed to be dreaded. This was the only fear
that they need entertain. Jesus, it is to be noticed, does not promise His disciples
that in every time of danger their lives would be preserved. They might be
called upon to forfeit life, but not without the consent of Him whom He taught
them to regard as their heavenly Father. And in the most forcible terms He
assures them that the providence of God extends to the minutest details of
human life. The birds of the air are not forgotten by God; how much more will
He care for His children! He numbers the hairs of their heads ; how much
more will He protect their highest interests! Let them banish all fears, there-
fore; they will not fall without God’s consent, and God will not consent to any-
thing which is not to be for their good.

III. The reward of the faithful disciples; the punishment of the faithless
(vers. 8-10).—Fidelity to the Saviour and to His cause may entail pains and
sufferings upon earth: but if they persevere unto the end, a glorious reward will
be bestowed upon them. Their glorified Master will recompense them for


330


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE, CHAP. XI¥.


Sa ee


confessing Him to be their Lord by acknowledging them to be His own before
the assembled hosts of heaven. But denial of Him must inevitably be followed
by the loss of His love and favour in the day when all shall appear before Him
for judgment. It is for them to decide, by their attitude towards Him, what is
to be His attitude towards them. There will be nothing arbitrary or capricious
in the rewards He will bestow or the punishments He will impose, but both will
commend themselves as just to those who will receive them. For a moment
Jesus turns from the disciples to the crowd that surrounds them, and speaks of a
worse sin than cowardly denial of Him as Lord and Master, and of the heavier
punishment which that sin entails. Faithlessness towards Him, or even mis-
guided antipathy towards Him, are grave offences, but they may be forgiven ;
but deliberate resistance to the Holy Spirit is asin that can never be forgiven.
The sinner who resolutely banishes from himself the light-giving, sanctifying
influences of that Spirit, and who hates goodness, shuts himself out from’ the
possibility of salvation.

IV. The promised aid of the Holy Spirit (vers. 11-12).—-Well might the
disciples fear that they would not be able to bear worthy testimony to their
Master when exposed to the dangers of which He now forewarned them. And
therefore Jesus reassures them, and promises that in their hour of need they
would be sustained by that Spirit whom their enemies blasphemed. Many and
various would be the tribunals before which His followers would be called to
stand ; they would be confronted with the representatives of ecclesiastical and
worldly power, but they would receive supernatural help to enable them to
endure the trial. Let them not premeditate defence! Words would be given
them to speak which their adversaries would not be able to gainsay or resist.
They would be taught both what to say and how to say it, and not only to
defend themselves, but also to render testimony in favour of their Lord. Thus
it was with St. Peter and St. Stephen before the Sanhedrim, and with St. Paul
before Felix and Festus ; they not only maintained their own integrity, but also
proclaimed the gospel of which Christ had appointed them ministers.

In all these ways, therefore, did Jesus seek to strengthen His disciples. He
infused into their hearts the hope of victory; He confirmed their faith in the
almighty power of their heavenly Father; He spoke of the glorious reward
which those faithful to Him might anticipate receiving, and of the penalty which
cowardice would draw upon itself; and, finally, gave assurance of a Divine aid
which would enable the weakest and most timid to rise to heroism in the day of
trial and persecution.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 1—12.


Vers. 1, 2. Hypocrisy and Truth.

I. The doom of hypocrisy. — Its
triumph is short-lived, for the mask
that conceals the true character of
pretenders to godliness will be torn
away.

II. The triumph of truth.—The
words now spoken by disciples in secret
will resound through the whole world.
Evil done in secret, and truth spoken
in secret, will both come to light, and
men will condemn the one and approve
the other.


Ver. 1. Two Kinds of Hypocrisy.—
Hypocrisy is of two kinds :—

I. Pretending to be what we are not.

II. Concealing what we are.—
Though these are so closely allied
that the one runs into the other, it is
the latter form of it against which our
Lord here warns His disciples.— Brown.


Self-Deception.— Hypocrisy is not
merely for a man to deceive others,
knowing all the while that he is de-
ceiving them, but to deceive himself


331


CHAP, XII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





and others at the same time; to aim
* at their praise by a religious profession,
without perceiving that he loves their
praise more than God’s, and that he is
professing far more than he practises.
—Newman.


Vers. 2, 3. The Place and Function
of the Lamp.—The disciples are to
beware of the leaven of the Pharisees,
one element of whose hypocrisy it was
to withhold from the common people
the light of their own better knowledge;
‘neither going into the kingdom of
heaven themselves, nor suffering those
who would have entered to goin. The
disciples, unlike the Pharisees, are not
to withhold any light which they
possess; for God intends nothing to
be concealed from any man. What-
ever is covered is to be uncovered.
Whatever is hidden from us is hidden,
not by God, but by the limitations of
our own faculty, and will be disclosed
as we train our faculty of perception
and outgrow its limitations. So far
aS we can see, we may see; and what
we see not yet we shall see soon. Yes,
and, as we are expressly taught here,
so far as we can see we may speak, and
must speak. For as it is the will of
God that nothing should be covered
except that it may be uncovered, so
also it is the will of Christ that what-
ever He or His disciples have spoken
in darkness shall be heard in the light ;
whatever they have spoken in the
chamber shall be proclaimed from the
house-top. The same rule is to govern
their words which governed His words.
What He had taught them privately,
that they were to teach openly (Matt.
x. 27); and now He adds that whatever
they taught privately, that their succes-
sors were to teach openly. They were
to have no mysteries, no “ economy,”
no truths reserved for the initiated.—


Cox,


Ver. 2. A Warning and a Promise.

I. A warning against the hypocrisy
which comes from fear of man.

Il. A promise and a consoling hope
for the faithful.


332


Ver. 3. “ Shall be heard in the light.”
— All that ye, on account of persecu-
tions shall have taught in secret, will,
at the victory of My cause, be pro-
claimed with the greatest publicity.” —
Meyer.


The Course of the Gospel.St. Luke
has described the course of the gospel
from the closet of Mary in Nazareth to
the house-tops of the city of Rome.


Vers. 4-9. Three Arguments against
Fear.

I. That drawn from the impotence
or limited power of the most malicious
enemies.—They can “kill the body”
and can do no more.

II. That drawn from the providence
of God, without whose will not even
the slightest injury can befall us.

III. That drawn from the fact that
in the day of judgment Christ will
acknowledge as His those who have
been faithful to Him, and deny those
who have denied Him.


Vers. 4-6. A Mid-Course.—The state
of mind Christ here seeks to cultivate
is midway between fear and implicit
trust.

I. He urges them on to earnestness
by pointing out spiritual dangers to
which they are exposed.

II. He preserves them from faint-
heartedness by speaking of God as
their protector.


Vers. 4, 5. The Place of Fear in the
Gospel.—There is a place for fear in
the gospel. Some readers of the Bible,
some preachers of the gospel, have
thought that fear was a dangerous,
even a forbidden principle, under the
dispensation of the fulness of times.
They have made this one of the chief
points of difference between the law
and the gospel. This is a hasty
inference. Our Lord says, “ Fear Him,
which, after He hath killed, hath
power to cast into hell”; says it to
His disciples—says it to those whom,
in the very same sentence, He calls


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


His “friends.” Paul bids his Philippian
converts work out their salvation “ with
fear and trembling”; Peter commends
a “chaste conversation coupled with
fear”; and even John, who speaks of
“perfect love casting out fear,” yet
uses this, in the Revelation, as a
characteristic of the faithful—“ them
that fear Thy name.” Fear has a
place in the gospel, may we but find
it. But it is not, as some would make
it, the whole of religion. But there
are three things the proper objects of
gospel fear: 1. Sin and wickedness,
2. Our ghostly enemy. 3. Everlasting
death.— Vaughan.


Ver. 5. “ Whom ye shall fear.” —The
Christian, though having Christ for his
friend (ver. 4), and God as His protector
is not above all “fear.” The great
enemy is still near, and his malice is
deadly and unsleeping.


Vers. 6, 7. Divine Providence.

I. Christ here teaches that God’s
government of the world extends to
the minutest detail in the lives of all
His creatures.

IJ. That this is not rule of a blin
law, but of a loving Father.— Nothing
is left to chance, and we have every
encouragement to confidence in Him,
and to commit ourselves in prayer to
His protecting power.


Ver 7. Safety while Work is Un-
finished.—The servant of Christ is
immortal so long as his work is yet
unfinished.


Vers. 8, 9. Confession and Denial
of Christ.—The context shows plainly
that it is a practical, consistent con-
fession which is meant, and also a
practical and enduring denial. The
Lord will not confess the confessing
Judas, nor deny the denying Peter;
the traitor who denied Him in act is
denied; the apostle who confessed Him,
even to death, will be confessed (ef.
2 Tim. ii. 12).—Alford.


I. Gentle allurement.
II. Grave menace,


CHAP. XII.


Ver. 8. The Promise. 1. How base,
then, to refuse our testimony to Christ,
when on His part He offers His
testimony to us by way of reward!
2. How much more Christ promises
than that which He requires from us!
The Threatening. (1) Not only will
the names of the cowardly be blotted
out of the book of life, but (2) He will
bear testimony against them and take
away all hope of their admission into
the heavenly kingdom.


Ver. 10. The Sin against the Holy
Ghost.—St. Luke records the utterance
to the disciples of that same dread
sentence which St. Matthew and St.
Mark give as addressed to the blas-
pheming Pharisees — showing  con-
clusively that Christians are not out of
reach of that danger which in open
enemies is blasphemy, and in false
friends is a “ doing despite.” St. Luke
connects this sin with that of denying
Christ. His warning is addressed: to
disciples. They may deny Christ and
be forgiven: “ to him that blasphemes
against the Holy Ghost it shall not be
forgiven.” Thus he prepares us for
later disclosures which shall show how
a Christian may blaspheme against the
Holy Ghost, and, so doing, sin beyond
forgiveness.— Vaughan.


Rejecting the Preaching of the Apostles.
—The history of Israel fully proves
the truth of this word of warning.
That nation did not perish because of
the sin of having nailed the Son of
man to the cross. Otherwise the day
of the crucifixion would have been its
day of judgment, and God would not
have offered for forty years longer
forgiveness of this act. of rejection.
It is the rejection of the preaching
of the apostles—the obstinate resist-
ance offered to the Spirit of Pentecost
—that filled up the measure of Jeru-
salem’s sin.—G'odet.


Sins Against the Spirit.—Other forms
of sin against the Holy Spirit are re-
ferred to in Scripture :—

I. To resist the Spirit (Acts vii. 51),


333


CHAP. XII.


or to vex the Spirit (Isa. lxiii. 10).
The action of those who refuse to turn
from their evil ways.

II. To grieve the Spirit (Ephes: iv. 30)
—as believers do when they allow them-
selves to be carried away by sin. But
to blaspheme is of one’s own free will,
with full knowledge to hate and with-
stand the Holy Spirit. The reason
why this sin cannot be forgiven is not
that the fountain of God’s pity is closed
up, but that the fountain of penitence
and faith is dried up in the sinner’s
heart.


Ver. 11. Promised Help.—The dis-
ciples are forewarned that they would
be cited, not only before Jewish, but
also before heathen tribunals, and are
promised direct, immediate help from
above for all cases in which they would
need it. The promise is of a twofold
nature.

I. Help would be given them to
frame their defence.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


II. They would be assisted to deliver
their testimony on behalf of Christ.
The Acts of the Apostles contains the
record of many instances of the fulfil-
ment of this promise.


Ver. 12. The Authority of the Apostles.
—Not unjustly is the Saviour’s promise
of the assistance of -the Holy Spirit
regarded as one of the strongest grounds
of the high authority in which the word
and writings of the apostles stand. The
manner of the Spirit’s working may
be incomprehensible, but it is evident
that we are to understand an entirely
extraordinary immediate influence ; for
it was to be given them “in that hour.”
The promise of this assistance extended
as well to the substance as to the form
of their language, and this help was
to support them so mightily (cf. chap.
xxi. 14, 15) that it would be morally
impossible for their enemies to perse-
vere in offering them resistance,—
Van Oosterzee.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 13—21.


The Rich Fool.—Christ’s unusually stern and cold answer disclaims a com-
mission, either from God or man, to decide squabbles about property, or to put
such decisions in force. He lays down principles and supplies motives which
dominate and purify the sphere of conduct connected with wealth ; but He will
not narrow Himself into a mere arbitrator of family feuds. If the man and his
brother would lay to heart His next words, the feud would arbitrate itself. It
is for others to trim the branches ; he proceeds to dig up the root. The request
is made the occasion of the general warning against covetousness—against all
forms of undue desire after, and delight in, worldly good. Mark the only reason
here assigned for the warning (ver. 15). ‘‘ Life” simply means physical life,
and the one reason our Lord gives for His warning is that worldly goods cannot
keep alive. The abundance of the things which he possesseth can do much for a
man ; but one thing they cannot do, on which all the rest of their power depends
—they cannot keep the breath in him, and, if it is out, they are of no more use.
“'Threadbare morality,” it may be said—‘‘ scarcely worth coming from heaven to
tell us;” but Jesus did not disdain to repeat familiar truths, and no common-
places of morals are too threadbare to be reiterated, until they are practised.
There are but two stages in the parable: I. What the foreseeing rich man said
to himself; and (II.) What God said to the blind rich man. There is something
very grim and terrible in the juxtaposition of these two elements of the picture,
enhanced, as it is, by the long-drawn-out statement of the man’s projects, and
the brevity of the Divine word which smites them to dust.

I. What the foreseeing rich man said to himself—He has made his money
honestly in the innocent occupation of a farmer. God’s sun has shone on the
fields of the unthankful, and his abundant harvest—what has it done for him ?


334


. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XII.

2 egies en a eS Ee Se ee oe
It has only added to his cares. He has no gratitude and no enjoyment yet.
How clear and deep an insight Jesus had into the misery of wealth when He
made the first effect of prosperity on this man to be reasoning within himself
and perplexity as to what he was to do! How many rich men cannot sleep for
wondering how they are to invest their money! This man is provident and
enterprising. He sees quickly and clearly, and makes up his mind promptly to
face the necessary expenditure entailed by prosperity. He has many of the
virtues which commercial communities adore. Perhaps if the farmer had looked
about him he could have found some empty barns not far off and some bare
cupboards that would have taken the surplus and saved the new buildings. But
that does not occur to him. ‘All my corn and my goods” are to be housed as
“mine.” Looked at from the world’s point of view, he is a model man of business.
He adds to all his other claims on the world’s esteem, that he is just about to
retire, on a well-earned competence, to enjoy well-deserved leisure. His ideal of
enjoyment is somewhat low. But how unconsciously he acknowledges that
wealth has hitherto failed to bring peace! ‘Take thine ease” confesses that
there has been no ease yet in his life, and unless he has really “ many years” to
live, there will have been none. His case is that of many prosperous men nowa-
days, who have no tastes but the coarsest, and who, when they go out of business,
are miserable. They cannot eat and drink all day, and they have killed so
much in themselves, by their course of life, that they care nothing for books, or
thought, or nature, or God, and so live empty lives, and try to fancy they like it.

II. What God said to the blind rich man.—How awfully “God said unto
him” breaks the thin tissue of the man’s dreams! The important points, in brief
speech, are the Divine designation of every such life as folly, the swift snatching
away of the soul, and the unanswerable question as to the ownership of the
wealth. God addresses men in their true characters. When He does, the man
knows himself for what he is, and others know him. The end of every self-
deceiving life will tear down the veils, and the conscience will echo the Divine
voice, and feel, ‘I have played the fool, and have erred exceedingly.” All lives
greedily gripping to earthly good, and making it the be-all and end-all, are folly,
and so is the presumption that reckons on many years. The soul which he had
called “my soul” is demanded from him. He called it his, but he cannot keep
it. A good man, dying, commits his soul into the Father’s hands, but this “ fool”
would fain cling to life, and has reluctantly to surrender it to the stern voice
which demands and will not be put off. The grim reality of death, set by the
side of the shattered projects of self-indulgent life, shows what a fool he is. And
the last touch which perfects the picture of his folly is the question which he
cannot answer, ‘‘ Whose shall they be?” and the bitter irony of “thou hast
prepared.” What foresight, which did not foresee the possibility of leaving
them! What preparation, which got the things ready for a moment which
never came! The parable is finally pointed to a specific application. “So is
he” refers both to the folly and the fate of the man. The same absurdity is
committed and the same end is certain, though not always with the same startling
suddenness and completeness. Come how it may, the separation of the worldly
soul from all its “ goods” is sure to come, and “he that getteth riches,” or sets
his heart on them, “shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end
shall be a fool.” The sin and folly lie, not only in amassing, but in doing so for
self ; and the only way to escape the snares of worldly wealth is to be “ rich
toward God.” “Toward God” is the antithesis to “for himself,” and the whole
clause describes the only wise use of earthly good as being its consecration to the
service of God.—Maclaren.


335


CHAP. XII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 13—21.


Vers. 13-21. The Rich Fool.“ Man
does not live by bread alone.” Christ
tells the history of a man who forgot
that—1l. His history isa parable; but
how real ! and how often has it applied !
In the Bible alone we have Balaam,
Achan, Nabal, Gehazi, Judas, Ananias,
These men were fools, utterly being
overwhelmed in their covetousness.
2. But, again, to how many does it
apply—to how few does it not apply,
though ina less overwhelming manner,
in our daily life! The very phrases
that are current in men’s mouths
testify to this. “ What is he worth?”
they say. 3. ‘Every good gift cometh
down from above.” To learn that, and
never forget it, is the way to rise
above covetousness. This rich fool
said, “my fruits” and “my barns,”
and “‘my soul.” And so it came to
pass that there was no way by which
God could teach him that none of it
was his, except the one way, that last
and terrible way—by taking away his
life. Paul said to the Corinthians,
“ All things are yours,” and he named
“the world” and “ life” among them.
But then he added, “ Ye are Christ’s.”
—Hastings.


Vers. 13-15. I. The Saviour’s refusal
to interfere—1. He implied that it
was not His part to interfere. 2. It
was implied that His kingdom was one
founded on spiritual disposition, not
one of outward law and jurisprudence.
3. He refused to be the friend of one,
because He was the friend of both.

IT. The source to which He traced
this appeal for a division.—Covetous-
ness.

III. He proceeds to give the true
remedy for covetousness.—“ A man’s
life,” ete.; a true consolation and
compensation for the oppressed and
the defrauded.— Robertson.


Ver. 13. A Type of the Wayside
Hearer.—1. This man who interrupted
Christ while preaching on this occasion
had just heard Him utter the words,


336


“ Magistrates and powers,” and these
suggested to him the topics on which
his thoughts were habitually fixed—
his dispute with his brother about
their patrimony. 2. And so it happened
to him according to the parable of the
sower. The truth he had heard did
not get into his mind, hardened as it
was, like a beaten path, by the constant
passage through it of current thoughts
about money; it was very soon forgotten
altogether, caught away by the god of
this world, who ruled over him through
his covetous disposition.— Bruce.


Misplaced Discontent.—Men misplace
their discontent. They are very well
satisfied with what they are; they are
only dissatisfied with what they have:
whereas the very reverse ought gener- .
ally to take place; and the only desire
which we ought to set no bounds to
is that of increasing in godliness.


Use of the Passing Incident.—This
incident becomes a text for a sermon
on covetousness. And thus the Holy
Spirit teaches us to consider every event
of our lives as an occasion for applying
to ourselves the words of Christ. He
instructs us to read, mark, learn, and
inwardly digest the holy gospel in such
a manner that we may be able to bring
its precepts to bear on the principal
occurrences, public and private, of our
own lives and of the world’s history.—
Wordsworth.


Ver. 14. “ Who made Me a judge?”
—Reasons why Christ refused to inter-
fere—

I. His interference would have en-
couraged the delusion that the Messiah
would be an earthly ruler.

II. He wished to draw a distinc-
tion between the kingdoms of this
world and the government of His
Church.

III. Because he saw that this man
was neglecting graver matters than
the inheritance which he wished to
be shared with him


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP, XII.





a Higher Office than Arbitrator of
Property.—With great propriety He
declines interference with matters of
this world who came not down on their
account ; nor does He, who was Judge
of quick and dead, to whom belonged
the final disposal of the souls of men,
condescend to be an arbitrator in men’s
contentions about their property.—Sé.
Ambrose.


The Error of Moses not Repeated.
—Christ will not repeat the error of
Moses (Exod. ii. 14), and thrust Him-
self into matters that do not concern
Him. His work was from the inward
to the outward, and so He kept within
the limits of that moral and spiritual
world from which alone an effectual
renovation of the outer life of man
could proceed.— 7'rench.


A Lesson to All Religious Teachers.

I. Their influence in the external
relations of life is great, but only
when it is indirectly exercised.

II. It is broken when they interfere
directly with secular and political
matters——When ministers of religion
keep within their proper sphere, all
parties look up to them, and they are
often the means of mollifying the
bitterest feclings and reconciling the
most conflicting interests.— Brown.


Ver. 15. Covetousness.

I. This is one of the red flags our
Lord hung out which most people
nowadays do not seem much to regard.
—Christ said a great deal about the
danger of riches; but not many persons
are afraid of riches. Covetousness is
not practically considered a sin in
these times. A man may break the
tenth commandment, and be only
regarded as enterprising. The Bible
says the love of money is the root of
all evil; but every man who quotes
the saying puts a terrific emphasis on
the word “ love,” explaining that it is
not money, but the love of it, that is
such a terrific root.

TI. To look about one, one would
think that a man’s life did consist in


the abundance of the things he pos-
sesses.—Men think they become great
just in proportion as they gather
wealth. So it seems, too; for the
world measures men by their bank
account. Yet there never was a more
fatal error. A man is really measured
by what he is, and not by what He
HAS. You may find a shrivelled soul
in the midst of a great fortune, and a

and, noble soul in the barest poverty.

III. The chief thing is to gather
into our life all the truly great and
noble things of character.—Here are
two texts which settle the question :
‘“‘ Whatsoever things are true, honest,

. . think on these things”; “Add
to your faith virtue,” etc.”—Miller.


The Fool's Fourfold Mistake.

T. As to the true gauge of the worth
of life.—He valued his days by the
money he could make in them. Men
like him sell their soul for money—
abandon heart culture, the amenities
of life, the choice delights of home life,
for money. Now, worth means, not
wealth, but quality of character, purity,
sweetness, nobility, truth. If a
millionaire is of worthless character,
he dies a pauper.

II. As to the true use of his super-
fluity—He had more than he needed.
This made him think of building bigger
barns. It is well to have an overplus,
but to what use are we to put it? To
make provision for sickness, old age,
death? Yes, and after that is done to
be a trustee for the orphan, the widow,
the poor.

III. As to the true way of being
merry.—This man talks in a strange
way to his soul. What does his soul
say in response? “TI am ill at ease.
I cannot be merry. I cannot eat
gold or corn.” It is a profound mis-
take that one can be made happier by
a bigger house, or a “place in the
country.” More likely to be at
“ease” with a daily wage than as
an anxious, speculating business man.
“Fase!” Yes! get it from a clean
conscience and a pure heart. Money,
rank, and power, cannot give it.


337


CHAP, XII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





IV. As to the tenure of his life.—
He thought of “many years.” He
had only one day left. He had a good
title for earth, but no lease, and he
had no title for heaven. The soul
that night crept out from it all—all
its wealth—a poor beggar, into God’s
presence. How full of warning is
the record of this man’s mistakes !—
Ff. B. Meyer.


A Warning Against Avarice.—So far
as the request had to do with secular
matters Christ refused to accede to
it; but so far as it revealed a faulty
moral condition it entered within the
Saviour’s province to deal with it.
Though not a judge of civil questions,
He was a Redeemer from sin—from
avarice no less thanfrom hypocrisy. Nor
are his followers in slight need of the
warning He gives: for avarice is a sin
which may attack those who have
triumphed over lusts of the flesh, and
who are in many other respects ex-
emplary in spirit and life.


“ Covetousness.” ‘“ All covetousness”
(R.V.); both (1) that which leads a
man to desire the possessions which
rightly belong to another, and (2) that
which sets an exaggerated value upon
earthly goods. Whether the petitioner
were in the right or the wrong, he was
evidently in danger of one form or
other of this sin.


“A Man's Life.”—There is a con-
trast here between the earthly natural
life and the true life—between his
“living” and his “life”: the one is
sustained by what he has, the other
depends upon what he is. Possession
of worldly goods may (1) for a time
secure a measure of ease and comfort,
but (2) it may overlay, hinder, and
strangle the higher nature.


Money a Test of Character.—The
philosophy which affects to teach us
a contempt of money does not run
very deep; for, indeed, it is clear that
there are few things in the world of


338


greater importance. And so mani-
fold are the bearings of money upor
the lives and characters of mankind,
that an insight which should search out
the life of a man in his pecuniary rela-
tions would penetrate into almost every
cranny of his nature. He who knows,
like St. Paul, both how to spare and
how to abound, has a great knowledge ;
for if we take account of all the virtues
with which money is mixed up—
honesty, justice, generosity, charity,
frugality, forethought, self-sacrifice—
and of their correlative vices—it is a
knowledge which goes near to cover
the length and breadth of humanity:
and a right measure of manner in
getting, saving, spending, giving,
taking, lending, borrowing, and _ be-
queathing, would almost argue a perfect
man.—H. Taylor.


Possessions and Life.—Not from the
possession of many goods, but from the
will of God, who lengthens or shortens
the thread of life, does it depend whether
one remains long and quietly here in
life or not. One may be preserved in
life without possessing goods, and also
remain in the possession of goods and
unexpectedly lose life.—Van Oosterzee.


Vers. 16-21. This Parable Teaches—

I. That God maketh His sun to
shine and His rain to fall on the just
and on the unjust.

II. That the increase of riches in-
creaseth care.

III. That worldly men’s possessions
are their “good things”—such they
esteem them, and such is their whole
portion from God.

IV. Great estates and enjoyments
of this life have a very enticing quality
in them: 1, They make us loth to die,
and willing to think we shall live
many years. 2. They lull the soul to
sleep. 3. They entice us to sinful
mirth and luxury,

V. He that hath most may have
his soul taken from him in a night.

VI. A man is no longer owner of
the goods of this life than he can keep
an earthly possession of them.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XII.





VII. When he dies he knoweth not
where these things shall be.

VIII. That it is the greatest folly
imaginable to spend all one’s time and
strength in getting and laying up
treasure upon earth, and in the mean-
time neglecting to be rich towards
God.— Pool.


Ver. 16. “A parable.”—To teach
(1) how short and transitory life is ;
(2) that riches are of no avail for
prolonging it; and (3) that the great
duty of all, both rich and poor, is to be
rich toward God.


A Fault often Condemned in the New
Testament.—There are more parables, I
believe, in the New Testament against
taking no thought about heavenly
things, and taking too much thought
about earthly things, than against any
other fault whatsoever.— Hare.


“The Ground,” etc.—Christ selects
the most innocent method of acquiring
riches, that which most obviously
tended to lead the mind constantly to
thankful acknowledgment of God, and
thus makes this wretched harvest-joy
all the more frightful and all the more
impressive a warning to every man.—
Stier.


“A Certain Rich Man.”—The cha-
racter here drawn is exactly that of a
prudent worldly man, who rises from
inferior circumstances to great affluence
by assiduous industry and good man-
agement, and then retires from busi-
ness, to spend the latter part of his life
according to his own inclinations, His
is the sort of life which is often held
up as a model to young men. He
figures here as a warning. All who
desire to be successful in business, as he
was, should keep in mind the words of
the Psalmist: “He gave them their
request, but sent leanness into their
soul.”


Vers. 17-20. The Miseries of the
Worldly Rich Man :—
I. Discontent.


II. Anxieties and cares.

III. False hope.

IV. The terror of losing all his
goods.


Vers. 17-19. The Worldly Character.
—1l. Activity in promoting his own
temporal interest. 2. Selfish love of
ease and pleasure. The “soul” which
he addresses is the seat of the emotions
and of the power of enjoyment—not
the spiritual element in man.


Ver. 17. “ What shall I do 2?” —Not
what should Ido? Scarcely any other
words could more vividly depict his
utter and unconscious selfishness. That
all he has is to be secured for himself
and for his own exclusive benefit is
assumed as a matter of course—the
only difficulty is as to the precise
method of doing this.


“IT have no room.”—Thou hast
barns—the bosoms of the needy, the
houses of the widows, the mouths of
orphans and of infants.—St. Ambrose.


“ My fruits.’—Compare the speech
of Nabal (1 Sam. xxv. 11), who says,
“Shall I take my bread, and my
water, and my flesh that I have killed
for my shearers?” And on the very
next day his heart died within him,
and he became as a stone; and in ten
days after he died. Contrast the words
in Deut. viii. 10-18, and David's
language, 1 Chron. xxix. 12-14.


Ver. 18. “This will I do.”—Man
proposes.

I, How boastful !—He speaks of his
barns and fruits as though he, and he
only, had any share in producing them,
any right of ownership in them.

II. How shortsighted !—He speaks
of the “many years” as a matter of
certainty, when he must have known
the uncertainty of life.

III. How selfish !—His aims are all
selfish. There is no provision made
for others. His life is entirely self-
centred.

IV. How nnworthy !—His idea of


339


CHAP. XII.


life is a low one. Indolent ease,
eating, drinking, and merrymaking.
Pity for the sorrows of others; charity
for the aged and poor; provision for
those who had helped to make him
rich ;— all these are forgotten. —
W. Taylor.


Ver. 19. “ZI will say to my soul.” —
What folly! Had thy soul been a sty,
what else couldst thou have promised
to it? Art thou so bestial, so ignorant
of the soul’s goods, that thou pledgest
it the foods of the flesh? And dost
thou convey to thy soul the things
which the draught receiveth ?—<S¢.
Basil.


“ Thou hast many goods.” —The devil
does not now endeavour to deceive us
by saying, ‘‘ Ye shall not surely die.”
He knows that so notorious a cheat
would never pass upon us; but yet for
fear, lest we should undervalue the
allurements of the world, he whispers
in our ears, ‘‘ Ye shall not die so soon.”
And “ Although thou hast not add that
thou canst wish for, thou hast many
goods”; and “ Though thou canst not
enjoy them always, yet they are laid up
for many years”; and what hast thou
to do but “ take thine ease, eat, drink,
and be merry,” as if thou wert to live
for ever? Behold the best that we
can make of the most happy state we
hope for here.


Little Satisfaction Yielded by Wealth.
—He unconsciously confesses how little
satisfaction his wealth has brought
him ; he looks for rest, but it is only in
the distant future, when the intended
work shall have been completed, that
he can hope to obtain it.


This Parable found in Germ in
Ecclesiasticus.—Cf. Ecclus, xi. 17-19:
“The gift of the Lord remaineth with
the godly, and His favour bringeth
prosperity for ever There is that
waxeth rich by his wariness and
pinching, and this is the portion of
his reward: whereas he saith, I have
found rest, and now will eat con-


340


a Fe —


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


tinually of my goods; and yet he
knoweth not what time will come
upon him, and that he must leave
those things to others, and die.”


Ver. 20. “ Thou fool.” —Why is this
man called a fool?

I. Because he deemed a life of secure
and abundant earthly enjoyment the
summit of human felicity.

. IT. Because, having acquired the
means of realising this, through pros-
perity in his calling, he flattered
himself that he had a long lease of
such enjoyment, and nothing to do but
to give himself up to it. Nothing else
is laid to his charge.—Brown.


Loss.—He comes before the judge
with a lost name, for God calls him
“Thou fool”; with a lost sowl, for it
is taken away from him by force;
with a lost world, for it he has to
leave behind him; and with a lost
heaven, for in heaven he has laid up
no treasure.


Contrasts.—Note the contrasts: 1.
“ Thou fool,” though he has manifested
worldly prudence. 2. “This night,”
as opposed to “many years.” 3. The
“soul” in the one case, at its ease,
eating, drinking, and making merry ;
in the other, demanded, rendered up,
judged.


Vain Preparation. — “ Prepared ”—
“made ready ;” “ but not for thyself.”


Fourfold Folly.—His folly is four-
fold: 1. He forgets God, the giver of
his wealth. 2. He appropriates all he
receives for himself. 3. He counts
these things the food of his sowl. 4.
He does not think of the daily possi-
bility of death.


Moderation.—A wise man will desire
no more than what he can get justly,
use soberly, distribute cheerfully, and
leave contentedly.— Bacon.


Riches Without Godliness.—The gloom
of barrenness has besieged your mind ;


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XII.





and while the light of truth hath de-
parted thence, the deep and profound
darkness of avarice has blinded your
carnal heart. You are the captive and
slave of your money; you keep your
money, which, when kept, does not
keep you; you heap up a patrimony
which burdens you with its weight;
and you do not remember what God
answered to the rich man, who boasted,
with a foolish exultation, of the abund-
ance of his exuberant harvest. Why
do you watch in loneliness over your
riches? Why, for your punishment,
do you heap up the burden of your
patrimony, that, in proportion as you
are rich in this world, you may become
poor to God !—Cyprian.


“ Shall be required.”—From the
righteous his soul is not required, but
he commits it to God and the Father
of spirits, pleased and rejoicing, nor
finds it hard to lay it down, for the
body lies upon it as a light burden.
But the sinner who has enfleshed his
soul, and embodied it, and made it
earthy, has prepared to render its
divulsion from the body most hard ;
wherefore it is said to be required of
him, as a disobedient debtor that is
delivered to pitiless exactors. —Theophy-
lact.


The Parable brings vividly before us
Four Considerations :—

I. The embarrassment which wealth,
and especially a sudden accession of
wealth, may bring to a man who is not
under the guidance of high and true
principles.

II. Here is an example of the love
of property, as such, and apart from
anything that can be done with it.

III. There is that in the human
soul, even when most forgetful of its
true destiny, which refuses to take
pleasure for ever in the mere handling
money or any sort of matter, as a
thing to be rejoiced in for its own sake.

IV. The whole scheme of definite
enjoyment may collapse: no man has
a right to presume upon the future.—
Liddon.


Ver. 21. False and True Riches.—
The contrast between the false and
the true riches is implied in the two
phrases, “to lay up treasure ” and “ to
be rich.”

I. The one is to hoard up laboriously
things which are outside one’s self.

Il. The other is an actual condition
of wealth and happiness.


Rich Towards God.—There is a con-
trast between “ laying up treasure for
oneself” and being “rich towards God.”
God cannot be enriched or impoverished.
That man is rich toward God who lays
up treasure in heaven, and so he is
rich indeed (cf. 1 Tim. vi. 17). By
being rich towards God he becomes
rich for ever.

‘“‘He who is rich for himself, laying
up treasures for himself, is by so much
robbing his real inward life, his life in
and toward God, of its resources; he is
laying up store for, providing for, the
Jjlesh; but the spirit, that which God
looketh into and searcheth, is stripped
of all its riches ” (Alford).

The evil is not in the treasure, nor
in laying up treasure, but in laying up
treasure for oneself. A case like
this, where the sinner is respectable,
honest, and prosperous, shows the true
nature of sin—it is a devotion to self,
not to God; and laying up solely for
self is, therefore, a sin, according to
the judgment of Christ.


Change the Place of Riches.—God
desires not that thou shouldst lose
thy riches, but that thou shouldst
change their place. He has given thee
a counsel, which do thou understand.
Suppose a friend should enter thy
house, and should find that thou hadst
lodged thy fruits on a damp floor, and
he, knowing by chance the tendency of
those fruits to spoil, whereof thou wert
ignorant, should give thee counsel of
this sort, saying, ‘ Brother, thou losest
the things which with great labour
thou hast gathered; thou hast placed
them in a damp place; in a few
days they will corrupt.”—“ And what,
brother, shall I do?” —“ Raise them to


341


CHAP. XII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





a higher room ”—thou wouldst listen
to thy brother, suggesting that thou
shculdst raise thy fruits from a lower
to a higher floor; and thou wilt not
listen to Christ, advising that thou
raise thy treasure from earth to heaven,


where that will not, indeed, be restored
to thee which thou layest up—for He
bids thee lay up earth, that thou
mayest receive heaven, lay up perish-
able things, that thou mayest receive
eternal.— A ugustine.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 22—34.


Anxious about Earth, or Earnest about the Kingdom.—The warnings against
anxiety are another application of the prohibition of laying up treasures for self.
Torturing care is the poor man’s form of worldliness, as luxurious self-indulgence
is the rich man’s.

I. The prohibition against anxious care (vers. 22-23).—The disciples who
were poor men might think that they were in no danger of the folly branded in
the foregoing parable. They had no barns bursting with plenty, and their
concern was how to find food and clothing, not what to do with superfluities.
Christ would have them see that the same temper may be in them, though it
takes a different shape. The temper here condemned is “ self-consuming care,”
the opposite of trust—a frame of mind that is incompatible with prudent fore-
thought and strenuous work, since it both hinders from seeing what to do to
provide daily bread, and from doing it. Reasons against this anxious care: 1. Jé
as superficial. It forgets how we come to have lives to be fed and bodies to be
clothed. We have received the greater, life and body, without our anxiety. The
rich fool, in the preceding parable, could keep his goods, but not his “soul” or
“life.” How superficial, then, after all, our anxieties are, when God may end
life at any moment! Further, since the greater is given, the less which it needs
will also be given. The thought of God as “a faithful Creator’ is implied. We
may trust Him for the “more”: we may trust Him for the “less.” 2. Haamples
of unanxious lives abundantly fed. The ravens have “neither storehouse nor
barn.” In these particulars the birds are inferior to us, and, so to speak, the
harder to care for. If they, who neither work nor store, still get their living,
shall not we, who can do both? Our superior value is in part expressed by the
capacity to sow and reap; and these are more wholesome occupations for a man
than worrying. 3. The impotence of anxiety (ver. 25). The supposed addition,
if possible, would be of the very smallest importance as regards ensuring food or
clothing, and, measured by the Divine power required to effect it, is less than the
continual providing which God does. That smaller work of His, no anxiety will
enable us to do. How much less can we effect the complicated and wide-reaching
arrangements needed to feed and clothe ourselves! Anxiety is impotent. It only
works on our minds, racking them in vain, but has no effect on the natural
world, not even on our own bodies, still less on the universe. 4. Haamples of
unanaious existence clothed with beauty. Christ here teaches the highest use of
nature, and the noblest way of looking at it. It is a visible manifestation of
God, and His ways there shadow His ways with us, and are lessons in trust.
Christ appeals to Creation as witnessing to a loving care in heaven. That appeal
teaches us that we miss the best and plainest lesson of nature, unless we see God
present and working in it all, and are thereby heartened to trust quietly in His
care for us, who are better than the ravens, because we have to sow and reap,
and than the lilies, because we must toil and spin. Ver. 29 adds to the reference
to clothing a repeated prohibition as to the other half of our anxieties, and thus
rounds off the whole with the same double warning as in ver. 22. It paints
the wretchedness of anxiety as ever tossed about between hopes and fears,


342


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XII.





sometimes up on the crest of a vain dream of good, sometimes down in the
trough of an imaginary evil. We are sure to be thus the sport of our own
fancies, unless we have our minds fixed on God in quiet trust, and therefore
stable and restful. 5. Such undue anxiety is pure heathenism (ver. 30). The
nations of the world who know not God make these their chief good, and securing
them the aim of their lives. If we do the like we drop to their level. What is
the difference between a heathen and a Christian, if the Christian has the same
objects and treasures as the heathen? That is a question which a good many
so-called Christians at present would find it hard to answer. 6. Faith in God as
our Father should dispel anxious care.—This is the crowning reason. What has
preceded it might be spoken by a man who had but the coldest belief in
Providence. But how should we be anxious if we know that we have a Father
in heaven, and that He knows our needs? He recognises our claims on Him.
He made the needs and will send the supply. Our wants are prophecies of God’s
gifts. He has made them as doors by which He will come in and bless us. How,
then, can anxious care fret the heart which feels the Father’s presence and knows
that its emptiness is the occasion for the gift of a Divine fulness? Trust is the
only reasonable temper for the child of such a Father. Anxious care is a denial
of His love, or knowledge, or power.

II. An exhortation to set the affections on the true treasure (vers. 31-34).—
This points out the true direction of effort and affection, and the true way of
using outward good so as to secure the higher riches. Life must have some aim,
and the mind must turn to something as supremely good. The only way to
drive out heathenish seeking after perishable good is to fill the heart with love
and longing for eternal and spiritual good. To seek “ the kingdom”; to count it
our highest good to have our wills and our whole being bowed in submission to
the loving will of God; to labour after entire conformity to it; to postpone all
earthly delights to that, and to count them all but loss if we may win it ;—this is
the true way to conquer worldly anxieties, and is the only course of life which
will not at last earn the stern judgment, ‘Thou fool!” This direction of our
aims is to be accompanied with joyous, brave confidence. How should they fear
whose desires and efforts run parallel with the “ Father’s good pleasure”? They
are seeking, as their chief good, what He desires, as His chief delight, to give
them. Then they may be sure that if He gives that, He will not withhold less gifts
than may be needed. If they can trust Him to give them the kingdom, they
may surely trust Him for bread and clothes. Mark, too, the tenderness of that
“little flock.” They might fear when they contrasted their numbers with
the crowds of worldly men; but, being a flock, they have a Shepherd, and that
is enough to quiet anxiety. Seeking and courage are to be crowned by surrender
of outward good, and the use of earthly wealth in such manner as that it will
secure an unfailing treasure in heaven. The manner of obeying the command
varies with circumstances. For some the literal fulfilment is best; but some-
times the surrender is rather to be effected by the conscientious consecration and
prayerful use of wealth. That is for each man to settle for himself. But what
is not variable is the obligation to set the kingdom high above all else, and to use
all outward wealth, as Christ’s servants—not for luxury and self-gratification, but
as in His right and for His glory—WMaclaren.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENT ON VERSES 22—34.


Vers. 22-31. The Cure for Covetousness. and love their Lord. Hence He puts
—Jesus well knew that over-anxiety before them full and sufficient reasons
about worldly things would always bea why His followers should not be over-
great snare, even to those who know anxious about their bodily needs.


343


CHAP. XII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,


en SA Re a Ee


I. See what God has already given.
—Will He, who has given life, withhold
what life needs ?

TI. See God’s care for birds and
flowers.—Evidences of God’s thought-
ful, loving providence abound on every
side. If the ravens are fed, and the
lilies clothed, will He neglect His im-
mortal, redeemed servants ?

III. How useless is fretful anxiety !
—It does no good. You can neither
add to stature, nor length of days.

IV. How unworthy it is. — The
heathen who do not know God may
well give themselves up to a life of
mere worldly care and pleasure. But
is this conduct befitting the children
of the kingdom ?

V. There is God’s unfailing promise.
—‘‘ Seek . . . and all these things shall
be added.” Care for His interests, and
He will care for yours.—W. Taylor.


Vers. 22-40. Against being Pre-occu-
pied by Things of the World.

I. The believer may renounce the
pursuit of worldly riches because of
a strong confidence in the goodness of
his heavenly Father in matters pertain-
ing to this life (vers. 22-34).

II. Because of the superior blessings
which he anticipates obtaining at the
coming of his Lord (vers. 35-40).


Anaious, Restless WSolicitude about
Earthly Things Forbidden.

I. The Giver of life and the Creator
of the body may well be trusted to give
the food that sustains the life and the
raiment the body needs.

II. God’s care for animals and
plants.

IIT. The uselessness of such solici-
tude on our part.

IV. Anxiety about earthly things
unchristian and heathenish.

V. God adds everything to those
who jirst seek His kingdom.


Vers. 22-24. A Precept, an Argu-
ment, and an Illustration.

I. The precept: “Take no thought,”
etc. (ver. 22).

II. The argument in support of it


344


‘life.


(ver. 23). He who gave the greater
will give the less.

III. The illustration from nature
(ver. 24).


Ver. 22>“ Therefore I say unto you.”
—It cannot be said too often that the
avaricious are not to be found ex-
clusively among the rich. Augustine
says, ‘‘God judges men to be rich or
poor, not by the amount of their pos-
sessions, but by their dispositions.”
Our Lord turns at once to the disciples,
who had neither fields nor barns, and
exhorts them to beware of avarice,
anxieties, and worldly cares.

As the believer is not (1) to aspire
after the possession of superfluous
wealth, so is he not (2) to be unduly
anxious even about the necessaries of
He is the servant of a kindly
Master, who will provide him with food
and clothing.


Ver. 23. “ Meat ;” “raiment.” —The
illustrations that follow are drawn
from (1) the animal, (2) the vegetable
world—the ravens are fed by God, the
lilies clothed by Him.


“ The life is more than food.”—You
turn it exactly round : food is meant to
serve life, but life forsooth serves food ;
clothes are to serve the body, but the
body forsooth must serve the clothing.
And so blind is the world that it sees
not this !—Luther.


Ver. 24. “Sow ;” “reap;” “ store-
house ;” “ barn.” —All refer to the pre-
ceding parable of the Rich Fool. From
the ‘‘ storehouse” seed is brought out
for sowing ; in the “ barn” the wheat
is deposited to be used for food.


Vers. 24, 27. Birds and Flowers.—
The birds of heaven, the flowers of
the field: how simple, how beautiful,
this contemplation of nature, as Adam
before the fall beheld it in Paradise!
—Stier


Ver. 27. “ The lilies.” —As the beauty
of the flower is unfolded by the Divine


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XII,





Creator Spirit from within, from the
laws and capacities of its own individual
life, so must all true adornment of
man be unfolded from within by the
same Almighty Spirit (cf. 1 Pet.
ii. 3, 4). As nothing from without
can defile a man (Matt. xv. 11), so
neither can anything from without
adorn him.—A/Jford.


“They toil not, they spin not.”
—wNeither “toil”—as men, for the
materials of clothing; nor “ spin ”—as
women, whose office it is to give shape
to those materials, and make them fit
for use. Consolation is intended for
either sex.— Burgon.


** Solomon.” —“ The lily belongs to the
paradise of God, Solomon’s glory to
the hot-house of art.” —Stier.


Ver. 28. “ Clothe you.”—This may
also be applied as an assurance of a
glorious resurrection. If in each suc-
cessive spring, after the winter’s frost
and death, God clothes the flowers of
the field with the apparel of such fresh
verdure and beautiful colours, will He
not much more clothe you with the
bright raiment of a glorious body, like
to that of the angels (chap. xx. 36), and
of Christ (Phil. iii. 21) 1—Wordsworth.


Vers. 29-32. Cares.

I. The cares which consume men of
the world (vers. 29, 30).

II. The only care that should en-
gross the believer (vers. 31, 32).


Ver. 29. “Of doubtful mind.”—The
phrase really means and implies “ toss-
ing about on the open sea” ; so that we
might paraphrase it, “ Do not toss
about in the windy offing, when you
may ride safely in the sheltered haven.”
—Cox.


Ver. 31. “Added unto you.’—So
to Solomon were given, not only the
wisdom which he had asked, but also
the temporal benefits for which he had
not asked.

“The way to obtain spiritual bessings


is to be importunate for them ; but the
way to obtain temporal blessings is to
be indifferent about them. Solomon
had wisdom given him, because he
asked it; and wealth, because he did
not ask it” (Henry).


Ver. 32 “ Fear not.”—1. They have
no reason to fear want. 2. Or the
various other afflictions and calamities
of life. 3. Or spiritual enemies. 4. Or
death.


“ Tittle flock.” —The phrase suggests
(1) cause of fear, and also (2) the more
special care on the part of God which
is needed and is exercised.


Christ's Flock.—How Christ’s people
come to be His flock.

I. By the express appointment of
God.

II. By the purchase of His atoning
death.

III. By His actually bringing His
people into His fold.


Ver. 33. “ Sell what ye have and give
alms.”—Our Lord’s words are dia-
metrically opposed to modern socialism.
The latter would make laws to take
away wealth ; the former inculcates love
that gives away.


Ver. 34. Detachment and Attachment.
In proportion as the faithful thus
creates for himself a treasure above,
detachment from earth is transformed
into attachment to heaven. For it is a
law that the heart follows the treasure.
From this results the new attitude of
the faithful which is described in the
words that follow.- The heart, dis-
engaged from the burden of earthly
possessions, like a balloon after its
fastenings have been severed, springs
up to meet the Master, who is on His
return, and for whom every faithful
one is waiting unceasingly.—G@odet.


‘“‘ For where your treasure is.” —The
human heart, little by little,appropriates
to itself the style and nature of the
treasure to which its whole thought is


345


CHAP. XII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





directed. Whoever constitutes his god
of gold, his heart becomes as cold and
hard as metal; whoever takes flesh
for his idol becomes more and more
sensual, and takes on the properties of
that which he loves above everything ;
but whoever has invisible treasures


invisible world, and whoever has no
higher good than God accords to Him
the first place in his love. This is the
key to the precious saying of one of
the Fathers, ‘“‘O Lord, since thou hast
made us for thyself, our heart is uneasy
within us, until it rests in Thee”—


keeps eye and heart directed upon the Van Oosterzee.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 35—38.


The Kind Master.—The parable of the Dutiful Servant (xvii. 7-10) is the
complement of this parable of the Kind Master. The one of these parables,
without the other, is not perfect. For if the one teaches us how to think of our-
selves, the other teaches us how God thinks of us, when we do that which it is
our duty to do. While the one sets forth the diligence and lowliness of the
servant, the other sets forth the friendliness and bounty of the Master.
The form of the parable. A certain Oriental lord has gone to the wedding of a
friend. The festivities on such occasions were spread over many days, a week at
least, sometimes a month. Consequently his servants could not tell to an hour,
or even to a day, when he would return. But however long he delayed his
coming, they kept a keen look-out for him. When night fell, instead of barring
up the house and retiring to rest, they girt up their long outer robes, that they
might be ready to run out at any instant to greet him ; they kindled their lamps,
that they might run safely, as well as swiftly, on his errands; they even pre-
pared a table for him, in case he were hungry and tired by his journey home.
In this posture, with these preparations, they await his coming. And when he
comes, he is so pleased with their fidelity and thoughtfulness that, instead of
sitting down to meat or hastening to his couch, he girds up his loins, bids his
servants sit down to the very banquet they had prepared for him, and comes
forth from his chamber to wait upon them. The main points of the parable
are—

I. The watchfulness of the servants.— What does this symbolise? As these
servants waited for the coming of their master, so we are to wait for the coming
of our Master. The second advent of Christ is the great and special promise of
the New Testament, as His first advent was the great and distinctive promise of
the Old Testament. The anticipation of the second advent of Christ has come
under suspicion because of fanatical and morbid minds having cherished it in a
carnal and literal form. But we may frame some such reasonable conception of
the promise as well make it a real power and a potent factor in our lives. Strip
it of all mere accidents of form and date, and reduce it to its more simple and
general terms, and what does it come to? It comes at least to this: that, some-
where in the future, there is to be a better world than this—a world more wisely
and happily ordered ; a world in which all that is now wrong will be righted; a
world of perfect beauty and growing righteousness ;—-in a word, a world in which
He who once suffered for and with all men, will really reign in and over all men.
His spirit dwelling in them, and raising them towards the true ideal of manhood.
And is not that a reasonable hope? Is it not a great hope? Does it not make
a vital difference to us whether or not we entertain it? But if we believe in
this great promise, if we cherish this great hope, then can we with patience wait
for it, And this is the very posture which our Lord here enjoins. He would
have us to be like servants who watch for the coming of their Lord, that, when
He comes, they may open to Him immediately. He would have us believe in,
and look for, the advent of a better world, in which all the wrongs of time will


346


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XII.





be rectified. He would have us sustain ourselves under all the toils and sorrows
of our individual lot, and under the still heavier oppressions of the world’s lot, by
looking forward to that end and purpose of the Lord God Almighty which will
vindicate all the ways in which we have been led, and all the painful discipline
by which we have been tried and purified and refined.

II. The kindness of their Master.— What does it symbolise? It means that
whatever we have done for God, He will do for us—that when He reckons with us,
we shall receive our own again, and receive it “with usury.” It is but a meta-
phorical expression of that great law of retribution which pervades the whole
Bible, but the happier face of which we are too apt to overlook—that whatever a
man sows, that shall he also reap, that, and all that has come of it. The Divine
reward will be at once equitable and bountiful. If in this present life we have
shown some capacity for serving God in serving our fellows, we may be sure
that in the life to come we shall receive the harvest of our service; we may be
sure that God will do for us all that we have done for Him, and a great deal
more. But what, after all, is the best part of a man’s reward for faithful and
diligent use of any faculty here? It is that his faculty, whatever it may be, is
invigorated, developed, refined, by use. If, then, I have here used my faculty
and opportunity for serving God in serving my fellows, I may hope, I may believe,
that hereafter my best reward will be an enlarged faculty of service and ampler
opportunities for exercising it. IfI have served the Master, He will serve me;
but He will serve me best and most of all by making me a more skilful, faithful,
and happy servant. Is there anything arbitrary in such a reward as this, or
anything unreasonable, or selfish, or base, in my hope that I may receive it? On
the contrary, is it not most reasonable, is it not in accordance with the most
scientific interpretation of the facts of observation and experience, to believe that
my capacity for service will grow by use? Is it not a very noble and unselfish
reward for having in any measure done my duty here, that I should be able to
do it more effectually and happily hereafter? Let us watch, then, for the
coming and kingdom of Christ; let us cherish the pure, unselfish hope that, if
we serve Him in this life, He will serve us in the life to come, and serve us most
and best of all by making us more capable and accomplished servants.—Cow.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 35—38.


Ver. 35. Preparedness.—1. ‘ Loins
girt about”—to run with speed and
freedom to meet his Lord. 2. “ Lights
burning ”—to run with safety.


believers may not weary themselves to
no purpose, by going astray.—Calvin.





Ver. 36. “ Watch.” The state of
mind here commended consists (1) of


Ready for the’ Road. an ever-present thought of God and


I. Christ enjoins the disciples to be
ready and equipped for the journey,
that they may pass rapidly through
the world, and may seek no fixed
abode or resting-place but in heaven.

II. As they are surrounded on all
sides by darkness, so long as they
remain in the world, He furnishes
them with lamps, as persons who are
to perform a journey during the
night. The first recommendation is to
run vigorously, and the next is to have
clear information as to the road, that


of our responsibility towards Him, and
(2) of an anticipation of the future
coming of Him who is our Saviour and
Judge.


“ Open immediately.”—The watchful
Christian is one who would not be
over-agitated if he found that Christ
was coming at once. Few will thus
open tmmediately. They will have
something to do first ; they will have
to get ready. ‘They will need time to
collect themselves, and summon about


347


CHAP, XII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





them their better thoughts and affec-
tions.— Vewman.


“ Wait for their Lord.”

I. With eager longing.

II. With joyous expectation. “ Im-
mediately.” At the first sound of His
knock.


Christ's Second Coming.—Christ re-
turns to all from the heavenly wedding
at the end of the world, when He
has taken to Himself His Bride, the
Church ; to each individual He comes,
when He stands suddenly before a man
at the hour of death.—Theophylact.


Ver. 37. Different Effects Produced
by Christ’s Coming.—Among the pro-
fessed servants of Christ, though all
will be more or less be taken by surprise
when He comes, some (1) will be able
to receive Him at once and with glad
welcome ; but some (2) though faith-
ful in the main, will be somewhat
unprepared, and unable to greet Him
with full cordiality; while some
(3) will be overwhelmed with con-
fusion at their utter unfaithfulness
being brought to light.


The Blessedness of the Faithful.

I. The momentary separation is
closed, and they are admitted to closer
fellowship with their Lord.

Il. He transforms them from
servants into honoured guests.


IIl. He bestows upon them the
administration of all His possessions.


Ver. 38. “ Blessed are those servants.”
—The more tardy His arrival, the |
greater is His satisfaction with those
servants whom He finds watching.
Christ here plainly teaches that His
second coming will be very much more
distant than the apostles themselves
thought, and that the patience and
faith of His servants who look for
Him will be put to a severe test. The
same fact of delay is alluded to in the
parables of the Ten Virgins and of the
Talents (Matt. xxv. 5, 19).

By the omission of the first and
fourth watches, Christ seems to hint
that His second coming will not be
(1) so soon as impatience expects, nor
(2) so late as carelessness supposes.


Vers. 39, 40. A Serious Crisis for
Some.—The Parousia, that event so
giorious and so welcome to the faithful
servants of Jesus, is for the world a
serious and dread crisis. He who
returns is not only a Master welJ-
beloved, who gives to each that which
he has sacrificed for Him, but also a
thief, who will then take away all that
they have not been able to guard.—
Godet.


The Prepared and the Unprepared.
—Those ready find Him a friend : only
those not ready find His coming as
uncomfortable as that of a thief.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 41—49,


Watching for the King.—There are many comings of the Son of Man before
His coming in final judgment, and the nearer and smaller ones are themselves
prophecies. So we do not need to settle the chronology of unfulfilled prophecy
in order to get the full benefit of Christ’s teachings here. In its moral and
spiritual effect on us, the uncertainty of the time of our going to Christ is
nearly identical with the uncertainty of the time of His coming to us.

I. Watchfulness because of our ignorance of the time of His coming.—
What is this watchfulness? It is, literally, wakefulness. We are beset by
perpetual temptations to sleep, to spiritual drowsiness and torpor. Without
continued effort our perception of the unseen realitics, and our alertness for
service, will be lulled to sleep. Christ bases His command on our ignorance of
the time of His coming. It was His purpose that from generation to generation
His servants should be kept in the attitude of expectation, as of an event that
might come at any time, and must come at some time. The parallel uncer-


348


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.  cmav. xu.





tainty of the time of death, though not what is meant here, serves the same
moral end, if rightly used, and is exposed to the same danger of being neglected,
because of the very uncertainty, which ought to be one chief reason for keeping
it ever in view. Any future event which combines these two things—absolute

certainty that it will happen, and utter uncertainty when it will happen—ought
to have power to insist on being remembered, at least till it is prepared for, and
would have, if men were not so foolish. Christ’s coming would be often con-
templated if it were more welcome. But what sort of servant is he who has no
glow of gladness at the thought of meeting his lord? True Christians are “ all
them that have loved His appearing.”

II. The picture and reward of watchfulness.—It is to be observed that
watchfulness is not mentioned in this portraiture of the watchful servant. It is
pre-supposed as the basis and motive of his service. So we learn the double
lesson, that the attitude of continual outlook for the Lord is needed if we are to
discharge the tasks which He has set us, and that the true effect of watchful-
ness is to harness us to the car of duty. A Church or a soul which has ceased
to be looking for Him will have let all its tasks drop from its drowsy hands, and
will feel the power of other constraining motives of Christian service but faintly,
as in a half-dream. On the other hand, true waiting for Him is best expressed
in the quiet discharge of accustomed and appointed tasks. The right place for
the servant to be found, when the Lord comes, is “so doing” as He commands,
however secular the task may be. Observe, further, the interrogative form of
the parable. The question isthe sharp point which gives penetrating power, and
suggests Christ’s high estimate of the worth and ditticulty of such conduct, and
sets us to ask for ourselves, ‘“‘ Lord, is it 1?” The servant is “faithful,” inas-
much as he does his Lord’s will, and rightly uses the goods entrusted to him ; and
“‘ wise,” inasmuch as he is ‘‘ faithful.” For a single-hearted devotion to Christ is
the parent of insight into duty, and the best guide to conduct ; and whoever
seeks only to be true to his lord in the use of his gifts and possessions, will not
lack prudence to guide him in giving to each his food, and that in due season,
Such faithfulness and wisdom (which are, at bottom, but two names for one course
of conduct) find their motive in that watchfulness which works as ever in the
great Taskmaster’s eye, and as ever keeping in view His coming, and its render-
ing account to Him. The reward is, that faithfulness in a narrower sphere leads
to a wider. The reward for true work is more work, of nobler sort and on a
grander scale, That is true for earth and forheaven. If we do His will here, we
shall one day exchange the subordinate place of the steward for the authority
of the ruler, and the toil of the servant for the joy of the Lord.

III. The picture and doom of the unwatchful servant.—This portrait pre-
supposes that a long period will elapse before Christ comes. The dimming over
of the expectation, and doubt of the firmness, of the promise is the natural
product of the long time of apparent delay which the Church has had to
encounter. It will cloud and depress the religion of later ages, unless there be
constant eflort to resist the tendency and to keep awake. It was an “evil”
servant who said so in his heart. He was evil because he said it, and he said it
because he was evil; for the yielding to sin and the withdrawal of love from
Jesus dim the desire for His coming, and make the whisper that He delays a
hope; while, on the other hand, the hope that He delays helps to open the
sluices, and let sin flood the life. So an outburst of cruel masterfulness and of
riotous sensuality is the consequence of the dimmed expectation. The corrup-
tions of the Church, especially of its official members, are traced with sad and
prescient hand in these foreboding words, which are none the less a prophecy
because cast by His forbearing gentleness in the milder form of a supposition.
The dreadful deom of the unwatchful servant is cast into a form of awful


349


CHAP. XII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





severity. The cruel punishment of sawing asunder is his. What concealed
terror of retribution it signifies, we do not know. At all events, it shadows a
dreadful retribution, which is not extinction, inasmuch as, in the next clause, we
read that his portion —his lot, or that condition which belongs to him by virtue
of his character—is with the unbelievers. That is not the punishment of un-
watchfulness, but of what unwatchfulness leads to, if unawakened. Let these
words of the King ring an alarm for us all, and rouse our sleepy souls to watch,
as becomes the children of the day.—Maclaren.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 41—49.


Ver. 41. “ Then Peter.” —This apostle
was the one who afterwards most
needed the admonition (Matt. xxvi.
41), and in so sad a manner forgot it.
Those who stand in most danger are
often slowest to profit by words of
warning.


Ver. 42. “ Faithful and wise.” —
Faithful comes before wise, because the
true wisdom of the heart comes from
faithfulness. Motives to  faithful-
ness :—

I. Love.—Which is sufficient of
itself,

II. But where love is defective, con-
siderations of prudence—a salutary
fear, which Christ here commends to us.


The portion of steward in the king-
dom of God is—
I, One of honour.
II, One of usefulness.
III. One of responsibility.


Ver. 43. “ Blessed.”—I. He is al-
ready blessed in his deed.

II. It is a new and increased blessed-
ness so to be found of his lord.

III. He is promised a high pro-
motion, from a few things to many
things.


Vers. 45-48. Punishment of evil-
doers is here represented—

I. As no mere affectionate chastise-
ment for the moral reformation of the
erring, but as just retribution.

II. As varying in degree according
to the guilt incurred—according to the
measure of knowledge the servants had
of their Lord’s will, and the measure of
their disobedience.


350


Vers. 45, 46. Carelessness :—

I. Trusting to a longer delay of the
Master.

IT. The ease with which carelessness
leads to unbridled insolence and dis-
soluteness.

III. The severe punishment of such
carelessness.


Ver. 45. Negligence. — Negligence
leads to two great sins :—

I. Hardness and caprice towards
others.

II. Slothfulness and wantonness as
respects the servant himself.


Ver. 46. A Divided Heart.—The
heart of the negligent sinner is divided
between the duty he owes and the
vicious indulgences he is determined
to have; his punishment corresponds
to his fault—“will cut him in
sunder.”


Answer to Peter's Question.—It is
not difficult for Peter to draw from
these two pictures of the faithful and
the unfaithful steward the answer to
his question. Yes, watchfulness, with
the fidelity which results from it, is
a sacred duty for all believers, but it
is still more incumbent upon those of
them who are honoured with the
special confidence of their Master, and
charged with the superintendence of
their fellow-servants, as Peter and the
other apostles were shortly to be.
Their fidelity would receive a glorious
recompense; but their neglect would
be esteemed still more culpable than
that of others, and would draw upon
them a severer chastisement.—Godet.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XII.
ae ee eS ee eS


Ver. 47. A Warning to Rulers in the Ignorance no Hacuse. — Ignorance
Church.—It ought to be remembered does not free from condemnation ; for
that those who are appointed to govern —1. If we seek to know God’s will,
' the Church do not err through ignor- we may discover it. 2. Ignorance is
ance, but basely and wickedly defraud always accompanied by gross and
their Master of His right.—Calvin. shameful negligence.


MAIN HOMILETIOS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 49—59.


The Signs of the Times.—The fact that in the mission and work of Christ
upon earth a new epoch in the world’s history had opened was clearly realised
by the Saviour Himself; it was, however, but imperfectly comprehended by
His disciples, and quite hidden from the people at large. In this section of
the gospel history Jesus gives expression to His own feelings of concern at the
greatness of the work given Him to do, and the sufferings through which alone
He could bring it to a successful issue. He then forewarns the disciples of the
sharp cenflict between faith and unbelief which would result in every community
where the gospel was preached; and, finally, He upbraids the multitude with
the spiritual blindness which prevented their recognising the significance and
solemnity of the times in which they were living.

I. The actual state of matters so far as it concerned Himself (vers. 49, 50).—
The conflict with the Pharisees was an indication of a widespread war between
the forces of good and evil, which was to result from His work on earth. The
fire-brand had been cast upon the earth, and from it a great conflagration would
ensue. He had kindled in the hearts of the disciples a love of heavenly things,
which they were to spread abroad ; and all the efforts of the earthly-minded
would be directed to oppose and extinguish it. And He recognises that one of
the results of this conflict will be sufferings and death for Himself ; nay, He
realises the fact that His passion is needed for completing the work which He
came to earth to accomplish. Without the cross His teachings and His miracles
would fail to produce the great change on human society which it was His
purpose to effect. This utterance of His strikingly illustrates the union in
Him of the human and the Divine natures. With genuinely human feelings
He shrinks from the conflict, but with Divine knowledge and love He anticipates
the results that will flow from His self-sacrifice, and longs for it to be
accomplished. These mingled feelings recur in a more intense form at a later
period of His life (John xii. 27; Matt. xxvi. 38), but were never entirely absent
from His mind during the whole pericd of His public ministry. The fact that
He so clearly foresaw the sufferings and death which were attached to His
redeeming work brings into clearest relief His love for mankind and His
devotion to the will of the Father.

TI. The disciples forewarned of their participation in the strife (vers. 51-53).
—They were probably anticipating the erection of a Messianic kingdom,
characterised by peace and prosperity of a material kind, and needed to be
prepared for a very different state of matters. Peace was not to be the first
and immediate result of His work, if by peace was to be understood comfortable
outward conditions of life. The peace which He bequeathed to His disciples
was a state of heart: being delivered from bondage and fear, and reconciled to
God. The relation which Jesus sought to establish between Himself and all who
accepted Him as their Lord and Saviour was higher and more sacred than any
other, and acknowledgment of His unique claims was certain to lead to conflict,
not only between Himself and the world, but between the members of human
society. Men would begin to distinguish themselves as adversaries and subjects
of His kingdom. And it is one proof of the profound significance of Christ’s


351


CHAP. XII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,


work in the world that this strife should spring up wherever the gospel is
preached. Men feel that they have to do with One whose claims override all
others and extend to every department of life; and if these claims are not
accepted they provoke resistance. And every one who accepts Christ as
Lord and Master needs to keep in mind that He insists upon absolute devotion
to Himself, even if this means the rupture of the nearest and dearest ties that
bind him to his fellows.

III. The multitude upbraided for their blindness and heedlessness (vers.
54-59).—Jesus now turns to the people at large, who do not realise the gravity
of the circumstances in which they are placed, and who are plunged in carnal
security and impenitence. He upbraids them with their blindness to the import-
ance of the crisis, and urges them to take advantage of the time which yet
remains to them for making their peace with God. He contrasts the shrewd-
ness and prudence which they display in the ordinary affairs of life with their
slowness to comprehend the things that concern their spiritual welfare. The
real explanation of the discrepancy is that they are interested in things that
concern their earthly welfare, but are indifferent to their highest welfare. A
sinful heart means a darkened understanding (cf. Rom. i. 21; Eph. iv. 18).
The very appearance of Christ upon the earth pointed to the necessity of
reconciliation with God: it was to effect this that He came, and therefore
indifference to Him and to His teaching meant exposing oneself to the greatest
danger. All who heard Him had the opportunity of becoming reconciled to
Him whom they had offended, and whose claims they could not of themselves
satisfy. Let them beware of allowing the day of grace to pass, and of compelling
God to deal with them according to the strict demands of justice.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 49—59.


Vers 49-53. The Conflict—My con-
flict hastens apace ; Mine over, yours
begins; and then let the servants
tread in their Master’s steps, uttering
their testimony entire and fearless,
neither loving nor dreading the world,
anticipating awful wrenches of the
dearest ties in life, but looking for-
ward, as I do, to the completion of their
testimony, when, after the tempest,
reaching the haven, they shall enter
into the joy of their Lord.—Brown.


The Critical Nature of the Time.
—The critical nature of the time
(1) as concerned Jesus Himself—vers.
49, 50, (2) as concerned the disciples
vers, 50-53). “Is it a time,” said
Elisha to the faithless Gehazi, “ to buy
lands amd oxen, when the hand of God
is on Israel?”—that is to say, when
the Assyrian is at the gates of Samaria ?
Jesus speaks in the same way to the
disciples about Him, “Is it a time for
the believer to propose, as the aim of
his life, the peaceful enjoyment of


352


worldly property, at the moment when
the great conflict is about to begin ?”
—Godet.


Ver. 49. “ Fire on the Earth.”—By
“fire” here we are to understand the
higher spiritual element of life which
Jesus came to introduce into this earth,
with reference to its mighty effects in
quickening all that is akin*to it, and
destroying all that is opposed. To
cause this element of life to take up
its abode on earth, and wholly to per-
vade human hearts with its warmth,
was the lofty destiny of the Redeemer. °
—Brown.


The Gospel a Fire.—Our Lord says
here, in the plainest way, that while
the object of His coming is to give
peace, the effect of His coming will
too often be to send fire on earth.

I. The text calls the gospel a fire —
A fire is a power. How fire spreads,
glows, rages, devours! When the
gospel is called a fire, we mean not a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


name, an idea, a poor faint, creeping
thing, which may be disregarded and
let alone, but a great, active, at last
a victorious and irresistible force.
Never suppose that the gospel is an
insignificant or despicable thing.

Il. There are hearts and places in
which the gospel is not a fire-——There
are families where the gospel in the
heart of one causes discord and division.
The only alternative must be the
backsliding of the one, or the conver-
sion of the rest. So long as the gospel
is not a power, it is not a fire; it
causes no breach and no division.
Therefore we are constrained to wish
for such signs of its working. The
fire is the sign of the peace. If there
be no fire, the gospel will be a mere
balm, a mere soporific, a mere lullaby
of the soul.

III. What is the lesson of the text
for each of us ?—Is the concord of our
homes due to the gospel? Is serving
Christ the secret of family union? Let
the fire be a fire of cleansing, and a
fire of quickening, and a fire of devotion.
Is your home disorganised? What
has divided you? Was it the fire of
the gospel which severed? Are you
intolerant of the devotion and service
which others render to Christ? It
must needs be that the gospel divides ;
but woe to them by whom that division
comes! We do not wish to spread
division by the gospel; but even if
this be the effect, we recognise there
one of the signs of the work of grace.
Division is a sign that life is there. It


means an end to fatal lethargy. It is.


the work of the ministry to bring the
gospel home. It is something to have
it preached in our churches ; it is more
to have it preached, even to dispeace
and division, in our homes.—Vaughan.


“ Already Kindled.”—The disciples
having falsely imagined that, while
they were at ease and asleep, the
kingdom of God would come, Christ
declares, on the contrary, that there
must first be a dreadful conflagration,
to kindle the world. And as some be-
ginnings of it were, even then, making


AA


CHAP, XII.


their appearance, Christ encourages
the disciples by the very consideration
that they already feel the power of the
gospel. “ When great commotions,”
says He, “ shall already begin to kindle,
this is so far from being a reason why
ye should tremble, that it is rather
a ground of strong confidence; and, for
my own part, I rejoice that this fruit
of my labours is visible.” —Calvin.


“ To send fire.” —“ Everything fertile
in results is rich in wars” (Renan).
The fire when it burns on all sides
consumes chaff and straw, but purifies
silver and gold.


Ver. 50. The Passover before the
Passion.—Jesus expresses with perfect
candour the emotion that fills His mind.
The thought of the terrible suffering
He is to endure is before His mind, and
weighs upon Him like a nightmare until
it is over. The first evidence of this
feeling is in this passage ; a second time
it comes to view while He is in the
temple (John xii. 27)—‘“‘Now is My
soul troubled ; and what shall I say ?”
A third time it breaks forth in all its
vehemence in the garden of Geth-
semane.


The Secret of the Saviour’ s Harnestness.
—1. His belief in a Divine commission.
2. His belief in the solemnity of time.
We, too, however, have a mission to
fulfil, and our time for fulfilling it is
appointed and proportioned by God.
If these convictions possessed our souls,
would they not kindle a Christlike
earnestness? (1) They would dispel the
delusions of time. (2) They would
overcome the hindrances to submission.
(3) They would break down the impedi-
ments of fear.—Hull.


Vers. 51-53. The Gospel an Occasion
of Division.

I. The fact that the gospel of Christ
shall be the occasion of division and con-
tention in the world is easily verified.
The heart of every believer is an
example. The history of tas gospel


353


CHAP. XII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


ee


in every country into which it has been
introduced establishes it.

II. The causes of the division.
Hatred of the truth ; hatred of a holi-
ness which rebukes sin; hatred of
authority such as the gospel claims.

III. Results of this division. The
world is convinced of sin. The faith
and patience of believers are called
forth and strengthened.


Ver. 51. “ Peace.’—This saying
may distress weak minds ; for (1) the
prophets everywhere promise peace
and tranquillity under the reign of
Christ, and (2) Christ is our peace
(Eph. ii. 14), and the very office of the
gospel is to reconcile us to God. But
we must remember that this peace is
associated with faith, and exists only
in the hearts and consciences of the
godly. The corrupt nature converts
the inestimable gift into a most de-
structive evil.


The Result of Christ's Coming.— Our
Lord speaks not of the intention with
which He came into the world, but
of the sad result of His coming, which
was to be (owing to the corruption
of man’s fallen nature) strife and
division,


Ver 52. Strife Sometimes Better
than Peace.—Better is strife, when it
brings one near to God, than peace,


when it separates one from God.—
Gregory Naz.


Vers. 54-59.—Two Great Faults :—

I. Blindness, in not being able to
discern the significance of this time, as
they did the signs of the natural
heavens (vers. 54-56).

II. Want of prudence in not repent-
ing and becoming recanciled to the
law of God while yet there was time
(vers. 57-59).


Vers. 57-59. The True State of the
Case-—Why do ye not discern of your-
selves your true state—that which is
just—the justice of your case as before
God? You are going (the course of
your life is your journey) with your
adversary (the just and holy law of
God) before the magistrate (God Him-
self) ; therefore by the way take pains
to be delivered from him (by repentance
and faith in the Son of God), lest he
drag thee to the judge, and the judge
deliver thee to the exactor, and the
exactor cast thee into prison.—<A//ord.


Vers. 58, 59. ‘‘ When thow goest,” ete.
—Our Saviour seems to say: In a
merely temporal matter, you are care-
ful to act thus prudently. While the
day of mercy yet lasts, should you not
discover the like anxiety to avail your-
selves of it? through Me to obtain
deliverance from the wrath of God,
before it be too late ?—Burgon.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE. CHAP. XUL
Sg te et een i a es apace


CHAPTER XIII.
CRITICAL NOTES.


VER. 1. There were present.—The phrase is a peculiar one, and might be translated, “then
there came up” or “arrived,” perhaps to bring tidings of this outrage. Whose blood.—The
phrase is highly dramatic: the persons had been slain in the Temple, and their blood had
been mingled with that of the sacrifices they were offering. Pilate.——This incident is not
recorded in history. But similar events are known to have happened : Josephus tells of
murders and massacres in the Temple, and of Pilate’s cruelty in repressing outbreaks. As
these persons were Galilzans, we have, perhaps, here an explanation of the enmity between
Pilate and Herod (xxiii. 12). Pilate had, we know, about this time put down an insurrection
in Jerusalem with great severity (see xxiii. 19).

Ver. 2. Suppose ye.—This thought was in their minds, though apparently they did not
express it. What they regarded as a judgment upon others Christ advised them to take as a
warning to themselves. Great public calamities may be signs of God’s displeasure, but it is
a superstitious abuse of the doctrine to hold that the particular sufferers are greater sinners
than other men.

Ver. 3. Ye shall all likewise perish.—It is not for those who, by their sins, are liable to
like judgments of God to pass sentence on others and to infer their exceptional guilt. The
words are doubtless prophetic of the manner in which myriads perished in the siege of
Jerusalem by the Romans.

Ver. +. Lhose eighteen.—An incident well known at the time, but of which we have no
further information than is here given. Tower in siloam is evidently a tower on the city
walls near the Pool of Siloam, at the south-east corner, “It is an ingenious, but of course
uncertain, conjecture of Ewald that the death of these workmen was connected with the
notion of retribution, because they were engaged in building part of the aqueduct to the Pool
of Siloam, for the construction of which Pilate had seized some of the sacred Corban-money
(Jos. B.J, II., ix. 4)” (Farrar). It is noticeable that these two incidents are of a different
character: the first was death inflicted by the cruelty of man; the second, death by
accident. Sinners.—Lit. “ debtors,” a different word from that in ver. 2.

Ver. 5. Likewise.—Prophetic also of deaths by falling buildings in the siege and capture
of Jerusalem by the Romans.

Ver. 6. A certain man had a fig-tree.—This parable is peculiar to St. Luke, and tells of
impending destruction because of long-continued abuse of God’s mercy. The fig-tree is the
Jewish nation, the vineyard is the Church, the owner of the vineyard is God, and the vine-
dresser is Christ (or. according to another interpretation, Christ is the owner, and the
vine-dresser the Holy Spirit). It is hard not to see some reference in the seventh verse to the
three years of Christ’s ministry. This is not, however, fatal to the identification of the owner
with God, and of the vine-dresser with Christ, as in Christ’s coming to seek fruit God might
be said to come. The objection to the identification of the vine-dresser with the Holy Spirit
is that it represents Christ as one to be interceded with—a view of His character quite
contrary to the spirit of the New Testament. It is useless to say that we should not press
the parable too far by such identifications, as in the parables expounded by Christ Himself
(those of the Sower and the Tares) every detail is shown to be significant.

Ver. 7. Three years.—Apart from the allusion above noted, the time here specified is that
within which a fig-tree, if it is going to bear fruit, should show some signs of fertility.
Cumbereth.—Lit. “make of none effect,” “make idle.” It takes the place of a tree that
might yield some fruit, and impoverishes the ground by drawing nutriment from it.

Ver. 8. Lord.—JZ.c., “sir.’ Dig about it.—Ze., dig holes for casting in manure.

Ver. 9. Well.—This word is supplied to fill up the broken sentence. There is great
solemnity in the significant gap left in the speaker’s words—in the suggestion that amend-
ment is barely possible, but that a certain time will be allowed to see if it will take place.
After that.—Omitted in R.V., but of course the words are understood in any case.

Ver. 10. In one of the synagogues.—Time and place are indefinite ; probably in Perza.

Ver. 11 A spirit of infirmity.—(Cf. Acts xvi. 6, “a spirit of Python”). Je., an evil spirit
(cf. v. 16)) who had the power of producing bodily weakness.

Ver, 12. When Jesus saw her.—She does not seem to have asked to be cured; but the
language of the ruler of the synagogue implies that she expected or hoped for cure, and
therefore she may be credited with a measure of faith. Thou art loosed.—The negative
part of the cure—the relief from the evil spirit that had bound her.

Ver. 13. Laid His hands on her.—The positive part of the cure—the imparting of
strength,


355


rem gd


cuap. xu HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





Ver. 14. Said to the multitude.—It is noticeable that he did not address his rebuke to
Christ directly, but covertly spoke against Him in his words to the people. Ought to
work.—His folly is shown in his implied statement that the bestowal of Divine grace and
help is a kind of working by which the Sabbath is profaned.

Ver. 15. Thou hypocrite.—Rather, “ye hypocrites” (R.V.)—i.¢., the ruler and those about
him, or those of the Pharisaic sect to which he belonged, and which favoured such criticism.
‘The hypocrisy or insincerity consisted in pretending a zeal for the Sabbath, when tne real
motive of the speech was to stir up enmity against Jesus. Doth not each one of you ?—J.e.,
they themselves broke their own rule about the Sabbath, in order to show mercy to their
cattle. The instance is an apt one: the woman bound down by her infirmity is as helpless
as the beast tied to the manger.

Ver. 16. Ought not this woman ?—“ Ought ’—a repetition of the ruler’s phrase in ver. 14.
The contrast is very strongly put—it is between a dumb animal and, not merely a human
being, but one of the chosen people—“a daughter of Abraham” (by blood and by faith) ;
the few hours of deprivation which a beast might be forced to endure by delay in watering
are contrasted with her eighteen years’ servitude.

Ver. 17. And when He,had said.—Rather, “and as He said these things” (R.V.). All His
adversaries.— Which implies that a number of them were present. All the people rejoiced. ——
Though He had abandoned Galilee, and Jerusalem had been hostile to Him, He still seems to
have enjoyed a measure of popularity in Perea (cf. Matt. xix. 1, 2).

Ver. 19. Like a grain of mustard seed.—So small in size as to be a proverbial comparison
among the Jews for anything exceedingly small. Garden.—Matt. xiii. 31 has “field.” A
great tree.—Omit “ great,” omitted in R.V. The plant in question sometimes grows as high
as a man on horseback. The points of comparison are the insignificant beginning and the
great outward extension of the kingdom of God founded by Jesus Christ. Birds of the
air.—T.e., birds attracted by the pungent seed of the plant. Lodged.—TZe., found a shelter
(cf. ix. 58). The Church is a place of shelter and of food.

Ver. 21, Leaven.—“ Except in this parable, leaven in Scripture (being connected with
corruption and fermentation) is used as a type of sin. See xii. 1; Exod. xii. 15-20;
1 Cor. v. 6-8; Gal. v. 9. Here, however, the only point considered is its rapid, and unseen,
and effectual working” (Farrar). The idea, too, of the wholesome effect produced by leaven
in the making of bread may be associated with the figure. Three measures of meal.—
Probably the amount usually kneaded at one time (Gen. xviii. 6). The various allegorical
explanations of this detail that have been given are more than usually frivolous and far-
fetched, Till the whole was leavened.—The process of change resulting in a complete
transformation. This is a companion picture to that of the mustard seed, the latter setting
forth the outward eatension of the kingdom, the former the inward transformation
effected by it. The comparison may also be extended to the effect produced by the gospel
upon the character of the individual believer, when external life and habits, and the whole
inner being, come under the influence of Christian truth.

Ver. 22. Went through cities, etc.—Not a direct journey. To Jerusalem.—The last
‘journey through Perza to Jerusalem,

Ver. 23. Then said one,— Probably a Jew (see ver. 28) ; he can hardly have been a disciple.
The question he asked was one frequently debated in Jewish schools, some maintaining
universal salvation, others limiting it to a few elect (2 Esdras viii. 1), It is plain that by
salvation is here meant final acceptance with God and entrance into heaven. Christ does
not directly answer the question, but turns the attention of his hearers to the sort of persons
that will be saved, rather than to their relative nwmber, In ver. 29, however, the fact that
the saved will be many in number seems to be hinted at.

Ver. 24, Said unto them.—Not simply to him who asked the question ; the answer Christ
had to give deserved the attention of all. Strive.—In the plural; the word used is a very
strong one, being taken from the contests in the arena, and might be rendered: “strain
every nerve to force your way in.” Strait gate.—Rather, “ narrow door” (R.V.): the word
“gate” having been probably taken from Matt. vii. 13. Seek to enter in.—J.e., evidently by
some other way than the narrow door of repentance and faith. There may be a contrast
between seehing (i.e., desiring) and striving.

Ver. 25. When once.—Lit. “from the time that,” There is great force in the abrupt
transition from ver, 24 to ver, 25. ‘The image of the closed door is preserved. The master
of the house, at a certain hour, rises from the table and closes the door, so that even the
inmates who may be lingering out too late are not only refused admission, but are not
recognised as members of his family ” (Speaker’s Commentary). Some commentators have
sought to tone down the harshness of the passage by punctuating it differently: “Shall not
be able when once the master,” etc, The result is a faulty, clumsy construction of sentences
in both the Greek and the English. Open to us.—Entrance claimed as a right based on
fone acquaintanceship, or, in other words, upon external privileges rather than worthiness
of character.


356


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. ) CHAP. XIII.


ee ee ee ee ee ee ee


Ver, 26. In thy presence.—A very different thing from “eating and drinking with Him ”
(cf. Matt. xxvi. 29; Rev. iii. 20). The Christian can scarcely fail to think of the Lord’s
Supper as an illustration of eating and drinking in Christ s presence.

Ver. 27. Workers of iniquity.—This is a peculiar phrase ; it means “ persons engaged in
the hire and receiving the wages of unrighteousness.” In the correspouding passage in
St. Matthew the word translated “iniquity ” means “lawlessness”; the word here used
means “ unrighteousness ”—“ disregard of the fundamental principles of God’s kingdom.”
This is an indication of the independence of the two accounts of the discourse.

Ver. 28. Weeping and gnashing of teeth.—The signs respectively of grief and rage.
Thrust out.—Rather, “cast forth without” (R.V.), ‘‘cast forth” because as Jews they had
been born in the covenant.

Ver, 29, And they shall come,—‘ In this and the preceding verse is the real answer to the
question of ver. 23 given: ‘They shall be many; but what is that to youif you be not among
them ?’” (Alford).

Ver. 30. There are last, etc.—Z.e., some who are first to believe will fall from their high
place, and vice versd. This has been strikingly fulfilled in the ruin of the Oriental Churches,
which were the first to be founded and were once in a flourishing condition. The Mother
Church of Jerusalem, too, has declined, while Gentile offshoots have flourished. —

Ver. 31. The same day.—A better reading is, “‘In that very hour” (R.V.). Pharisees,
saying, etc.—We are certainly led to understand that these Pharisees had been sent by Herod
to induce Jesus to leave his territory. If the intimation of Herod’s desire were a mere inven-
tion of the Pharisees it would be difficult to understand the epithet Christ applied to him.
Probably Herod had no real desire of the kind; he had become sufficiently unpopular by the
murder of the Baptist, and had no inducement to add to his guilt by further violence against
Jesus. Besides, when Jesus was afterwards in his power he abstained from injuring him.
But the excitement connected with Christ, and Herod’s own superstitious fears, would doubt-
less make him anxious for the Saviour to leave the country. His cunning is shown by his
endeavouring to secure this end in an underhand way, and by his using his enemies, the
Pharisees, as his tools in the matter. Will kill thee.—Rather, ‘would fain kill thee” (R.V.);
i.é., “ will” is not a mark of the future tense, but the verb “to desire.”

Ver. 32. That fox—An emblem of cunning and mischief.. This is the only recorded
exaniple of Christ’s speaking of any one in terms of sheer contempt. The rest of the verse
has been the subject of great discussion. What are the three days specified? and what is
meant by “being perfected”? Some have taken the time specified as referring to present
labours (“ to-day ”), to future labours (“ to-morrow ”), and to His final sufferings at Jerusalem
(“the third day I shall be perfected”). It is difficult, however, to understand the days in
any other than a literal sense. The meaning would, therefore, be that Jesus would still
remain for three days in Herod’s terrritories, and would still engage in those mighty works
that had excited his apprehensions, and carry through His plan to the very end. The only
serious objection to this interpretation is that the words “I shall be perfected ” would seem
to suggest more than merely bringing to an end the miracles of healing in the district of
Perza ; but no other meaning is possible if the days specified are to be taken as litera] days.

Ver. 33. I must walk.—Rather, “I must go on My way” (R.V.), the word used by the
Pharisees in ver. 31 (“depart”). Christ is on His way out of the territory of Herod, but He
is not urged by the fear of that king’s malignity ; He is not afraid of death, for He is going
to meet death in Jerusalem. It cannot be, etc.—There is terrible irony in these words,
Christ speaks of His life as being safe until He arrives in Jerusalem. It is almost a moral
impossibility, His words imply, for a prophet to perish except in that city, which had
monopolised the slaughter of the prophets. The death of John the Baptist was an exception
to the rule.

Ver. 34. O Jerusalem ! etc.—Rather, “ which killeth . . . stoneth. . . sent untoher”(R.V.).
How often.—Reference is here made to visits of Jesus to Jerusalem and of labours there
which St. Luke and the other Synoptists do not record. As a hen.—It has been said that
the figure of the eagle in Deut. xxxii. 11, 12 is emblematical of the spirit of the Old
Testament, and this in the present passage of the spirit of the New Testament. The
contrast between “I would” and “ye would not” is very startling: the power of man to
resist and defeat the merciful purposes of God.

Ver. 35. Desolate.—The best MSS. omit the word, but it or some such term is needed to
complete the sense. In the R.V. it is inserted in italics, The Divine Glory had departed
from the house (cf. Ezek. x. 18, xi. 23). Ye shall not see Me.—QJudicial blindness, the veil
remaining still upon the heart of the Jewish people. Until the time, etc.—The words quoted
were actually used on Christ’s triumphal entrance into Jerusalem a short time after this, but
we cannot think that the prophecy was in any sense then fulfilled. It is more probable that
a mistaken understanding of these words led to their being employed on that occasion.
Christ here speaks of a second coming in the far-distant future and associates it with the
penitence and faith of the Jewish nation, which will then receive Him as the Blessed One.


357


CHAP. XIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,





MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—5.


Accidents not Judyments.— Whenever any great public calamity happens, there
are never wanting persons who are ready to point out the special sin which has
provoked it; and it is noticeable that they are, as a rule, more indignant at
those who suffer wrong than at those who do wrong. They are eager to utter
their harsh censures, while other men sit silent with dismay ; they interpret the
Divine Providence according to their private prejudices and theories, and, there-
fore, often contradict each other; and they carefully exclude themselves from the
operation of the vengeance—“ Whatever happens to them is a trial, while what-
ever happens to their neighbour is a judgment.”

I. The false inference.—To affirm that, by an invariable and most merciful
law, sin entails punishment—national sins national punishment, personal sins
personal punishments—is the duty of every Christian teacher; but to fix the
times and assort punishments to sins, to affect to stand midway between heaven
and earth and interpret the mysteries of Providence, is simply stark presumption
in any uninspired man. It is not given to the sons of men to comprehend the
goings of the Inhabitant of Eternity. The sweep of eternity is large, and gives
scope and verge for the play of retribution beyond the reach of mortal eye. To
play the interpreter, and say, “This punishment is a judgment on that sin,” is
to play the fool. The Holy Scriptures affirm the mystery and delay of retribu-
tion ; that it is not measured in mortal scales; that the sweep and fall of its
scourge are not traceable by mortal eyes. They teach us that those ‘“ whose feet
are swift to shed blood” often outrun the pursuing vengeance for a time, and for
a long time—nay, beyond all bounds of time. They teach that many offences
escape whipping here, though, sooner or later, the impartial lash falls on all.

II. The true lesson to be drawn from calamities.—The gospel teaches us
a more excellent way of interpreting the facts of life than that of these
presumptuous discoverers of judgments. Instead of dwelling on the mysterious
fate of our neighbours, it bids us come quite home, and repent, lest we ourselves
should likewise perish. It teaches us in effect that no evil is so evil-as the spurious
goodness which, separating us from our fellows, cries to its neighbours, as from
a superior platform, “‘ Stand down there, for I am holier than thou.” It teaches
us that the accidents by which we suffer, so far from being personal judgments
on personal sins, are parts of that great mystery of evil which is now suffered
to task our thoughts and try our faith, in order that, by-and-by, it may lead in a
complete beatitude, a profounder rest, an eternal good and joy. The only safe
moral we can draw from the judgments of God, or what seem to us His
judgments, is the warning, ‘“‘ Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.”
Let us take the warning, and not judge one another any more. We are too
apt, when we see any forlorn and solitary brother sitting, like Job, among the
potsherds, to sit down beside him, like Job’s comforters, and hand him the very
sharpest and roughest of the sherds that he may scrape himself withal. We are
too apt, when any calamity befalls our neighbours, to assume that they must be
sinners above all other men, and to speculate—sometimes in their hearing—on
the crimson and scarlet dyes of their guilt. We need, therefore, to remember
that accidents are not judgments, that accidents are not even accidents, since they
are all ordered of God, and form part of that gracious discipline by which He
lifts us through the graduated and rising circles of His service. They are sent
for our sakes, who only stand and witness them, as well as for the sake of those
who suffer them; not that we may judge others, but that we may examine
ourselves. —Cow.


358


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XIIf.





SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 1—9.


Vers. 1-9. Three Motives to Repent-
ance.—We need to remember the
spiritual tension, the awful feeling of
urgency, if we would do justice to our
Lord’sthreefold summons to repentance.

I. The story of the Galileans was
probably carried to Jesus as a person
who made Messianic claims of some
sort, and who might be expected to
show a practical interest in the honour
of the country. Jesus startles His
informants by the abrupt diversion of
interest. He saw in the death of these
Galileans, with all its atrocity of cir-
cumstance, a picture and prophecy of
the doom, which, within a single genera-
tion, should overtake the whole of the
Jewish people. The moral motive to
repentance is plain here. A tragic
ending, a life cut short, is not to be a
mere nine day’s wonder. It is a voice
from heaven, an emphatic voice, to
stagger and shock the careless, and to
make them think seriously of God.

II. The next case is different. It
was an accident. Has an accident a
“moral”? If not, why did our Lord
utilise this pure “accident” in a moral
interest? In the lips of an unfeeling
man such language would be unpardon-
ably offensive. It is the use of it by
such men that has brought it to dis-
credit. But Christ’s interest in repent-
ance was an absorbing passion. Such
accidents ought, if we take Christ’s
example here as a law, to help in the
conversion of all who are awed and
startled by them. Such emotions of
pity, awe, sympathy, are not to be
wasted. To see men moved, moved
deeply, and yet not permanently, not
to the point of changing their life to
the bottom, and putting it right with
God—this was what straitened Christ’s
spirit, and moved Him to speak with
such startling vehemence.

III. The insertion of the parable of
the fig-tree at this point, even though
it were spoken on another occasion,
rounds off the lesson on repentance, it
presents the same appeal, with the


same importunity, on what seems to be
at first totally different ground. The
urgency of massacres and accidents,
which do not happen every day, or at
every door, can easily be evaded by most
men. ‘ These things are not likely to
happen tows. It is absurd to make the
bare supposition of them a motive in
life.” Christ’s answer to this sceptical
mood is the parable of the fig-tree. He
seems to side with the mood, but does
not allow it to evade His earnestness.
Massacre and accident are extra-
ordinary resources of which God avails
Himself ; but His goodness also—which
is so unbroken in your life—is also
designed to lead you to repentance.
God tries every way, because men seek
to evade Him by every way. He tries
exceptional severity, because men take
His goodness for granted; He tries
uniform, ever-renewed, patient goodness,
because He is good, and severity is His
strange work. But it would be a fatal
error to presume on His goodness.
The parable ends with the same in-
exorable refrain as the verses about
the Galileans and the fall of the tower.
Not to repent is perdition—if neither
severity nor goodness startle men, they
are lost. These stern, passionate utter-
ances are the expression of the intense
love of Christ. No one has ever loved
like Jesus Christ, so no one has ever
spoken with such awful severity and
urgency. No one has been so pained
with soul-travail for the conversion of
men.— Denney.


Vers. 1-5. The Lesson of Hvil Tidings.

I, How men use evil tidings.— Jesus
was from Galilee. Men are always too
ready to gossip about the misfortunes
of others. Christ had just been speak-
ing about God’s judgments on men who
knew His will and did it not. The
bystanders at once named the destruc-
tion of the Galileans by Pilate. Why?
Because they thought the sudden death
of these men was a mark of God’s dis-
pleasure at some grievous sin.


359


CHAP, XIII.


II, How Christ would have them
used.—How quickly Christ saw the
thoughts which had led the speakers
to utter their evil tidings! He saw in
them a fault which we are all too apt
to fall into—the fault of always form-
ing unkind judgments about people in
misfortune; of always thinking, and
even sometimes saying, the worst we
can of people. Christ rebukes them for
their want of charity, and cautions
them for the future. God’s judgments
will fall upon ad/ unrepentant sinners.—
W. Taylor.


Rash Judyments.—We are taught
here—1. To beware of rashly judging
others. 2. Not to be too hasty in
interpreting afflictive dispensations of
Providence against ourselves. 3. To
be thankful for our own preservation.
4, That it is our duty to mark and im-
prove calamities, and especially violent
and sudden deaths. 5, The necessity of
genuine repentance.—/oote.


Sin and Punishment.

I. Punishment does follow upon sin.

II. Yet God spares more than He
signally punishes.

III. Therefore no one can conclude
from such instances that those who are
punished are worse than their neigh-
bours.

IV. The best use we can make of
remarkable examples of this kind is to
examine ourselves and to repent of our
sins.


Ver. 1. “Blood . . . mingled with their
sacrifices. — The suggestion is: God must
have been specially angry with these
Galileans, who were cut off by a
heathen, in God’s house, at His altar,
and when engaged in the act of wor-
shipping God. The argument is similar
to that of Job’s friends (Job iv. 7,
viii. 20, xxii. 5).


Vers. 2-9. Punishment and Long-
Suffering.—Christ’s answer consists of
two parts.—

I. A plain and literal threatening of


360


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


general destruction to all who do not
repent.

II. A new challenge to the repent-
ance which alone can save, in a parable
which exhibits long-suffering as an
argument to repentance, and which
passes from the people as a whole to
each individual.


Ver. 2, 3. “Sinners above all the
Galilceans.”—Our Saviour does not, say
that the calamity which had overtaken
these Galileans was not a punishment
for sin. He contests not about that,
but rather seems to agree to them so
far, and draws that warning out of it.
He only corrects the misconceit it
seems they were in, in thrusting it too
far off from themselves, and throwing
it too heavily upon them that sacrificed.
—Leighton.


Ver. 3. “* Ye shall all likewise perish.”
—Jesus, with prophetic insight, im-
mediately discerns the significance of
this fact. In this carnage, wrought by
the sword of Pilate, He sees the prelude
of that which the Roman army would
accomplish soon in every part of the
Holy Land, and especially in the
Temple—the last refuge of the nation.
In fact, forty years later, all that
remained of the Galilean people was
gathered in the Temple, and suffered,
under the Roman sword, the penalty
incurred by their present impenitence.
—Godet.


Signal Chastisements —1, Signal
chastisements inflicted upon sinners
by God warn us of His righteous
anger against sin, and should lead us
to examine ourselves and consider what
we deserve. 2. His kindness and
forbearance in sparing others who are
equally guilty should be regarded by
us a8 an invitation to repentance,


“ Repent.” —Repentance implies.—1.
A change of mind. 2. Conviction of sin.
3. Grief on account of sin. 4. Hatred
of sin. 5. Actual reformation. 6. Faith
in the Redeemer.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XIII.


a


Our Inability to Trace the Connection
between Suffering and Sin.—Christ
affirms, and all Scripture affirms, that
the sum total of the calamity which
oppresses the human race is the con-
sequence of the sum total of its sin;
nor does He deny the relation in which
a man’s actual sins may stand to his
sufferings. What He does deny is the
power of other men to trace the con-
nection, and thus their right, in any
particular case, to assert it.—T'rench.


“Likewise.”—The correspondence be-
tween what had happened to these
Galileans and what was to happen to
the Jewish people is very striking.
1. In both cases the punishment was
inflicted by the heathen. 2. The time
was that of the Passover, when
sacrifices were being offered. 3. They
were slain with the sword.


Vers. 4, 5. ‘Upon whom the tower
fell.” Our Lord introduces this incident
as showing that whether the hand of
man or (so called) accidents, lead to





inflictions of this kind, it is in fact but
one Hand that doeth it all (cf. Amos
iii. 6). There is also a transference
from the Galileans—a despised people
—to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, on
whom the fulness of God’s wrath was
to be poured out in case of impenitence.
—Alford.


Ver. 5. True and False Ways of Re-
garding Calamities.

I. Light-minded persons are inclined
to deny the intimate connection be-
tween natural and moral evil.

II. Narrow-minded persons are dis-
posed to interpret all such calamities —
as Judgments upon exceptional guilt.

Ill. The true way to regard them is
as a call to repentance.


“ Likewise perish.”—In like manner
with the former instance, this prophetic
word of Jesus was literally fulfilled at
the destruction of Jerusalem ; houses
and public buildings were burned and
overthrown, and multitudes perished in
the ruins.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 6—9.


The Barren Fig-Tree-——No doubt this parable, in its primary reference, set
forth the then state of the Jewish people—the pains that had been spent
upon them, the meagreness of spiritual results that had been yielded by them,
and the certainty of Divine retribution if there were not a speedy change in their
condition. But the solemn lessons which it contains are equally applicable to
every individual whose life has been subjected to religious influences, and who
has failed to yield the fruits of righteousness.

J. The worthless tree.—Note that it enjoyed special advantages. It was
planted in good soil, and it was attended to by one who both knew how to
apply, and was diligent in applying, helps to its growth and fruitfulness. It was
not a tree growing wild among the rocks, or on the road-side, which the passer-
by might strip of its scanty fruit, and which no one would be surprised at finding
devoid of figs, even in the season when they were naturally to be expected. Nor
can we fail to see the spiritual meaning of this. From those who are outside
the influences of religion little can be expected. But from ws, who are placed in
the most advantageous conditions; who have been taught the truth as it is in
Jesus from our earliest years; who have enjoyed all the helps and privileges the
Church can give; to whom God’s Word is so familiar that we are in danger of
losing reverence for it ;—much is expected. There was no fruit upon this fig-tree.
Yet it was not dead; and was probably all the more richly clothed with pre-
tentious foliage because it bore nothing. Instead of being a fruit-bearing tree,
it had become a tree of the ornamental kind, and—for it represents a being with
moral responsibilities—it had no right to make the change. It was not planted
for ornament, but to yield fruit; if it did not yield fruit, it had no claim to its


361


<


CHAP. XIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





place in the vineyard. In it, therefore, we have a picture of the mere profession
of religion, as contrasted with genuine, vital religion. The person whom the fig-
tree represents is in the Church ; he has all the advantages of that position ; he
clothes himself in the guise and uses the language of the Christian. But one thing
is wanting. He yields no fruit; no one is any the better for his existence ; he
exercises no good influence. Even in the case in which he is not a mere deceiver,
masquerading as a religious person, all the privileges and blessings he enjoys go
to his own nourishment—to feed his own self-complacency—and he is of no use or
service to God or man. He is never known to do a generous, kindly, Christ-like
action, or to assist in any good cause. And this is the great test of the value of
a life. The goodness Christ requires is something that imparts itself and not
something that merely pleases the eye. It yields fruit, which serves to feed and
nourish the spiritual life of others.

II. The patient owner.—He is impoverished and disappointed by the fruit-
lessness of the tree. Its fruit would have value for him as an article of food and
merchandise, and he is all the poorer for its absence. In the same way, and in
as absolute a sense, we belong to God, our life has been ordered for us by Him,
the place we occupy is that which He has assigned to us, and it is adapted to the
purpose for which He has chosen it—viz., that of our yielding the fruits of
righteousness and holiness. Some may be more favourably situated than others,
but all have it in their power to yield some fruit. Note the patience and perse-
verance of the owner: ‘“ Behold, these three years I come, seeking fruit on this
fig-tree.” More than three annual visits are implied. The fig-tree bears three
times in the year—in early spring, in summer, and in autumn—fruit of different
degrees of lusciousness and value. So that we are at liberty to think of the
owner of this fig-tree as coming time after time during these three years, to see
if there were any signs of fruit. Our Master also is patient. If He were not,
what would become of us? If He did not know how to wait, which of us would
not, long ago, have come under His sentence of condemnation? He comes to us
every season—that is to say, whenever new circumstances occur in our lives, when
there are fresh influences brought to bear upon us, or we pass into a new phase
of experience. A great sorrow or a great joy befalls us, we are put into different
conditions, and He comes in due time to see what gain we have made. And He
is not easily discouraged, even if the condition of matters that meets His eye is
unsatisfactory. He comes time after time to see if there is in summer what
there was not in spring, if in autumn what was not insummer. He is slow unto
anger, and time after time re-visits the tree, in spite of previous disappointments.
And if we pass to the spiritual side of things, we see that He does more than
visit the tree periodically. He Himself creates those new circumstances, He
arranges those new events which are to our lives what the changes of season are
to the tree. He sends them for the very purpose of exciting to fruitfulness, and
every time that He has thus dealt with a life, or acted upon it, He draws near
to it, to see if at last it is beginning to yield fruit, When, after protracted
patience, there is no prospect of fruit, His sentence is simple and clear: “Cut it
down ; why cumbereth it the ground?” The decision of the owner is all the more
serious for the reason which he alleges. The tree is useless. It has been planted
there to bear fruit ; it does not bear it, and there is no reason for any longer
preserving it. It is taking up the space which might be occupied by a fruitful
tree ; it is not only doing no good, but it is hindering good from being done.
The spiritual truth which is thus pictorially set forth is a very solemn one.
God is patient, but there is such a thing as exhausting even His patience, and as
making further long-suffering ridiculous. He waits long, but a time may come
when He will be forced to leave to their fate those who are resolutely set upon
disappointing Him.

362


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XIII,





III. The loving intercessor.—The owner has pronounced the sentence of
condemnation, but an intercessor is found in the vine-dresser. He has a love for
all the trees that are within his care; he loves this tree, not only for the fruit
which it may yield, but also for its own sake. However, it is very noticeable
that it is only a respite that he asks for. The success of his intercession is before-
hand and by himself subordinated to the success of his undertaking. I will do
so-and-so with it, and try all in my power to correct the defect; but if failure
attend my efforts, I will not have a word to say in its behalf. There is a deep
spiritual meaning in this. We are the subjects of intercession, but this inter-
cession has conditions attached to it. There 7s One who loves us profoundly—
loves us for our own sakes, independently of what we may become, or, to use this
figure, of the fruit we may bear. But at the same time He knows that eternal
life can only be given to those who live unto God, and who, by their fruits, give
evidence of the genuineness of their faith in God and love for Him. He inter-
cedes for us—that is, He asks for time to make use of every means within His
power for stirring us up to be fruitful in all good works. The vine-dresser in
the parable would have had no ground to stand upon, no reason to plead, if he
had put in a word for sparing a tree that had proved itself hopelessly barren.
And so in the spiritual side intercession avails in the case of those who, though
backward and disappointing at first, yield to the heavenly influences brought to
bear upon them, and begin to live unto God. The mercy which is shown to the
penitent, whatever may have been the depth of their guilt, warrants no inference
of mercy being shown to those who are finally impenitent. The plain, definite,
solemn warning which the parable contains is, one may say, one of the means
which the Heavenly Vine-dresser uses to make us bestir ourselves. The words
are calculated to shake us out of indifference, and to urge us to begin at once to
bear fruit towards God, in a devout and holy life.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON THE VERSES 6—9.


Vers. 6-9. The Unfrwitful Fig-Tree.
I. The vineyard.
Il. The fig-tree in a vineyard.
TII. The fig-tree visited.
IV. The fig-tree doomed.
V. The fig-tree spared.


The Teaching in the Parable—

T. Cuts up all pleas of negative good-
ness.

II. Calls on us to examine ourselves
whether we be barren or fruitful, and
to follow out the result aright, what-
ever it may be.

III. Calls on us to be thankful to
the Lord for sparing us hitherto.

IV. Warns us not to abuse Gcd’s
mercy so as to presume upon it for the
future.


I. The promise of fruit.
II. Patient waiting.
III. Deserved condemnation.
IV. Loving intercession.


The Lessons of the Fig-tree. I. For
the Jewish Church. 1. Its privileges.
9. Its unfruitfulness. 3. God’s for-
bearance.

Il. For the individual Jew.


The Parable also Teaches—

I, That a solemn responsibility at-
taches to those who are within the pale
of revealed religion and of the Church..


TII. For the individual Christian.
—1. The value of Church membership.
2. Individual responsibility. 3. Un-
fruitful Church members need warning.
4, The day of grace is drawing to an
end. What then? —W. Taylor.


II. That God notes the length of
time that men continue fruitless under
the means of spiritual culture.

III. To be cut down is the rich
desert of all the fruitless.

IV. The purpose of the mercy that is


363


CHAP. XIII


shown to them is to produce a change
in them.

V. Genuine repentance,
late, avails to save.

VI. The final destruction of those
who are, after all forbearance, found
fruitless, will be pre-eminently and
confessedly just.


however


Ver. 6. “ Fig-treein his vineyard.” —
The most frequent emblem for the
Jewish people is the vine. Here the
fig-tree is chosen to imply advantages
bestowed for a definite purpose, to be
withdrawn if that purpose is not served.
Vines belong to a vineyard : a fig-tree
can only find a place in it by the choice
of the owner of the vineyard. So God,
of His own free will, chose Israel to
occupy a special place in the world,
and to fulfil special duties in the educa-
tion of the world in spiritual things.


“ Sought fruit.”—Cf. Isa. v. 2: “ He
looked that it should bring forth fruit.”
He has a right to it, and will require
it. .


From Whom Results are Expected.
—The time when God thus comes is
not: the day of judgment only; for the
tree is represented as allowed to stand,
with a view of its beginning to yield
fruit. It is now, therefore, during our
present state, that God comes seeking
fruit from us. He expects results—

I. From those who have received a
Christian education and are familiar
with holy examples.

II. From the faithful sermons we
have heard.

TIT. From the trials of life which are
designed to discipline the soul.


“ Fruit.”—There is a wonderful fit-
ness in the simple image running all
through Scripture which compares men
to trees and their work to fruit. The
three kinds of works whereof Scripture
speaks may all be illustrated from this
image.

I. Good works, when the tree, having
been made good, bears fruit after its
own kind.


364


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


il. Dead works, such as have a fair
outward appearance, but are not the
genuine outgrowth of the renewed
man—fruit, as it were, fastened on
externally, alms given that they may
be gloried in, prayers made that they
may be seen.

III. Wicked works, when the
corrupt tree bears fruit, manifestly
after its own kind. Here it is, of
course, those good fruits of which none
are found; both the other kinds of
fruit the Jewish fig-tree only too abun-
dantly bore.”—Trench.


Ver. 7. “ Cut it down.”—Threaten-
ings precede judgment ; in this the love
of God is manifested, for the threaten-
ings may excite a penitence which will
avert judgment.


“‘ Cumber the Ground.” —Why does it
not only bear no fruit, but also hinder
the land from bearing any, by occupy-
ing the place of a better tree? It is
itself sterile and it sterilises the soil.
1. It occupies space. 2. It shuts out
the sun. 3. It impoverishes the soil.


Ver. 8. “ Dig about it,” etc.—Some-
times affliction may turn the soul to
God; sometimes the bounties with
which He enriches us may have the
same effect.


Time Left for Repentance.—The idea
of God’s final sentence being delayed,
that time may be left men to repent,
runs all through the Scriptures. Before
the Flood, there was appointed a space
of a hundred and twenty years (Gen.
vi. 3); Abraham intercedes on behalf
of Sodom (ib., xviii. 23, segg.); the
destruction of Jerusalem did not follow
till forty years after the ascension of
Christ ; and the coming of Christ is
delayed through the long-suffering of
God (2 Peter iii. 9). ;


Ver. 9. Intercession for a Respite.—
Nature of Christ’s intercession: not
that the sins of men may go un-
punished, but that the sentence may


LS) a)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,


CHAP, XIII,





for a while be suspended, to prove
whether they will turn and repent.


The Significance of the Special Pains
taken with the Tree.—The special treat-
ment accorded by the vine-dresser
to the barren tree represents the
marvellous deeds of love wrought by


and afterwards in the gift of the Holy
Spirit and the preaching of the apostles,
in order to rouse the nation from its
impenitence. This parable informs
those who hear it that their life hangs
by a thread, and that that thread is in
the hand of Him who speaks to them.
—Crodet.


Jesus in His death and resurrection,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 10—17.


Work which Hallows the Sabbath.—This incident took place as Jesus was teach-
ing in one of the synagogues on the Sabbath-day. This reminds us of the com-
parative prominence and frequency of these Sabbath-day cures. It is quite plain
that nothing but the blindest Pharisaism, in its design to misinterpret Jesus and
His work, could have led men to suppose that there was anything in these deeds
of His inconsistent with the true observance of the day, or with the spirit of the
Divine law. It is as obvious, on the other hand, that only a secularism equally
blind and a similar misconstruction of His acts, could find in these Sabbath
miracles any intention to abolish the day, to take away aught of its sacredness,
or loose a jot of its Divine obligation. It was a reward for the faithfulness and
diligence of these diseased folks, who, in spite of their ailments, were found in
God’s house on the sacred day, that they should there meet with their gracious
Deliverer.

I, The miracle.—The sufferer made no application to Jesus for healing. She
had come to the synagogue because it was her wont, and because the effort to
reach it and share in its blessing was one of the ways in which she fought against
the advance of her malady. Jesus saw her and singled her out for a signal
instance of His mercy. The expression afterwards used when He turned the
attention of the ruler and all the congregation to her case, shows how deeply and
tenderly He had looked into it. ‘ Lo!” he said, “see how long she has suffered.”
Her bent form and furrowed face were to Him as a book in which He read the
story of her eighteen years’ bondage and of her patient struggle to sustain her
infirmity. Her faithful attendance on Divine worship, and perhaps other
features, to which we have no clue in the narrative, lighted up to Him her
genuine, religious, spiritual character. For by the title He gives her hardly any-
thing so commonplace can be meant as merely that she was a Jewess. In all
probability it was intended to point her out as one of that inner circle of pious,
believing Israelites—the class to which belonged His own mother, the parents of
the Baptist, Simeon and Anna—those, namely, “ who were looking for the con-
solation of Israel.” He called her to Him; He spoke the word of liberation ;
then He laid His hands upon her, and immediately she was cured. There were
apparently two elements in the case to be dealt with; one physical—dorsal
paralysis ; the other nervous or mental—some infirmity which paralysed the
will. With His word and touch together the cure was done. The word, majestic
and commanding, proclaimed her free from the subtle bond,the root of the mischief,
which chained her will. Then His hand laid on her, a sensible act to her faith,
gave strength and suppleness to the disused muscles. As the woman rose erect
from her long, sad bondage, her grateful piety broke forth in the instant into an
irrepressible thanksgiving, a voluntary act of praise before all the people.

II. The indignation of the ruler of the synagogue.—The scene had become
very offensive to the narrow mind of the presiding elder. The reputation of
Jesus for piety and wisdom was by this time so universally acknowledged, that it


365


cuap,.xut. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





was no doubt practically impossible for the most prejudiced synagogue ruler to
prevent His taking part in the service. Even the president of a Persean country
synagogue had not been able to do so. Jesus was already noted for having set
aside Pharisaic opinion as to Sabbath work. This particular Pharisee had pro-
bably hoped that no conflict of opinion would arise on the occasion. But that in
open congregation, in the place of worship where he ruled, the daring innovator
should perform one of His Sabbath-breaking cures was too much for him, It
quite overcame any little sense and proper feeling he possessed. He broke out
into angry vituperation. Not daring to attack the Lord directly, nor even the
thankful woman, in a covert and cowardly manner, he spoke at them both.

III. Christ's defence of Himself.—The Saviour answered him with a pungent
and well-merited rebuke. ‘“ You reproach the people, but your quarrel is really
with Me. You pretend to be zealous for the law, but you are only jealous of
My work. You Pharisees deserve no credit for even conscientiously mistaken
views about the sanctity of the seventh day. Your ideas of its observance are
quite sane and sensible so soon as a question arises affecting your own material
interests. You would have no scruples in relieving the wants of a suffering
animal on that day by a certain amount of Sabbath labour. But when I loose
from long years of Satanic bondage one of your human sisters, a daughter of the
chosen family, and do it with no labour at all, you are filled with horror at the
breach of the Sabbatic law.” Such hypocrisy is its own complete self-exposure.
But this trenchant reply of Jesus completely shuts the mouths of His adver-
saries, and brings the admiration of the hearers to a height; for not only the
words He had spoken, but the glorious things He had done, filled them with joy.
Let us note the spiritual lesson of the woman’s story. She had come to her
accustomed place in the synagogue in spite of all weariness and difficulty; and a
blessed piece of work it was for her. Had she not gone that day to the place of
worship, it is next to certain she had never met with Jesus. In the way of her
usual waiting upon God—a troublesome routine it might have seemed to many—
she got the blessing ; not merely relief from her bodily chain, but, if we have
read her character aright, the glorious liberty of those who saw in Christ Jesus
the Lord’s salvation. What good cheer is in the story for those who, amid bodily
infirmities, mental oppression, or household burdens and afflictions—tempting
them to defer their duty to God’s house—find their way statedly thither! Every
minister knows that these are often the most blest of all the company that
gathers in God’s house. For the Master of the house sees them and calls them
to Him To the drooping spirit, to the burdened heart of those who come there
just because He bids them, He oft comes, as it were, all unbidden, and makes
them glad with an unexpected visitation.—Laidlaw.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 10—17.


Ver. 10-17. The Infirm Woman in III. Our Lord’s five actions.—He
the Synagogue.—The third time our _ sees, calls, heals, touches, and lifts up
Lord, by a miracle of healing, stirred this infirm woman. He does so still
up the wrath of the ecclesiastical rulers with infirm souls.— Dover.
at His supposed violation of the
Sabbath-day.

I. The danger of falling, all uncon-
sciously, into formalism.


A Scene in the Sanctwary.—I. An
exemplary worshipper.
II. An unlooked-for reward.


II. Often seeming zealous champion-


III. Pretended zeal for the Sab-


ship for the truth isreally zeal forthe bath.
promotion of our own theories and IV. Unanswerable rebuke. — W.
ideas. Taylor.


366


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XIII.


ee


Christ's Dreatment of Women.—-
There is great beauty in the behaviour
of Christ to women, whether it be the
woman of Samaria, whose deep wound
He probes so faithfully, yet with so
light a touch; or the child of Jairus,
to whom He speaks in her own dialect,
holding her hand; or the widow of
Nain, whom He bids not to weep; or
she whose many sins were forgiven
her, loving much ; or Mary, for whose
lavish gift He found so pathetic an
apology-—‘‘ She hath done it unto My
burial.” This woman He would not
heal from a distance, as though an alms
was being flung to her; but neither
was it for Him to attend upon her
needlessly—such efforts that she can
yet put forth must be made, and so
He calls her to Him, lays His hand
upon her, speaks kind words that name
not the humiliating cause of her com-
plaint; and even when the adverse
criticism of the ruler requires Him to
say all, His only thought of her is
sympathetic—to Him she is honourable,
as one of the holy race, and pitiful, as,
to its owner, a helpless creature that
needs drink on the Sabbath day. He
will not refuse release and refreshment
to His own. Satan had bound one
who belonged by formal covenant to
another, and Jesus dwelt with linger-
ing pity on the long period of ‘her
thirst, whom He had led away to the
watering.—Chadwick. Cm


Ver. 11. 4 WMoble Character.—The
noble character of this woman is plainly
indicated by a number of particulars
stated concerning her :—

I. Her faith—for she is a daughter
of Abraham—i.e., not merely a Jewess,
like the other women in the synagogue,
but one of kindred spirit with her great
ancestor.

II. Her steadfast resistance to the
encroachments of her malady.

III. Her zeal in attending upon
Divine worship.

IV. Her devout thankfulness, openly
expressed, on being healed.


“ Spirit of infirmity.” —Her sickness,
having its first place in her spirit, had


brought her into a moody, melancholic
state, of which the outward contraction
of the muscles of her body, the inability
to lift herself, was but the sign and the
conseq uence.—:7'rench.


“‘ Bowed together.’’—Probably she did
not perceive that Jesus was present ;
but Jesus saw her.


Ver. 12. “ Loosed.”—This expresses
the setting free of her muscles from
the power which bowed them down,
and then (ver. 13) the laying on of the
Divine hands confers upon her strength
to rise and stand upright. It would
be, in such a case, one thing to be
loosed from the stiffening of years,
and another to have strength at once
conferred to stand upright.—A (ford.


Ver. 13. “ He laid his hands on her.”
—The miracle is (1) a representation
of the gracious work of Christ on the
soul. 2. It is an illustration of the
kindness of the Saviour to afflicted,
weak, and contrite disciples.


Five Kindly Actions.—In the healing
of this woman our Lord did five things :
He compassionately saw her; He called
her; He healed her; He touched her ;
and He lifted her up. Thus does He
also perfectly cure a sinfu) soul. He
sees it, in His compassion; He calls:it,
by His internal inspiration ; He heals
it, by remitting its sin; He touches
it, by the afflictive chastenings of His


hand. He raises it up to things above,
in the warmth of Divine love.—
Ludolphus.


Ver. 14. “Answered with indigna-
tion.”—The ruler of the synagogue is
restrained, by some measure of awe,
from openly attacking Jesus; He
abstains also from directly rebuking
the woman who had been healed, but
most ridiculously reproves the innocent
multitude. It is very significant that
he admits the fact of healing.


Ver. 15. ‘* Loose his ox or his ass.” —
Our Lord varied, from time to time,
the arguments with which He abolished
the fanatical formalism of the Pharisees


367


CHAP. XIII.


prove GF nl iy ot el


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST., LUKE,





respecting the Sabbath. Sometimes
He appealed to His own inherent
authority (John v. 17-19); sometimes
to Scriptural precedents (chap. vi. 3-5),
or to common-sense and eternal princi-
ples (ibid., vi. 9). Here, as in chap.
xiv. 5, He uses an argumentum ad
hominem: they allowed men to loose
and water their cattle on the Sabbath,
to abridge a few hours’ thirst; was, then,
this suffering woman not to be touched,
not to be spoken to, to end eighteen
years of suffering !—Farrar.


Ver. 16. “Ought mnot.”—To the
“ought” of ceremonial obligation
(ver. 14) Christ opposes the “ ought”
of moral obligation—the Divine neces-
sity of love.


There is here a Threefold Contrast :—

I. “Ox or ass” and “daughter of
Abraham.”

II. Fastened to the
“ bound by Satan.”

III. A few hours of thirst and
eighteen years of suffering.


stall, and


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 18—21.


In these two parables our Lord sets forth a bright and cheering aspect of the
future of the kingdom, exhibiting in the first of them its growth from small
beginnings to great magnitude, and in the second its transforming influence on
the mass in which it is deposited.

I. Outward growth.—The parable of the little mustard seed, as that of the
sower, takes the process of vegetation as emblematic of the growth of the
kingdom; but the sower barely appears, though His agency is part of the essence
of the representation, and the place where the plant grows is “His garden.”
But the seed is now the kingdom itself, and the only points brought into notice
are the contrasted smallness of the beginning and bulk of the growth at the end.
Jesus does not speak as a botanist, but in popular language; and it is enough
to know that the mustard seed was a common proverbial illustration of extreme
minuteness, and that the herb was a miracle of growth as compared with its
tiny origin. The application is too plain to need any interpretation. It strikes
home at once to the many among the first listeners who had recoiled from the
(as it seemed to them) dreadful down-come from the long-cherished national
hopes to the obscure Galilean peasant and His handful of followers. He stole
into the world in a despised corner of a despised land. He gathered a few
believers, spoke some gentle words, laid His hands on a few sick folk, and then
died. What proud incredulity would have curled the lips of men of influence
and culture in that day, if they had been pointed to Him and His disciples,
and bidden to see there the mightiest force, destined to universal dominion !
The lesson is not less needed now than then. God’s great things have ever
small beginnings, even as the seed of the “ big trees” in California is smaller
than that of many a much humbler conifer. The world’s great things begin
large and dwindle fast. We have to learn reverence for the smallest seed which
has vitality, and confidence that the quantity, and still more the quality, of the
life in the little black packet of latent possibility is not measured by its size.
So we shall not be led away by vulgar admiration of the big, which we mistake
for the great and Divine, nor discouraged and impatient if a heritage be not
“ gotten hastily at the beginning.” The parable brings the small seed into
sharp contrast with the large results, and implies the world-wide spread of the
kingdom. The picturesque touch of the birds lighting on the branches is
probably an allusion to Ezek. xvii. 23, and a definite prophecy of the coming
of the nations to partake in its blessings. The fowls of the air sing among the
branches. Souls weary of flight fold their tired wings, and find rest, shelter,
and joy there.

It. Inward change.—The parable of the leaven completes the picture of the

368


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE, CHAP. XIII.





growth of the kingdom by describing its inward operation, as the former does
its outward growth. It spreads in space and increases in bulk ; but it transforms
inert matter into its own nature, and thus grows by assimilation. The eccentric
interpretation of the leaven as the emblem of evil is disposed of by observing
that it is the kingdom, and not its corruption, which is like unto leaven,
and by remembering that the meal is improved, not spoiled, by it. The main
lessons lie (1) in the addition of the leaven to the meal, teaching that the
quickening influence comes from without; that, in a word, if human society is
ever to contain a kingdom of heaven, and be transformed thereby, it must be
imparted, not developed. They lie (2) in the hiding of the leaven, by which
is taught the same truth of secret beginnings as in the former parable. They lie
(3) in the manner of the leaven’s working, which is fermentation, So the
gospel stirs up movement in the dead man. Christ comes to bring peace at the
end, but He must first bring a sword. Leaven works from within outwards.
The gospel is planted in the depths of the individual spirit, and gradually
permeates the whole being. It works underground in society, and only
re-models institutions as the result of having remodelled men. The lesson lies
further in the assimilative power of the leaven, which changes each particle
of the meal, and, by means of each in turn, transmits the transforming power
to the outer unleavened particles. It lies, finally, in hopes suggested by that
“till the whole was leavened,” which foretells the permeating of the mass with
quickening influence, and the complete assimilation of the individual to it.—
Maclaren.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 18—21.


The Kingdom of God.
I. Its rapid growth.
II. Its transforming power.


fulfil in God’s own time its marvellous
destination.

II. Its secret growth.—Not to be
inaugurated by pomp and circum.
stance, or by the literal appearance of


Emblems of the Kingdom.

I. Lessons from the mustard seed.
—1. Its personal teaching. 2. Its pro-
phetical teaching.

II. Lessons from the leaven.—l.
The source of grace. 2. The secrecy
of its workings. 3. The certainty of
its success.— W. Taylor.


The Kingdom of God.

I. Its gradual extension.—Our
Lord corrects the fatal error of His
countrymen, that the kingdom of God
would come as a sudden outbreak of
Divine power. It is to grow, from
small beginnings, in the hearts of men.
How gradual it is in the individual we
know from sad experience. How
gradual among the nations the observa-
tion of eighteen hundred years has
shownus. Yet we must never despair.
Seed has in it the germ of life, a power
of endless development, and is certain to


the Son of Man in the clouds of heaven.
Jesus corrects this error in the parable
of the leaven. He teaches the quiet,
unobtrusive character of true religion
—how unnoticeable is its first infusion;
how far beneath the human eye its
growth. Religion is a hidden life, and
it works spontaneously, by its own
secret vitality, till it leavens the whole
mass of society.— Griffith.


Fulfilment of the Prophecies here
Contained.

I. The way in which these parabolic
prophecies of the spread of the gospel
have already been fulfilled is a proof
of its divinity.

II. These parables open up delightful
views of the future. history of the
Church, and furnish us with a call and
an encouragement to exert ourselves for
the universal diffusion of the gospel_—
Poote.


BE 369


CHAP. XIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,





Increase of Bulk and Change of
Character.—In the one parable, that
of the Mustard Seed, the kingdom is
conceived of as a visible society, which
is susceptible of increase in its bulk by
addition to the number of its member-
ship. In the other parable, that of
the Leaven, the kingdom is conceived
of as a moral or spiritual power, which
is susceptible of increase in the trans-
forming influence which it exerts on
those who are subject to its operation.
— Bruce.


The Conversion of the World.

I. The process is to take its rise from
small and very unpromising beginnings,
and yet shall prevail speedily to a vast
extent.

II. The change is to be wrought by
pacific means only, without the inter-
vention of any force or violence what-
soever,


The Mustard Seed.

There are three great chapters in
the history of Christ’s kingdom.

I. The germ.—It is something new.
It is small at first.

II. The growth.

III. The glory.—The kingdom is
one, though belonging to all ages and
nations. It is a world-wide kingdom.
It blesses and only blesses. It will yet
become very great. We may be very
hopeful about the future of the kingdom.
—Wells.


Mustard Seed.
I. The kingdom of heaven: its
apparent insignificance.
Il. Its vitality.
III. Its future grandeur.


Leaven.

I. The kind of change which
Christianity works in the world.

II. The method by which this change


is wrought.


The Kingdom of God has Two Kinds
of Power.


370


I. A power of extension, by which
it gradually embraces all peoples,
and—

II. A power of transformation, by
which it renews gradually the whole
of human life. The natural symbol of
the first is a seed, which in a brief
space of time attains an increase dis-
proportioned to its small size at first ;
that of the second, a small portion of
leaven, which is capable of exerting its
regenerative influence upon a large
mass.—Crodet.


Vitality and Influence.

I. Inherent vitality; development
from within.

II. Contagious influence; a change
wrought from acquiring a new force
from without.


Progress and Growth,

I. Progress from a small beginning
to a glorious consummation.

Il. The cause of growth—the
inherent, unquenchable life of the king-
dom.

IIT. The manner of growth—silent,
secret, unobserved.


Hopefulness and Patience Inculcated.
—These parables inculcate (1) hope-
fulness, and (2) patience amid circum-
stances fitted to breed despondency
and discouragement.


Vers. 18, 19. I. General reference.
—In the general sense, the insignificant
beginnings of the kingdom are set
forth; the little babe cast in the
manger at Bethlehem; the Man of
Sorrows, with no place to lay His head ;
the crucified One; or, again, the hundred
and twenty names who were the seed
of the Church after the Lord had
ascended. Then we have the kingdom
of God waxing onward and spreading
its branches here and there, and differ-
ent nations coming unto it.

II. Individual reference.—The
individual application of the parable
points to the small beginnings of Divine
grace; a word, a thought, a passing


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XIII.


a EE a ee ee eee


sentence, may prove to be the little
seed which eventually fills and shadows
the whole heart and being, and calls
all thoughts, all passions all delights,
to come and shelter under it.—Adford.


Ver. 19. “ A tree.”—The greatness
of size attained by the mustard plant
in the East causes it to rank as a tree
as compared with garden herbs, though
not as a great tree as compared with
other trees.


“ Lodged in the branches.”—Christ’s
kingdom shall attract multitudes by
the shelter and protection which it
offers ; shelter, as it has often proved,
from worldly oppression, shelter from
the great power of the devil. Itself a
tree of life whose leaves are for medi-
cine and whose fruit for food, all who
need the healing of their soul’s hurts,
all who need the satisfying of their
soul’s hunger, shall betake themselves
to it.—T'rench.


The Lesson of the Parable.—The
Jesson of the parable obviously is: (1)
that the kingdom of heaven was to
be, and was, small and apparently in-
significant in its beginning; but (2)
that it was to rise into a magnitude
that would far overtop all rival insti-
tutions. The Jews expected that it
would begin as a full-grown tree, and
they were scandalised at the apparent
insignificance of our Lord’s position
and following.


Vers. 19-21. “A man... a@ woman.”
—The two actions of sowing seed and
of making bread are appropriated and
assigned to a man and a woman
respectively, in accordance with the
different occupations usually followed
by those of each sex. Any identifica-
tion of the woman with the Church is
therefore out of the question.


Vers. 20, 21. I. General reference.
—In the penetrating of the whole mass
of humanity, by degrees, by the in-
fluence of the Spirit of God, so strik-


ingly witnessed in the earlier ages by
the dropping of heathen customs and
worship—in modern times more gradu-
ally and secretly advancing, but still
to be plainly seen in the various
abandonments of criminal and unholy
practices (as, eg., in our own time of
slavery and duelling, and the inereasing
abhorrence of war among Christian
men), and without doubt in the end
to be signally and universally mani-
fested.

II. Individual reference.—In the
transforming power of the “new
leaven” on the whole being of indi-
viduals. In fact, the parable does
nothing less than set forth to us the
mystery of regeneration, both in its
first act, which can be but once, as the
leaven is but once hidden, and also in
the consequent renewal of the Holy
Spirit, which, as the ulterior working
of the leaven, is continual and _pro-
gressive.—A l/ord.


Ver. 21. “Jt is like leaven.”—The
leaven—1. Only acts upon meal—it
would produce no effect upon sand—
so there is an affinity between the
gospe] and man’s nature. 2. It pene-
trates to every part of the mass in
which it is placed. 3. It operates
gradually. 4. It produces a wholesome
change—renders the meal more suit-
able for food.


“Took and hid.”—“Took” from
without, ‘and hid”—~.e., put it where
it seemed lost in the larger mass.


“The whole was leavened.”—1. The
whole heart of each man (1 Cor. x. 5).
2. The whole world (xxiv. 47).


A Secret Influence.—The gospel has
such a secret, invisible influence on the
hearts of men—to change them and
affect them, and all the actions that
flow from them—that it is fitly re-
sembled toleaven ; so mixed thoroughly
with the whole that, although it ap-
peareth not in any part visibly, yo
every part hath a tincture from it.—
Hammond,


371


CHAP. XIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


aE


A Permanent Change.—Just as it is
impossible that the leaven, after it is
once mixed with the dough, can ever
again be separated from it, because it
has changed the nature of the dough;
in like manner it is impossible that
Christians can be severed from Christ.


The Spiritual Leaven.

I. Christ, the Son of God, became
man and dwelt among us.

II. Converted men, women, and
children, are let into the openings of
corrupt humanity, and hidden in its
heart.—Arnot.


“ Leavened.”—The parable indicates
that the influence is internal and


noiseless, not dependent upon external
organisation so much as upon quiet
personal agency and example, since
the leaven transforms the dough lying
next, until it is all leavened.— Popular
Commentary.


“The whole.”—1. The individual.
2. The family. 3. Society at large.


The Two Main Ideas Illustrated by
the Parable are—(1) that the kingdom
of heaven, when Divinely introduced
into the mass, did not attract atten-
tion, but (2) it began silently to
operate, and will continue to operate
until the whole of human society is
brought under its influence.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 22—30.


The question, ‘‘ Lord, are there few that be saved?” might in itself be the
anxious inquiry of a devout mind, animated by a true love for others. But the
tone of Christ’s reply inclines one to conclude that the question had been inspired
by frivolous curiosity. Our Lord does not say anything as to the number of the
saved, but He speaks of “many who will seek to enter into the kingdom of
heaven and not be able.” The reasons for this state of matters are that the door
of entrance is narrow, and exertion is needed for pressing in at it, and that one
day the door will be shut. From the nature of the reply which Christ makes we
are justified in concluding that the man who put the question had no doubt about
his own salvation, and trusted in his privileges, as a son of Abraham, as raising
him above all danger of losing the inheritance of eternal life. Our Lord,
however, warns him and all who were present of the conditions on which
entrance into the kingdom of heaven is based, and of the danger of being
excluded from it. He uses the familiar figure of a feast to which guests are
invited, and describes the attitude taken up by the Master of the house towards
guests and towards would-be guests.

I. The Master of the house.—This can be no other than Himself, for in ver. 26
He speaks of eating and drinking at the tables of men, and of teaching in the
streets of their cities. We note, therefore, the contrast which He implies as
existing between the relations which He then held with men and those which
one day He would assume. Now He is an ambassador from God, persuading
men to be reconciled to Him, and laying the foundation of a lasting peace
between heaven and earth. But a time will come when He will sternly banish
from His presence those who have refused to accept Him as their Lord, and to
obey His commands. The supreme authority to open and shut the door of the
kingdom of heaven, which He here claims, is in striking contrast to His present
circumstances. There is at first something repellent in the sternness of attitude
which He represents Himself as assuming towards some who will seek to enter
in. But a moment’s consideration convinces us that there is nothing unjust or
unduly harsh in His procedure. Those whom He excludes are the self-righteous
and hypocritical—those who, under a guise of discipleship, have been “ workers of
iniquity” (ver. 27). The very idea of such persons being admitted, without


372


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. cmap. xu
undergoing a change of character—for in their supposed dialogue with Him
they do not seem to recognise the necessity for any such change—is utterly
absurd. Heaven would cease to be heaven if the ungodly were received
indiscriminately into it. However sad, therefore, it is to think of any of us
excluded from it, we cannot accuse the Master of the house as manifesting
injustice in the course which He takes. On the contrary, we see His broad
and generous love displayed in the invitation given to all who dwell in the earth
to press into the kingdom. Not alone from the favoured nation of Israel, but
from east and west, north and south, does He anticipate receiving guests at
the heavenly banquet.

Il. The guests who obtain admittance.—They are those who “ strive ”—those
who are really in earnest in religion and put forth their whole strength to secure
entrance into the kingdom of heaven. They realise the greatness of the blessings
which it implies, and are determined to make them their own; they discern the
obstacles that lie in the way of the fulfilment of their desire, and resolutely over-
come them. Such obstacles consist in the weakness of the carnal nature, which
cannot for long continue in any holy enterprise; in the temptations which beset
the life; and in the severe requirements of the law of God. But those who are
found worthy to enter the kingdom of heaven recognise their own weakness, and
in humility rely upon Divine strength ; they trust, not in themselves, but in their
Saviour and God. Hence, though the door into the kingdom is too narrow to
admit the self-righteous and unbelieving, it allows those who draw near in
humility and faith to enter in. “To strive” implies not only great, but also
sustained effort—an attitude and endeavour steadily maintained from day to day.
Religion, therefore, is not merely a mood belonging to special times and occupa-
tions, but it is an influence that should tell upon every department of the life.
While doing many things, the Christian can still be bent upon doing the one
thing ; in all that engages his attention and employs his powers he can find
opportunity for honouring and serving God. Genuine holiness is a distinguishing
mark of those who arc guests in the heavenly kingdom. It is the result of their
humility and faith und endeavour, and qualifies them to partake in those
spiritual blessings which God has reserved for them that love Him.

IIT. The would-be guests who are excluded.—They seem to be excluded by
the will of the Master of the house, but they are really self-excluded. They have
not striven, and therefore have failed to find entrance. In other words, they
have not been in earnest in religion—they have been content with merely
professing devotion to Christ, and have all through been ‘“ workers of iniquity.”
They claim to know Christ, but He does not know them as belonging to Him.
Another master has had them in his service, and from him they must receive
their recompense. The knowledge of Christ upon which they lay such stress is
merely external. They have been in His presence, but have not been in com-
munion with Him ; they have heard His voice, but have not obeyed His word.
The privileges they have enjoyed, but by which they have not profited, turn to their
condemnation. Those who thought highly of themselves, and stood prominently
forward as professed disciples, find themselves on their true level at the last—and
in a low place. Others, upon whom they may have looked with contempt, come
to the front, and are welcomed to the feast, from which they are excluded.
And how great will be the misery of those who are thus “ thrust out” Christ
hints in the significant phrase, “there shall be the weeping and the gnashing of
teeth ””—sorrow and pain, in comparison with which all other emotions and
sensations of that type are as nothing. It isin mercy that Christ reveals the
suffering to which those who reject God and goodness doom themselves ; He
draws aside the veil that we may be warned, and may take advantage of the day
of grace and of the offer of salvation.

373


<


CHAP. XIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 22—30.


Vers. 22-30. Who may Enter the
Kingdom ?
I. Few or many?
useless question.
II. None enter without personal
effort.
III. Some will never enter.
TV. Some will be too late in seek-
ing to enter.
V. Some will enter from un-
expected quarters.—TZaylor.


An idle and


Ver. 23. “Are there few that be
saved ?”—The inquirer was evidently
doubtful as to whether many would be
saved, but had no doubt that he him-
self would be saved. Many, like him,
are very much interested in questions
of religion which have no direct bear-
ing upon conduct, but are merely
speculative. Christ here refuses to
gratify a prurient curiosity, and advises
arduous endeavours to enter into the
kingdom of God.


How the Question may be Asked.
—This question may (1) be asked
haughtily by one who has his mind
made up on the point, and is prepared
to contradict a reply which does not
meet with his approval. (2) It may
be uttered good-naturedly, with vague
good wishes and hopes on behalf of
self and others. (3) It may be pro-
posed with a measure of anwiety and
godly fear.


What Sort rather than How Many.
—It rather concerns us to know what
sort of persons will be saved, than how
many or how few.


Ver. 24-30. The Necessity for Striving.

I. The duty of earnest and strenuous
diligence in religious life.

II. The reason for this duty.—
Every one may be saved, but many
will not, through their own fault.
Many who think they are secure of
a place in the kingdom will find them-
selves shut out (vers. 24-28). While


374


others, who might be supposed, from
their meagre advantages, to be unpre-
pared for it, will find an entrance into it.


Ver. 24, 25. Two great dangers.

I. The door is a narrow one.—Too
narrow to admit those who are
burdened with sinful habits, and those
who are puffed up with a trust in their
self-righteousness.

II. The door will one day be shut.
—The time of probation will draw to
an end; the offer of mercy which has
been slighted will be withdrawn.


Ver. 24. “ Strive.”—1. By earnest
prayer. 2. By strenuous resistance to
temptation. 3. By avoiding all
occasions of sin. 4. By attending
diligently on every means of grace.


“ Strive to enter.” —Difficulties in our


way.
I. From our own natural state.
1. Ignorance. 2. Unbelief. 3. Aver-


sion to good, and proneness to evil.

II. From the nature of a religious
life, itrequires—l. Faith. 2. Repent-
ance. 3. Mortification of sinful
desires. 4. Self-denial.

III. From the opposition of enemies.


“ The strait gate.”

I. Where does it stand ?—Not above
the sky; it is here on earth, at the
entrance of the path to the mansion.

Il. The difference between striving
and seeking.—It is a real distinction.
There may be seeking without striving,
inquiry without eagerness.

III. The inability of many to enter.
This has nothing to do with the pur-
poses of the Most High, but only with
the strength of man. The strength of
nature is perfect weakness in the
mortal struggle; but how fully, how
sufficiently, has help been provided !—
Smith.


“ Will seek to enter in,” ete.— Where
striving is necessary, mere seeking or


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


CHAP. XIIt, ©


SE a ee ee


desiring will not avail. Entrance is
refused (1) to those also who seek
too late (Prov. i. 28, 29; Isa. 1-15;
John vii. 34; Heb. xii. 17), and (2) to
those seek to come in by other ways
than by the one Door (John x. 9, xiv.


6).


“* Not be able.”—1, Because they
seek half-heartedly. 2. Or seek in the
wrong way. 3. Or seek too late.


An Exhortation and a Warning.

I. Strive.—Lit. “‘agonise,” obey and
fulfil the holy will of God, whatever
struggles or sacrifices may be involved
in so doing—put forth the intensest
effort of which you are capable.

Ii. Many will seek and not be able.
—Many, indeed all, have a desire to be
admitted into heaven, but only some
are willing to undertake the arduous
labour which is needed to secure
entrance into that kingdom.


“ Seek . . . and not be able.” —Some
seek admission into the favour of God
and eternal happiness without con-
version, or faith in the Divine Saviour;
others seek the blessing in a slothful
manner, or in the use of such means
as God has never appointed; others,
with reserves for their worldly interest,
reputation, or sinful pleasures, or for
avoiding reproach or persecution. In
these and similar ways, many come
short of salvation, notwithstanding con-
victions, temporary seriousness and
earnestness, and partial reformation.
But it is by procrastination especially
that men “ will seek to enter in and
not be able.”—WScott.


“ Hath shut to the door.”—He who
will not open the door of his heart
in this life to the Saviour when He
knocks, will knock in vain there for
the Saviour to open His door to him.


Ground for Suspecting that we are
not Striving.—If my religion is only
a formal compliance with those modes
of worship which are in fashion where
I live ; if it cost me no pain or trouble;


if it lays me under no rules or re-
straint ; if I have no careful thoughts
and sober reflections about it ;—is it
not great weakness to think that I am
striving to enter in at the strait gate%—
Law.


Unseasonable Seeking.—It is not the
weakness of the endeavour which is
blamed, but its being owt of season,
the right time having been squandered
away. This is represented as not
less culpable, nor less extreme in the
dangerous nature of its consequences,
than the want of all effort. He who
has not sowed in spring must expect
no success, how earnestly soever he
labours in harvest.—Clshausen.


Vers. 25-27. A Note of Warning—

I. No nearness of external com-
munion with Christ will avail at the
Great Day, in place of that “ holiness
without which no man shall see the
Lord.”

II. The style which Christ announces
that He will then assume—that of
absolute Disposer of men’s eternal
destinies—and contrast this with His
“ despised and rejected ” condition when
He uttered these words.—Lrown.


Fruitless Seeking.—These verses con-
tain two examples of fruitless and vain
seeking to enter—

I. They knock and call, but too late,

II. They appeal, but in vain, to their
acquaintance with the master of the
house. Observe the striking climax;
first, standing some time without, then
knocking, then calling, finally remind-
ing of former acquaintance ; but all in
vain.


Ver. 25. “ When once theMaster,” etc.—
Awfully sublime and vivid picture. At
present He is represented as in a sitting
posture, as if calmly looking on to see
who will ‘“strive” while entrance is
practicable. But this is to have an
end, by the great Master of the house
Himself rising and shutting the door,
after which there will be no admit-
tance.—Brewn.


375


<


OHAP. XIII.


: Nee


LHP Py


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





The Closed Door.—A reason why this
striving is so important : because there
will be a day when the gate will be
shut. The figure is the usual one, of
a feast, at which the householder en-
tertains (in this case) the members of
his family. These being assembled,
he rises and shuts the door, and none
are afterwards admitted.—A/ford.


Ver. 26. Haten and Drunk in Thy
Presence.—1. External acts of com-
munion with Christ. 2. Outward
privileges enjoyed. Neither of these
will avail us if in the meantime we
have been workers of iniquity.


“In thy presence.”—Very different
from the drinking “ with you” of which
He speaks in Matt. xxvi. 29, and from
the “T will sup with him and he with
Me” in Rev. iii. 20.


“ Taught in our streets.” —1. Salva-
tion brought very near. 2. The
absence of the disposition of heart
which would lead to receiving His
words and doing them.


Claiming a Right.—The earnestness
is not that of those seeking for mercy,
but of those claiming a right, and
basing their claim on something merely
external.


Ver. 27. “ Workers of iniquity.”—
Those in the employ of, and receiving
the wages of, unrighteousness.


Ver, 28, 29. Many in the Kingdom
of God.—-In these verses the real
answer to the question of ver. 23 is
given : “They shall be many, but what
is that to you, if you be not among
them ?”


Ver. 28. “ Weeping and gnashing of
teeth.” —1. Sorrow at the loss of privi-
leges and blessings. 2. Rageat seeing
others enter on the possession of them.


Ver. 30. “ Last which shall be first,”
etc.—1, Those disadvantageously placed,
who overcome obstacles in their way.
2. Those highly privileged, who do not
avail themselves of the opportunities
within their reach. The Church at
Jerusalem, and the Oriental Churches,
furnish illustrations of the latter.


“ First which shalt be last.” —Prodigals
often repent, and get before decent
moralists; the Gentile converts ob-
tained the priority to the Jewish
nation ; splendid hypocrites apostatise,
and open persecutors become preachers
of the gospel, and those who have been
the grief and reproach of families
and neighbourhoods, sometimes become
their chief credit and blessing ; whilst
plausible characters are by this very
circumstance rendered more inveterate
against the truth.—Scott.


An Encouragement and a Warning.
—1l. An encouragement to those called
late in life. 2. A solemn warning to
those called early, urging them to be
humble and ever mindful of their
unworthiness before God, lest they be
overtaken by others, or forfeit their
reward altogether.

They must be on their guard against
trusting to appearances or to the per-
manence of present circumstances and
conditions: priority in time is not
necessarily priority in position.

“This word should strike terror into
the heart of the greatest saints”
(Luther).


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 31—35.


Courage and Compassion.—There could be no doubt of the hypocritical cha-
racter of the concern which these Pharisces manifested for the safety of Jesus,
or of the enmity of the prince whose designs were now disclosed to our Lord.
Yet he was not intimidated by the news conveyed to Him, nor did He break off


His beneficent labours to save Himself by flight.


calm dignity and an heroic courage.
ministry by any tidings you bring,
376


His reply was animated by a


“So far from being interrupted in My
be they false or true, by your wish or by


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE. CHAP. XIII.





Herod’s wish, to be rid of My presence at once, I shall proceed on My way. I
shall do as before I have done. I shall put forth My powers, casting out devils,
healing sick for the present, for the future ; and only at a remoter period will My
life and course reach their appointed end.” Nor was it that He refused to believe
that a violent end was in store for Him. He knew that He should die in that
city to which He was now journeying, and His heart was filled with grief—not
at the thought of His own sufferings and death, but at the thought of all the
miseries which rejection of Him would draw down upon her—miseries against
which He would fain have protected her. This union of unshaken courage with
infinite tenderness is very wonderful and affecting, and make the lamentation
which He uttered over Jerusalem one of the most pathetic passages which history
contains. These words of Christ are full of instruction and warning.

I. We, too, need to be on our guard against the craft and malice of enemies.—
We are exposed to the wiles of one who but seeks to allure and to drive us from
following the path of duty, and whose subtilty and malice we cannot by our own
strength overcome. Our own hearts are only too apt to betray us, by becoming
allies of our enemies, and by trying to persuade us to avoid the risks which
fidelity to God seems to involve. Our true safety lies in our having that wisdom
which will enable us to discern the snare of the enemy, under whatever guise it
may be concealed, and in our committing our souls to God in well-doing as unto
a faithful Creator.

II. The serenity and courage of Christ should be an example to us.—He was
not to be deterred from the path of duty by the menaces of enemies or by the
solicitations of weak friends. He continued to prosecute His work faithfully and
boldly, notwithstanding every threat anddanger. Let us, then, persevere in the
path of duty, and believe that God will restrain the wrath of men, and bring us
safely through every danger, until our appointed time arrives. The place, time,
and manner of our death are in God’s hand, and, like those of Christ, are deter-
mined. It is good, too, that, like Him, we should regard the period of our life
here as short, that we may be diligent in doing the work that lies before us ; and
that we should regard death, not as interrupting, but as completing, our course.

III. The expostulation with those who had resisted His invitations is full of
significance for us.—It implies very real and great dangers to which we are
exposed. He would not have spoken in such solemn tones of the protection He
would have afforded to those who now rejected Him, if dangers of the most
terrible kind did not threaten them. The judgments of God upon the doomed
city, the penalties of a broken law, the punishment due to those who have
wilfully rejected the salvation brought near to them—are all in His mind’s eye
as He speaks these words. And the same dangers of being cut off in sin and
being overwhelmed in sudden and hopeless ruin still hang over those who are
impenitent. His words distinctly imply, also, that all who betake themselves to
His protection are safe, and that He is ready to receive even the worst of those
who have despised and rejected Him, if only they will betake themselves to Him
in humility and penitence. In many ways He warns us of our danger—in the
expostulations of conscience, in the invitations of the gospel, and in the events
of life, which are all governed by His providence, and which daily illustrate the
wrath of God against sin, and the blessedness of obedience to Him. He points
out, too, in this utterance, the true reason of rejection of salvation: “Ye would
not.” However we may deceive ourselves, aversion of heart is the secret of
refusal to accept Christ as a Saviour. “Ye will not come unto Me, that ye
might have life.” And, finally, He warns His hearers of a time when He will
return, clothed with Divine power and authority, to judge the world, and when
all must meet Him face to face. Only those who receive Him will then welcome
Him, and say, “ Blessed be He that cometh in the name of the Lord.”

377


<


CHAP. XIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 31—35.


Vers. 31-35. The Saviour and His
A dversaries.

I. We may learn from this passage
the craft and malice of the enemies of
the gospel and of our salvation.

II. The example of Christ should
teach and encourage us not to be
deterred from the path of duty by any
threatenings of enemies or misgivings
of weak friends.

III. It teaches that Christ was,
indeed, perfected by His sufferings—
perfected as a Saviour for us.

IV. He here appears as expostulating
with those who have hitherto resisted
His invitations.


Vers. 31, 32. “ Herod will kill thee.”
—Our Lord not merely gave an answer
to the Pharisees, which would have
been enough if their word of alarm
had been a mere audacious lie, devised
by themselves, but charged them to
take back His reply to Herod—“ that
fox,” that creature of cunning and
deceit. As for the menace to His
life, Jesus despised it. He was going
up to Jerusalem, knowing that He
would be killed. But Herod could not
kill Him. The Prophet could not die
but at Jerusalem. The metaphor here
was meant to express that the Lord
Jesus saw through and despised the
cunning wiles of the Tetrarch. The
man was a selfish intriguer, neither
good nor strong, but cunning, subser-
vient—a jackal to the imperial lion
at Rome. The epithet is certainly a
startling one. It must have sounded
to the Pharisees like the crack of a
whip. But there is no need to apolo-
gise for it, as though it were unworthy
of Him who was meek and lowly in
heart, and as if it had fallen from His
lips incautiously. It was calmly spoken.
It expressed a just feeling of scorn for
a tricky and crafty character. There
is a contempt that is noble, as well as
a contempt that is ignoble. Noble
scorn may dwell in the heart along
with tender compassion and fervent


378


love. That man cannot be the disciple
of Christ who breathes intrigue and
practises deceit. Those who please Him
are men of simple faith and honest
purpose. Without these a man is liable
to be described by the Lord’s withering
epithet, “ that fox.” —Fraser.


“ Depart hence.”—It was in the in-
terest of the Pharisees to see Jesus
depart into Judea, where he would
fall under the power of the Sanhedrim.
And it also suited Herod best for Jesus
to quit his territories ; for, on the one
hand, the excitement which His presence
caused among the people was bound to
disturb him ; and, on the other hand, he
was certainly unwilling to burden his
conscience by adding another murder
to that of the Baptist. Jesus, however,
knew the Pharisees too well to believe
that they were interested in His wel-
fare, and recognised in the message
they brought a plot in which Herod
was chief conspirator. His reply con-
tains a severe but merited rebuke:
“Not daring to show the teeth ef the
lion, thou hast recourse to the tricks of
the fox.” —G@odet.


Vers. 32-35. “I do cures to-day and
to-morrow.”—The words may be para-
phrased as follows : ‘‘ I have to exercise
My blessed office for a certain time.
For this time, however, I must walk
and work, and no power can touch
Me (Mine hour is not yet come) ; but
in Jerusalem it will come, and then
will ye gain power over Me. Your
victory, however, will be your ruin,
and Him whom ye shall have rejected,
ye shall never more behold till the day
of His final return.”


A Revelation of the Saviour’s Heart.

I. Jesus displays His perfect know-
ledge of what is in man as He unveils
the cunning and hypocrisy of His
enemies.

IT. He manifests a holy serenity in
carrying on His beneficent labours,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XIII.


ee


though he is conscious that a cruel
death awaits Him in the near future.
III. He laments over the miseries
which His enemies are preparing for
themselves by their rejection of Him.
IV. He anticipates with joy the last
and most glorious scene of all, when
Israel will repent of her unbelief, and
receive Him as her Saviour and Lord.


Vers. 32, 33. “Go ye, and tell.”.—
Christ’s reply is addressed—l. To
Herod. Be reassured: My activity,
which consists in ministering to the
suffering, is drawing to an end: three
days only remain—but those three
days, no one, not even thou, mayest cut
short. 2. To the Pharisees. They,
too, may reassure themselves: their
victim will not escape them; He is on
the way to the city which has ever
been the murderess of the prophets.


Ver. 32. “ That fox.”—Distinguished
by craftiness, and malice, and cowardice.
Herod probably did not wish to kill
Jesus, but to get Him out of His
territory. To threaten thus without
really purposing to carry out the
threat, and to use Pharisees, his
opponents, to report the threat, is the
cunning of “ that fox.”


The Message to Herod.—‘ Tell him
from Me that My times are set in the
eternal counsel of God, and when My
prefixed time is accomplished for My
labours and sufferings I shall, in spite
of all the opposition of earth and hell,
be perfected and enjoy My full glory.”
—Hall.


Respect for Rulers.—There is no need
to seek to clear our Saviour from the
appearance of having violated the law
which forbade speaking evil of the ruler
of the people (Exod. xxii. 11-28). The
prophets all along had no hesitation in
severely reproving kings and princes.
Thus Elijah tells Ahab that it was he
that troubled Israel, and Isaiah calls
the rulers of the Jews “rulers of
Sodom and princes of Gomorrah.”


Much more might He who had sent


the prophets use like freedom in re-
buking sin.


Lamb-like Patience, Lion-like Courage.
—Over against the fox, the Saviour
appears in lamb-like patience, but also
in lion-like courage.—Van Oosterzee.


Ver. 33. “ The third day I shall be
perfected.”

I. Christ’s clear vision of the suc-
cessive steps of His work yet remaining.

II. His calm and deliberate purpose
to go through with His work, unmoved
by the menaces of His enemies.

III. His consciousness of the rapid
march of events—of His death now
not far off.


“ T must walk,” i.e., “depart” (as in
ver. 31), or “go on my journey.”
Christ was, indeed, journeying out of
Herod’s territory, but not because of
Herod’s threat. So far from being
scared away by fear of death, He knew
that in the city to which He journeyed
He would meet certain death.


“Tt cannot be.”—There would be a
certain moral unfitness, a violation of
custom, in the murder of a prophet
anywhere but in Jerusalem, The words
are instinct with a terrible irony.

John the Baptist had’indeed been an
exception to the rule; he had not been
slain in Jerusalem. But that city could
scarcely allow its monopoly to be again
infringed upon, and that within so
short a space of time.


Vers. 34, 35. The Lamentation of
Love-—We have here a typical exhibi-
tion of grace: 1. Jndiscriminate grace.
2. Inviting grace. 3. Ineffectual grace.


Ver. 34. “ Them that are sent.” —Not
treating the ambassadors of God as
clothed with that inviolable sanctity
which protects from injury the ambas-
sadors of an earthly sovereign.


“As a hen.”—The similitude con-
descendingly employed by our Saviour


379


CHAP. XIII.


‘ ee i
ae eS ae


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





is one of the homeliest possible, but in-
expressibly felicitous and significant.
It graphically represents the Saviour’s
intense and tender solicitude and desire.
How lofty, too, the self-consciousness
which it bespeaks! The whole of the
Jews belonged to Him as His brood,
He could cover and protect them all.
He could do, too, without them,
although He longed after them; but
they could not do without Him.—
Morison.


Protection Withdrawn.—Like a bird
of prey which hovers in the air above
its victim, the enemy threatens the
inhabitants of Jerusalem. Jesus, who
had, up to this, been sheltering them
under His wings, as a hen her chickens,
withdraws; they remain exposed and
are reduced to defend themselves. Such
is the representation of matters given
here.—Godet.


The Hen and Chickens. — Christ’s
word carries such intrinsic dignity that
we do not need to fear the familiarity
of the metaphor. The words express
Christ’s feeling for the people of Jerusa-
lem in view of their city’s hastening
doom. Coming after words of stern


warning, this saying reveals a most


pathetic sorrow. Remember how com-
plete was His knowledge of the sin of
Jerusalem. He recalled its past blood-
guiltiness. He foresaw its coming
treatment of Himself and His apostles.
Yet He lamented over it, and His com-
passion yearned to rescue its people
from destruction. His repeated visits,
at personal risk, had been fruitless.
They would not come to Him that they
might have life. ‘To this day the rela-
tions subsisting between Jesus Christ
and the Jewish nation at large through-
out the world may be expressed in His
own words, “I would, but ye would
not.”

I. The illustration employed implies
that the danger was at hand.—Perdi-
tion is imminent. Christ is a present
Helper to those who come to Him.

II. How simple the way of salva-
tion !—How sure and perfect the de-


380


fence! Those who trust in the Saviour
are completely covered by His righteous-
ness and strength.

III. It is a grief to Christ to have
His offer of salvation slighted.—No
one knows as He does the awfulness
of the doom from which He rescues
His people, or their weakness and
helplessness before the impending judg-
ment.

IV. What joy of faith and restfulness
of love are under the covert of Christ’s
wings !—There His people dwell to-
gether in unity. Loved of the Saviour,
they learn to love one another.—
Fraser.


“ And ye would not.”—The teaching
of Scripture regarding the will includes
the following points :—

I. Whether men are to be saved or
lost hinges entirely upon their own
will: “ye would not.”

II. The will of man is utterly in-
disposed and disabled from yielding to
Christ (John vi. 44).

III. When the will is effectually
gained, and salvation thus obtained,
it is in consequence of a Divine opera-
tion upon it (Phil. ii. 13). How the
fact of the Divine action is to be recon-
ciled with our freedom is left unsolved,
and perhaps will always remain so.


Eternal Blessings Lost only with Our
Consent.—A man may lose the things
of this life against his will; but, if he
loses eternal blessings, he does So with
his own consent.— Augustine.


Ver. 35,
Temple :
Lord’s.


“ Your house”—i.e., the
but their house now, not the


“¢ Desolate.” —Deserted of its Divine
Inhabitant—a spiritual ruin to be
followed by material ruin.


“ Your house is left.” —By these words
Jesus frees Himself from the charge
laid upon Him by His Father—viz., the
salvation of His people. He is in
exactly the same circumstances as the
Divine Shepherd represented in the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XIV.





picture which Zechariah draws of the the subject of all prophecy, when the
last attempt which Jehovah makes to repentant people shall turn with true
save the flock appointed tothe slaughter and loyal hosannas and blessings to
(Zech. xi. 10-14), greet ‘Him whom they have pierced ”
(Deut. iv. 30, 31; Hos, iii. 4, 5; Zech.

“Until the time.”—Until that day, xii. 10, xiv. 8-11),


CHAPTER XIV.
CRITICAL NOTES.


Ver. 1. One of the chief Pharisees.—Rather, “one of the rulers of the Pharisees” (R.V.).
The phrase is a peculiar one, since the Pharisees, as such, had no rulers; it may refer to some
influential Rabbi, or to some member of the Sanhedrim. To eat bread.—The Jews were
accustomed to give feasts on the Sabbath (all the food having been cooked the day before),
and in the writings of the.early Fathers there are many allusions to sumptuous eating and
drinking among the wealthier Jews on that day. (Cf. Neh. viii, 9-12; Tobit ii. 1.) The
phrase “to eat bread” is a Hebraism which is often used to denote “to feast,” “to make
good cheer.” They watched Him.—Rather, “they were watching Him” (R.V.). It would
seem as if they went further and laid a trap to ensnare Jesus. The man with the dropsy
seems not to have been a guest, but to have been planted among the company in the sight of
Jesus. This appears from the phrase (ver. 2) “‘ before Him,” and (ver. 4) “ let Him go”—as
of dismissing him from the room.

Ver, 3, And Jesus answering.—J.e., knowing their thoughts and, replying to them, though
they were unexpressed (cf. v. 22). Is it lawful?!—They were in a dilemma; for if they
answered in the negative they exposed themselves to an overwhelming retort like that given
in chap. xiii. 15, while if they answered in the affirmative their whole case against Jesus would
fall to the ground.

Ver. 4, Held their peace.—And even thus could not avoid giving an answer to the question.
They did not forbid the miracle, by declaring that it was unlawful to heal on the Sabbath
day. Took Him.—Z.e., took hold of Him, laid His hands upon him,

Ver. 5, An ass or an ox.—The balance of evidence is about equal in favour of “a son or an
ox,” or “an ass or an ox.” The R.V. retains the latter in the text and relegates the former to
the margin, The natural connection between “ass” and “ox” (cf. xiii. 15) may account for
that reading. The other is a more difficult reading, and therefore more likely to have been
the original one, according to a well-known canon of criticism. The reading “son”
suggests two different kinds of ownership—“ one of your children, or even one of your
cattle.” Fallen into a pit.—Rather, “into a well” (R.V.). There is a certain analogy
between the disease and the accident—dropsy, and death by drowning. Pull him out.—
Rather, “draw him up” (B.V.).

Ver. 6. Could not answer Him.—Silent, but not convinced: obstinacy and spiritual pride
sealed their minds against the force of His reasoning.

Ver. 7. Put forth a parable.—The miracle was wrought, evidently, before the feast began.
From the emulation among the guests, and from the allusion in ver. 12 to friends and rich
neighbours, this seems to have been a formal and luxurious entertainment. The word
“ parable ” is used in a wide sense; the words are to be taken literally, but suggest a great
moral lesson (ver. 11). Chief rooms.—Rather, “ chief seats” (R.V.); the middle places on
the triclinium were counted the most honourable.

Ver. 8. A wedding.—Rather, “a marriage feast” (R.V.); perhaps to avoid: making the
rebuke on this occasion too pointed. Ata marriage, too, rules of procedure might be more


381


OHAP. XIV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





carefully insisted upon. Sit not down.—It need scarcely be said that the pride that apes
humility violates the spirit of this teaching. There should be genuine self-abasement.

Ver. 9. He that bade.—The person who has authority to decide such matters. Begin.—
This vividly suggests the reluctance and lingering with which a presumptuous guest leaves
the higher and goes down to the lower place. Lowest room.—The other good places having
been taken possession of in the meantime.

Ver. 10. That when he, etc.—A consequence that may follow, though not designed and led
up to by the guest. Worship.—Rather, “glory” (R.V.), as distinguished from ‘“ shame ”

ver. 9).

: Vor 1 Abased.— Rather, “humbled” (R.V.). For an example of such humiliation see
Isa, xiv. 13-15, ane of such exaltation Phil. ii, 5-11. These words (vers. 7-11) had been
addressed to the guests. Christ now addresses the host.

Ver. 12, Call not thy friends, etc.—J.e., hospitality is not to be confined to such feasts ;
ostentatious and interested motives are also discouraged. Returns are made by friends and
rich neighbours, so that real hospitality is not manifested by such feasts. Over and above
the intercourse and civilities of social life are the claims of charity; the former are pre-
supposed as ordinarily taking place, and common-sense forbids us to suppose that Christ
here condemns them. He Himself, by being present on this and similar occasions, sanctioned
them.

Ver. 13. Call the poor.—As a different and somewhat unusual phrase for “call” is given
in ver. 13, some have supposed that the one implies an ostentatious invitation and the other
a more unobtrusive one. But this seems rather too far-fetched. The poor: cf. Neh. viii. 10;
Matt, xxv. 35.

Ver. 14. Resurrection of the just.—If the phrase “‘ of the just” is to be taken as having a
distinct meaning (which we can scarcely doubt it has), Christ here refers to the twofold
resurrection. See 1 Cor. xv. 23; 1 Thess, iv. 16; Rey. xx. 4,.5.

Ver. 15, Blessed is he.—The recompense at the resurrection of the just (ver..14) suggested
to this guest a great banquet in the kingdom of the Messiah at which the faithful Israelite
would sit down in company with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob (cf. xiii. 28). He extols the
greatness of the privilege. Christ warns him and the others, in the parable that follows, that
the privilege will by no means be so generally recognised or embraced by the Jewish people
as was commonly thought. There seems to be nothing especially vapid or affected in the
exclamation of this guest. Eat bread.—See on ver. 1.

Ver. 16. A certain man.—The giver of the feast represents God. A great supper.— The
kingdom of God, the feast of fat things in Isa. xxv. 6; completed in the marriage-supper of
the Lamb, but fully prepared when the glad tidings of the gospel were proclaimed ”
(Alford). Bade many.—J.e., the Jewish nation, especially the religiously-minded among .
them—rulers, Pharisees, and doctors of the law—those enjoying highest religious privileges.
The invitation was given through Moses and the prophets.

Ver. 17. Sent his servant.—As was usual in the Hast (cf. Matt. xxii. 3, 4). If the servant
is to be identified with any one historical person, it can only be with Christ Himself; but
John the Baptist, the Apostles, and others after them, delivered a message like this. All
things.—“ All” is not in the original, but may fairly be inserted, as it is implied in the sense
of the passage.

Ver. 18. And they all_—The underlying idea is that but few of the Pharisaic class
responded to Christ’s invitation. One consent.—‘“ Consent” is also inserted by the trans-
lators ; it might have been equally well rendered, “with one voice.” All are worldly-
minded, though each has his different preoccupation, and expresses himself differently in
asking to be excused. All, by alleging excuses, admit that they feel they are under a
kind of obligation which they choose to set aside. Go and see it.—Rather, “ go out [into
the country] and see it” (R.V.). I must needs go.—The reply is still a courteous one, the
excuse being pressure of business.

Ver. 19. I go to prove them.—No necessity alleged, but simply the fact that he is going;
he has made plans which he will not alter. Still, he feels that some excuse is needed for his
conduct,

Ver, 20, I cannot come.—Abrupt refusal, without any attempt at excuse. His “I cannot”?
is equivalent to “I do not want.” According to the Mosaic law (Deut. xxiv. 5) a newly
married man was free for a year from military service ; but exemption from the hardships
of war is a very different thing from slighting the claims of friendship. “ Commentators
usually dwell upon the weakness of the excuses offered. So far from that the first two
reasons are very plausible, and the last very strong. And why? They seem to have been
purposely made as strong as such reasons ordinarily are, in order to show that no reasons ox
any kind will be admitted as valid by the heavenly Inviter, who enjoins us first (i.e., above
all) to seek His kingdom and righteousness, and allows of no plea for neglecting that duty ”
(Bloomfield).

Ver. 21. Go out quickly.—No time is lost, either in the parable or in fact, in finding fresh


382


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE. CHAP. XIV.








guests. Streets and lanes of the city.—The city still, among the Jews. The poor, etc.—
_ Publicans, sinners, and harlots; lost sheep of the house of Israel. The guests at the banquet

correspond to those described in ver. 13.

Ver. 22. Yet there is room.—“ Both nature and grace abhor a vacuum ” (Bengel).

Ver. 23. Highways and hedges.—Outside the city; this refers to the calling of the
Gentiles. Compel them.—By moral suasion: had physical force been permitted, why should
those who had first refused have been left to themselves? The word “ compel” no doubt
refers, in the first instance, to the circumstances of the parable: the time was short, the
banquet could not be deferred, and the master was anxious for every seat to be occupied.
Of course it has its spiritual counterpart in the earnestness with which zealous servants of
Christ will press the claims of the kingdom of God (cf. 2 Tim. iv. 2).

Ver. 24, For I say unto you.—Here Christ speaks in His own person, half continuing the
parable and half expcunding it. For “you ” is in the plural, while in the parable the master
has been giving commands and directions to one of his servants.

Ver. 25. There went with Him.—T.e., journeyed with Him; many, if not most, of them
being on their way to one of the feasts in Jerusalem. The multitudes were attracted by
Christ’s teaching and works, and He wishel to teach His followers the wide difference
between an outward and a real adhesion to Him. He spoke these stern words to sift the
multitude. The purpose of seif-sacrifice by which He was inspired lent force to His
utterances. ‘The nearer the approach of His own self-sacrifice, the more distinct and the
more ideal are the claims which He makes” (Meyer).

Ver. 26. Cometh unto Me.—This is descriptive of outward adhesion. Hate not.—The word
cannot be understood of active hatred, since Christ commands us to love even our enemies, but
denotes a deep and heartfelt alienation from all ties, and affections, and feelings, that would
interfere with devotion to Christ. The clue to whatever difficulty the words might, at first
sight, suggest is to be found in the phrase “and his own life also.” Life here means animal
life; not life in the highest sense. In the same manner in which a man is called to control
and repress and subordinate his lower life to higher claims, at any cost of feeling, is he to
deal with the other relationships in which he finds himself, “ Let the hate begin here, and
little explanation will be further wanted. It need hardly be observed that this hate is not
only consistent with, but absolutely necessary for, the very highest kind of love. It is that
element in love which makes a man @ wise and Christian friend, not for time only, but for
eternity ” (Alford).

Ver. 27. Bear his cross.—Z.e., submit to any sufferings, however severe, to which his
devotion to Christ might expose him.

Ver. 28. Sitteth not down.—Deliberate and careful consideration (so in ver, 31) of ability
to complete the undertaking.

Ver. 31. Or what king. ..?—The former illustration lays stress upon the folly, this upon the
danger, of following Christ without having duly considered what is involved in discipleship
—what self-renunciation must be exemplified. The purpose of the illustrations seems to
be to enforce the necessity of earnestness and deliberation in entering upon and discharging
the obligations of the spiritual life.

Ver. 33. That forsaketh not, etc.—In other words, “‘counting the cost” (ver. 28), which
may be that of forsaking the interests, and affections, and possessions, of this present
life.

Ver. 34. If the salt have lost, etc.—The life of the merely nominal Christian is compared to
salt that has lost its characteristic properties and is useless for any purpose. The office of
the follower of Jesus is to be a salutary influence in the world, by which it is to be preserved
from corruption. The figure was evidently one frequently used by Christ (cf. Matt. v. 13;
Mark ix. 50). The Joss of savour is an illustration drawn from actual fact. “It is a well-
known fact that she salt of this country (gathered from the marshes in dry weather), when
in contact with the ground, or exposed to air or sun, does become insipid and useless ”
(Thomson : “The Land and the Book”).

Ver. 35. Neither fit, etc.—Of no use as manure, or to be mixed with manure. Men cast
it out.—A fit emblem of the contempt which even the worldly-minded have for any who
fall away from Christian practice—who have the name of disciples, but have lost all that
differentiates them from the children of this world. He that hath ears, etc.—Words that no
doubt closed the discourse (cf. chap. viii. 8).


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—-Verses 1—6.


There is little that is specially characteristic about this miracle. On other
occasions than this Jesus healed disease by a word, or by a touch; on other
occasions, as on this, He gave offence to those who were anxious to find it by


383


ON yl OL een The le ee Md |
‘a eh NEM, oP f


CHAP. XIV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE,


i


healing upon a Sabbath, and amply vindicated His action, to the confusion of His
adversaries. Yet the incident here recorded is not, by any means, superfluous or
wanting in suggestiveness; it gives us a vivid picture of a scene in the life of
Jesus, in which both the graciousness of the Saviour and the sullen malice of His
adversaries are set forth.

I. The graciousness of the Saviour.—This was manifested, first of all, in His
consenting to accept the invitation of the ruler of the Pharisees to eat bread in
his house. After the preceding scenes, a certain measure of courage, as well as
of kindly feeling, is implied in our Lord’s sitting down at table with members of
that party, whose hostility to Him could not be concealed. Yet the righteous
anger and indignation which the conduct of the Pharisees had, from time to
time, excited in the mind of Jesus, did not exasperate'Him against them; the
Divine compassion which He manifested towards publicans and sinners was not
withheld from those who were blinded by prejudice, and led astray by a delusion
as to their own righteousness. The patience and love of the Saviour toward
those who were animated by dislike to Him, are, indeed, more wonderful than
His compassionate treatment of the outcast and defiled ; just as, in the parable
of the Prodigal Son, the patience of the Father with the harsh elder brother
surprises us more than his kindness to the returning penitent. He knows that
He is the object of their malicious suspicions, even if they have not laid a snare
for Him, and yet He utters no reproaches against them. On the contrary, He
reasons calmly with them, in order to convince them of their error and to win
them to a better mind. Then, too, we see the graciousness of the Saviour in the
cure of the man with the dropsy. The sight of the sufferer awoke pity in His
heart, and though no direct petition for relief was offered to Him, the mute
appeal was sufficient to call forth His miraculous power. He not only had
compassion upon those who besought His help, but also upon those who stood in
need of it, even if they were too timid or faithless to apply to Him for relief.
And no sooner has Jesus healed him than He dismisses him from His presence,
apparently to spare him the acrimonious criticism which the sight of a cure
wrought on the Sabbath might provoke (cf. xiii. 14).

II. The sullen malice of Christ’s enemies.—They were not ashamed to violate
the laws of hospitality by narrowly watching to find some cause of offence, or
ground of accusation, in His conduct in private life, on an occasion when He
might be expected to be somewhat off His guard. The feast was a formal and
elaborate one, but the spirit of love was absent from it. So far from avoiding
controversy with their guest, they lay in wait for Him. Nor did they lay aside
their hostility when His words of calm wisdom overthrew their theories and
arguments, and left them silent in His presence. They could not answer Him,
and yet they refused to be persuaded by Him. Could we have a more striking
illustration of the power of religious prejudice to blind the eyes vnd deaden the
feelings of those who cherish it? They were in the presence of the Incarnate
Son of God, and yet they could not discern His Divine Majesty! They saw the
sufferer delivered in an instant from a dreadful form of disease, and yet felt no
gladness—their thoughts were taken up with the frivolous question as to
whether the miracle could be lawfully wrought on that day! They did not see
that their own souls were smitten with a spiritual disease, and that they were
rejecting Him who alone could heal them. And in all ages religious prejudices
exercise the same baneful influence upon all who indulge in them—they make
men hard-hearted towards their brethren, and they come as a thick veil between
the soul and Christ, so that His words cannot be understood nor His gracious
working recognised,


384


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XIV.


To ee el ie A A ee ae ade tee eR oe ree


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 1—6.


Vers. 1-24. Lessons from the Great
Teacher.
I. In Sabbath-keeping.
II, In true humility.
III. In true hospitality.
IV. In God’s hospitality.—Taylor.


Vers. 1-6. The Dropsical Man.—The
miracle with the account of which this
chapter opens gave rise to a conversa-
tion of graphic originality, carried on
by a series of parabolic illustrations.
Chiefly, perhaps, for the sake of intro-
ducing these is the healing narrated.
The incident in itseif is not dwelt upon,
and the reasoning which arose upon it
closely resembles previous cases of
Sabbath healing. The number of these,
and the living detail with which they
are recorded in the gospels, are note-
worthy. Jesus puts signal honour on
this day as a day for public worship
and for showing acts of mercy. His
example must ever remind Christians
that care for the poor, the sick, and
the ignorant, are duties specially fitted
for the Lord’s Day. It is consecrated
by His Spirit for the service of man,
as well as for the worship of God.—
Laidlaw.


Wer. 1. One of the Chief Pharisees.—
In this last period in which the hatred
of the Pharisees against Him was
most distinctly expressed, the Saviour
does not withdraw from them. Ob-
viously Jesus hoped, by the power of
the truth, to gain over for Himself
and the cause of God the better
disposed, at least, among them.


A Treacherous Invitation.—Theinvita-
tion of the Pharisee was a treacherous
one. He was carrying out the policy
indicated in xi. 53, 54, and had set
this diseased man in a place where he
would catch the attention of Christ, in
order to see what He would say or do.
“Behold” in ver. 2 implies something
unusual and unexpected; and this


ca


circumstance implies that the presence
of the diseased man was not accidental,


“To eat bread.”—It belongs to the
peculiarities of St. Luke that he loves
to represent to us the Saviour as sitting
at a social table, where He most
beautifully reveals His pure humanity,
through table-talk which, more than
that of any other “ was seasoned with
salt” (Col. iv. 6), and was addressed,
first to the guests (vers. 7-10), then to
the host (vers. 11-14), and, finally, on
occasion being given (ver. 15), to both
(vers. 16-24).—Van Oosterzee.


“ They watched Him.”—The kindness
and long-suffering of Christ in accept-
ing the invitation of the Pharisee are
very noteworthy, when we consider
the bad faith displayed in the desire to
find something in His words and deeds
out of which they might frame an
accusation against Him.

They watched whether He would not
transgress their Sabbath restrictions:
that was the way that they kept the
Sabbath.


Ver. 2. “There was a certain man
before Him.’—The Pharisees argued
(1) that Jesus could not ignore the
presence of a man conspicuously placed
in front of Him ; (2) that perhaps He
might fail in the cure of a disease ex-
ceptionally inveterate; (3) that if He
did heal the man on the Sabbath day
there would be room for another charge
before the synagogue or the Sanhedrim.
—Ffarrar.


Christ Moved by the Sight of Suffering.
—The sight of the suffering man stand-
ing there silent moved the heart of
Jesus, as the Pharisees had justly
expected that it would.


Ver. 3. “Sabbath day.”—Our Lord
studiously and designedly _ selected,
rather than avoided, the Sabbath day
for the performance of His miracles of


385


CHAP. XIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


eee ee TInt ESSnISnn nS


mercy. The five distinct instances
recorded were probably but a few out
of many. Add to which, that they
seemed, humanly speaking, to cause
offence; which our Lord would have
avoided, were it not for some great
purpose or principle.— Williams.


“ Ts it lawful to heal on the Sabbath ?”
—The question was an embarrassing
one. If they answered Yes, the occa-
sion of finding fault was taken away ;
if No, they were open to the charge of
want of compassion.


Ver. 4. “ Let him go.”—A delicate
courtesy is indicated in the man being
thus dismissed after being cured, before
the conversation is resumed upon the
work of mercy which had been wrought
in his case.


Vers. 5, 6. Christ and the Sabbath.—
The teaching to be derived from the
Sabbath healings, as recorded in the
gospels, may be summarised as follows :
1. We see that Jesus took pains to
emphasise the humane element in the
original institution as a day of rest,
while He rescued it from the exaggera-
tions of Pharisaism. 2. He gave it the
sanction of His own observance as a
day of public worship and religious
congregation. 3. By these deeds of
healing He put singular honour upon
it as a day for showing mercy.—
Laidlaw.


Ver. 5. “Answered them.”—Again,
it issaid, “ He answered them,” although
they had keld their peace. That is
because their minds were full of fierce,


rebellious thoughts ; and thoughts are
words in the ears of Him with whom
we have to do.—Burgon.


“ Son or ox” (R.V.)—The argument
proceeds from a thing of greater value
to one of less. ‘You deliver your
children, and even yorr oxen, on the
Sabbath ; shall not I much more
deliver My creatures and My children?”
If “ass” were the true reading, it
should follow ‘‘ox”; the Scriptures
often say ‘‘ox and ass,” never “ass
and ox.” In Deut. v. 14, in the law
of the Sabbath, “son” stands first in
the list of rational creatures, “ox” in
that of irrational.


Inconsistency of the Pharisees.—
As on other occasions (xiii. 15; Matt.
xii. 11), the Lord brings back those
present to their own experience. and
lets them feel the keen contradiction
in which their blame of Christ’s free
work of love sets them with them-
selves, in that, where their worldly
interests were at hazard, they did that
very thing whereof they now made
an occasion against Him.—Olshausen.


Ver. 6. “Could not answer.” —
Nothing is said, however, about their
being convinced of error. Prejudice
and malicious feelings are not always
to be overcome, even by the best-ordered
arguments.


The Truth Hxasperates Them.—The
truth, which did not win them, did the
only other thing which it could do—
exasperated them the more; they re-
plied nothing, biding their time (cf.
Matt. xii. 14).—Trench.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 7—14.


Lessons to Guests and Hosts.—The lawyers and the Pharisees at this feas.
scrutinised eagerly the conduct of Jesus, in order to bring home to Him the
charge of Sabbath-breaking. And He, on His part, took notice of their procedure,
and in due time spoke words of kindly counsel to them. We read that “ they
watched Him,” and also that ‘“‘ He marked how they chose out the chief seats” at


the table.


Yet there was a vast difference between their spirit and His.


Their


action was something like treacherous espionage, while His was like that of a
father who gently reproves his children’s faults.


386


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XIV.





T. A lesson to guests: a lesson of humility (vers. 7-11).—We should rob
these words of all their value if we took them as merely a counsel of worldly
prudence: for in that case they would enforce an artificial rather than a
real humility, and even make an affected humility the cloak for selfish ambition.
We should rather take the words as enjoining a genuine and unaffected humility,
as teaching that the only distinction that deserves a thought is that which is
freely bestowed on men of a lowly and a kindly spirit. We may take the parable
as setting forth a truth which experience abundantly confirms—viz., that even the
most worldly and selfish of men have a sincere respect for the unworldly ; that
the only men whom they can bear to see preferred before themselves are those
who are of a spirit so gentle, and sweet, and unselfish, as not to grasp at any such
preference or distinction. Even the world meets us in very much the same
spirit that we take to it. If we push men out of our way, they push back; if
we plot and strive against them, they plot and strive against us: whereas if we
show ourselves friendly, they are not unwilling to be our friends; if we are
unaffectedly meek and pure, they honour us for virtues which they may not
themselves possess. Those who are most ambitious of rule and of occupying
places of distinction are often, if not generally, devoid of the qualifications
needed for the post they covet, and men are glad when they see such persons
authoritatively commanded to take a lower seat. While those of meek and
quiet spirit are unaffectedly surprised when they are summoned to take a more
honourable or conspicuous post. Yet these are precisely the men whom we all
delight to honour and to see honoured—the men of whose spirit and usefulness
we are most assured, and of whose capacity for any work they can be induced to
take we are confident. We cheerfully give them the “worship” or glory they
do not seek. Because they abase themselves we rejoice in their exaltation.

II. A lesson to hosts: a lesson of benevolence to the poor (vers. 12-14).—As
the guests are warned against a pride which might lead to shame, so the host is
counselled not to waste his wealth in exercising an ostentatious and interested
hospitality. Again the words of Christ bear the appearance of worldly wisdom.
Friends and kinsfolk and rich neighbours return the hospitality they receive : the
poor cannot repay kindness shown to them, but recompense will be made at the
resurrection of the just. Appeal seems to be made to a mercenary motive—that
of expecting a reward in heaven for good deeds done upon earth; but in actual
life it will be found that no one will busy himself with kindly deeds merely for
the sake of a future reward. Consideration for others will awaken and strengthen
all the better feelings of the heart, and banish the mercenary spirit. The mention
of reward emphasises the fact that acts of benevolence have a high spiritual
value in the sight of God, and will draw down upon him who does them the
Divine favour and blessing. These words of Christ teach the same lesson as that
contained in the parable of the Unjust Steward, who diligently made use of
present opportunities for providing for himself shelter and comfort in the day of
need.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 7—14.


Vers. 7-14. Jesus at the Feast. The Exhortation to Humility.

I. What He said about men’s feasts. I. Guests ought to humble them-
—1. A word to the guests. 2. A word selves, by selecting the lowest place.
to the host. II. Hosts should humble themselves,


II. What He said about God's feasts. by inviting the poorest to their tables.
—1l. It is different as regards those
invited. 2. It is different as regards Vers. 7-11. The Lowest Seats at Feasts.
Him who invites.—Stock. —This parable deserves a passing notice,


387


CHAP. XIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





if it were only to give occasion for point-
ing out the prominent place which the
great truth that the kingdom of God is
for the humble occupied in the thoughts
of Jesus, as evinced by the fact of His
uttering two parables to enforce it.
That he who humbleth himself shall be
exalted, and he who exalteth himself
shall be abased is, in the view of Christ,
one of the great laws in the kingdom
of God. On the surface this portion of
our Lord’s table-talk at the Sabbath
feast wears the aspect of a moral advice,
rather than of a parable. But through
the medium of a counsel of prudence
relating to ordinary social life, the
Teacher of the doctrine of the kingdom
communicates a lesson of true wisdom
concerning the higher sphere of religion.
The evangelist perceived this, and there-
fore he called this piece of advice a
parable—most legitimately, inasmuch
as a parable has for its aim to show,
by an example of human action in
natural life, how men should act in the
sphere of spiritual life. Christ had no
serious intention to give a lesson in
social deportment, and the parabolic
element in His words is confined to this,
that instruction valid only for the
religious sphere is couched in terms
which seem to imply a reference to
ordinary social life. Jesus reminds
His fellow guests that there is a society
in which humility is held in honour,
and pride gets a downsetting. That
He is thinking of this sacred society is
apparent from His manner of express-
ing Himself.—Bruce.


The Ambitious Guest.

I. These verses obviously enforce an
important social principle applicable
to our daily life.

II. They bear also on religious duties
—our life in relation to God.

III. The more directly spiritual
application.—In spiritual things the
highest place is the most excellent
and most desirable. 1. We are com-
manded to aim at perfection. 2. We
are not to be satisfied with our pre-
sent condition. 3, Christ’s love
alone can give us a title to even the


388


lowest room in the heavenly world.—
Brameld.


This Parable Teaches—

I. That the law of Christ justifieth
none in any rudeness or incivility.

II. That the disciples of Christ ought
to have a regard to their reputation, to
do nothing they may be ashamed of.

III. That it is according to the will
of God that honour should be given to
those to whom honour belongeth ; that
the more honourable persons should sit
in the more honourable places.—Pole.


A Higher Place.—l. Every man
ought to desire a higher place. 2.
There is a wrong way of getting place.
3. There is a right way of getting
place. 4. As a general rule, high
character will be called into the higher
place.


Ver. 7. “A parable.”—The use of
this word, as well as the general
principle laid down in ver. 11, prepares
us to find more than a maxim of worldly
prudence in this saying of our Lord.
Christ here teaches humility in the
deepest sense of the word. Let each
take the lowest place before God, or, as
St. Paul says, “ esteem others as better
than himself” (Phil. ii. 3), It is God
who fixes the true place of each, and
His judgment is independent of ours.
If we sincerely think ourselves deserv-
ing of a low place, we shall not thereby
lose our true place.


Secret Dispositions Discovered.—The
dignity of these words appears in this,
that without any appearance of pro-
foundness or severity, they lay bare
the secret disposition at the foundation
of the external behaviour they condemn.
—NSchleiermacher.


Vers. 8-10. “Sit not down in the
highest room.” —Cf. Prov. xxv. 6, 7:
“Put not forth thyself in the presence
of the King, and stand not in the place
of great men; for better it is that it
be said unto thee, Come up hither, than
that thou shouldest be put lower in the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XIV.


ce et i ee ee


presence of the Prince whom thine eyes
have seen.”


Vers. 9, 10. Sense of Shame and
Lawful Pride.—It is noticeable that
He who created man such as he is,
here, and in ver. 29, appeals to man’s
sense of shame (ver. 9), and to his
sense of pride (ver. 10).


Ver. 9. “ Begin with shame.”—No
shame attaches to him who takes a low
place, but shame is felt by him who is
sent down from a higher place.


Ver. 10. “* Hriend.”—-No such gra-
cious appellation is addressed to him
who had been asked to give up his
place to a more honourable guest


(ver. 9).


This Teaching Exemplified by Christ.
—Now, what Christ commanded others
He Himself did; for when He came
into this world He reclined in the
manger, and He died reclining on a
cross. Neither at His birth nor at
His death could He find any more
lowly place.— Bellarmine.


false Humility Eacluded.—All that
false humility, by which men put them-
selves lowest and dispraise themselves
of set purpose to be placed higher, is
by the very nature of our Lord’s parable,
excluded; for that is not bond fide to
abase oneself. The exaltation at the
hands of the host is not to bea sub-
jective end to the guests, but will follow
true humility.—A/ford.


Ver. 11. Spiritual Counsels.—The
counsels which Christ had given—“ Be
not proud, lest thou be put to shame;
be lowly, so shalt thou be exalted ”—
are here deepened and spiritualised.
They are not mere prudential maxims,
therefore, but condemn the Pharisaical
pride of the Jews in relation to the
kingdom of God.


Vers. 12-14. The Highest Kind of
Hospitality.—Jesus, as it were, does
not interfere with the hospitality we


may show to relatives and friends—
He leaves it in its own place; but He
commands us to manifest a kindness of
a higher and more spiritual type in
caring for the poor and unfortunate.


Ver. 12. “Call not.”—Ie., “ prefer
to show mercy to the poor.” The
paramount importance of one duty is
here stated by comparing it with
another, and by preferring it to the
lesser, as in Matt. ix. 13.


Repayment by God.—The recom-
mendation Christ here gives is rendered
all the more gracious in its form by its
being represented as more for our inter-
est to show a kindness which will draw
down a recompense from God than a
hospitality which men will repay.


Friends, Reiations, Rich Neighbours.
—There is a gradation in the order of
persons named whom we are likely to
invite to our table. 1. Our friends—
from a delight in their society. 2. Our
brethren and relations—from a sense
of duty. 3. Our rich neighbours—
from the honour they confer on us by
coming, and the hope of receiving an
invitation from them in return.


“ Lest they also.”—A fear which the
world does not know.—Bengel.


Disinterested Kindness.—Jesus cer-
tainly did not mean us to dispense
with the duties of ordinary fellowship.
But since there was no exercise of
principle involved in it, save of re-
ciprocity, and selfishness itself would
suffice to prompt it, His object was to
inculeate, over and above everything
of this kind, such attentions to the
helpless, and provision for them, as,
from their inability to make any
return, would manifest their own dis-
interestedness, and, like every other
exercise of high religious principle,
meet with a corresponding gracious
recompense.— Brown.


Vers. 13, 14. “‘ Thow shalt be recom-
pensed.”
J. We may reasonably expect a


389


CHAP. XIV.


recompense from heaven for such good
works as we do, for which we are not
recompensed on earth.

II. That God’s recompense of us,
for doing our duty in obedience to His
commands, is often deferred until the
resurrection of the just; but then it
will not fail obedient souls.


Ver. 13. ‘ Call the poor.” —What the
Saviour here commends to others He
has Himself fulfilled in the most illus-
trious manner. To the feast in the
kingdom of God He has principally
invited not such as were related to
Him after the flesh, or those from
whom He might hope for recompense
again, but the poor, the blind, etc.,
in the spiritual sense of the words.
But for that reason also He has now
joy to the full in the kingdom of the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


Father, and a name that is above
every name.—Van Oosterzee.


Ver. 14. “The Resurreetion of the
Just.” —Jesus speaks, in John v. 28, 29,
of the general resurrection. Here He
distinguishes between a first and a
second resurrection (cf. chap. xx. 34-36),
and His teaching is further developed
in the later apostolic writings (1 Thess,
iv. 16; 1 Cor. xv. 23; Rev. xx. 5, 6).


Earthly and Heavenly Rewards.—
Let us, therefore, not be disappointed
and troubled at not receiving a recom-
pense from men on earth; rather let
us be troubled when we receive it, lest
we learn to look only for reward on
earth, and so lose our reward in heaven,
— Chrysostom.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 15—24.


The Feast Refused.—Pious sentiment is cheap, and many a man who has little
other religion has his mouth full of beautiful speeches about the desireableness
of heaven. Jesus seems to have detected the false ring in this seemingly devout
aspiration, and therefore to have met it with this story of the refused feast,
which warns the speaker and others to be sure that they are not excusing
themselves from a banquet for which they profess to long.

I. The preparation of, and invitations to, the feast.—The use of this emblem
to denote spiritual blessings is rooted in Old-Testament prophecy (Isa. xxv. 6,
ly. 1-3). It is a “great” feast, both in regard of the rich and satisfying food
and of the ample room. It provides ‘enough for each, enough for all, enough
for evermore” ; it meets all the hunger and need of the soul. The preparation
of the feast, and the invitations, cover a long time—the whole past ages of Israel’s
history, during which law, and sacrifice, and prophecy, had been aiming to make
men ready for receiving the kingdom, and had been summoning them to partake
of its blessings. A second invitation was given in the preaching of John the
Baptist, of our Lord Himself, and of the apostles during His life. The fact of a
more pressing summons being sent at the moment of readiness marks the solemn
significance of the hour at which He was speaking. His coming makes “all
things ready,” and is the critical moment to which all the ages have been tending.
Present decision was called for, and not pious platitudes. We, too, have to learn
the awful importance of the present moment, and to beware of losing the
awakening consciousness of that in smooth generalities about any future. How
we behave to God’s invitation, that peals in our ears to-day, settles how we shall
fare in the future.

II. The astonishing unanimity of refusal.—In ordinary life people would
scramble for invitations to such a grand feast, especially if a great man gave
it. But the improbability of the incident is the very point of it. ‘They all
with one consent.” This is the miserable strangeness of the fate of God’s invita-
tions to the highest good. No others are treated so. Mark the increasing
rudeness of the speakers. The first pleads a “‘ must needs”; the second merely


390


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XIV,


= ghiiea Ge Pa, om CT


states his intention—“T go” ; the third bluntly says, “I cannot,” and omits the
courtesy of asking to be excused. The true lesson from all three is, that innocent
and right things keep men away from the gospel feast, and that, however different
the objects which are preferred to it, the spirit which prefers them is the same.
These excuses do not cover all the reasons—which are excuses only, and not
reasons—for refusing the feast. But they suggest that by far the most common
is some form or other of preferring the poor delights of time and sense, and they
prepare the way for the stringent requirements, in ver. 26, of giving up all to
be a disciple. There was no real incompatibility between the true enjoyment of
farm, merchandise, or wife, and accepting the invitation; nor is there any
between discipleship and the fullest use and truest enjoyment of earthly good;
but the incompatibility is made by our false estimate of these. Because we put
them first, therefore they shut us out from the feast. Put it first, and it does
not shut us out from them.

If]. The needy who do not refuse.—Note—1. The action of the giver of the
feast. His settled purpose that some shall partake of it is not to be foiled.
God’s provision shall not be wasted, and if it be ‘refused by some foolish souls
who prefer husks to bread, and leeks and garlic to manna, the tables shall not
stand without guests. The Divine mercy is not to be thwarted, but, with
persistent variation of direction, works on to its end undiscouraged. ‘True, the
structure of the parable required the second invitation to appear as an after-
thought ; but that does not detract from the wonderful representation it gives
of the inexhaustible patience and unwearied, continuous invitation of the master
of the feast. 2. The success of the second invitation. The recipients are still
in the “city.” They are the same classes as Jesus had just bid His hearers ask
to their feasts (ver. 13). They have no farm or oxen to see after. In the
historical application they represent the “ publicans and harlots,” the outcast
classes who hung on to the theocracy, but, though Jews by descent, were scouted
by the class to whom Jesus was speaking. In the wider reference they are the
people who know their own needs, and have found themselves to be hungry and
poor, having infinite need of salvation, and nothing of their own to win it with.
“‘Yet there is room.” How that hints of the boundless spaces in the festal halls,
of the ample provision for all !

IV. The invitation extended and made more urgent.—The vagrants who
house in the fields and under the hedges are further down in misery than the
poor in the city. Historically they represent the Gentiles outside the polity of
Israel, and it is in accordance with the spirit of St. Luke’s gospel that this
transference of the offer of salvation to them should have been recorded by him.
But the representation embodies the great truth of which that transference was
but an exemplification ; namely, the destination of the gospel for all, and its
special mission to the lowest. The increase in urgency corresponds to the
distance from the banquet and the degradation of the invited. First the
message was a simple “Come”; then it was to be a “ Bring” them in; and
taow it is, “Constrain them.” The pleading earnestness increases with the need
and the sense of unfitness for so great an honour. Oomplacent indifference,
which made sure of a right to eat bread in the kingdom, and would give up
nothing for it, was left alone; but poor wretches, who could scarcely believe
that the feast was meant for them, were prayed with much entreaty to receive
the gift. How grand and wonderful a view of the Divine longing to bestow
blessings lies in that word, given as the motive of the host’s command, “ that my
house may be filled!” God cannot be satisfied with empty spaces at His table.
He does not rest till all the ample spaces are crowded with “the great multitude,
which no man can number,” so all-embracing is His love, so strong His desire to
impart the bread, enough and to spare, which He has prepared for all the


391


CHAP. XIV.


ne


Ma aa Ue


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





hungry. Historically, the closing threat foretells the exclusion of the Israel of
that day as a whole from the feast, but it does not necessarily imply that
individuals who separated themselves from the mass, and changed refusal into


acceptance, should be debarred access to it,
Acceptance is always possible, and no refusal


and no refusal need be final.
need be final.— Maclaren.


No threatenings are unconditional,


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 15—24.


Ver. 15. “ Blessed is he that shall
eat bread.” —This guest seems to have
formed an erroneous idea of the nature
of the kingdom of God: 1. He evi-
dently regarded it as affording privilege,
rather than as imposing obligations.
2. He thought that, as a Pharisee and
an Israelite, he was sure of entrance
into it. 3. He thought of that king-
dom as belonging to the future, and as
having little bearing upon present con-
duct. The sentimental guest flattered
himself that he appreciated the good
things of the kingdom; and Christ,
knowing how apt men are to deceive
themselves in such matters, went on to
show him how little reliance is to be
placed on the interest in things Divine
which he and others took credit for.—
Bruce.


An Unexceptionable Remark.—As a
saying, the guest’s remark was unex-
ceptionable. But as he uttered it,
it was only a mere pious remark.
He was not a true disciple of Jesus,
and had probably no intention of be-
coming one, so he was one who would
never eat bread in the kingdom of God,
since he was determined not to accept
the invitation to the marriage-supper
of the Lamb.—Hastings.


“ Blessed is he.”—The words sound
like those of Balaam, “ Let me die the
death of the righteous, and let my last
end be like his”.(Numb. xxiii. 10), a
wish only to be safe and happy at last,
while rejecting all present invitation to
turn to God and live.


Feeble HExcuses.—1. The spiritual
provision.—It is abundant, gracious,
glorious.

II. The wide invitation.—There is
room for many. Many must come.


392


III. The feeble excuses.—1. World-
liness of spirit. 2. Absorption in com-
mercial pursuits, 3. Relative obli-
gations.

IV. The angry host.—Displeased be-
cause His generosity is not appreciated.
Because He has given the strongest
proof of His goodness. His displeasure
is irreconcileable.— Stevenson.


Hacuses.—They are typical excuses.
—1. Cares of wealth. 2. Pursuit of
wealth. 3. Attractions of earthly
ties.

If. None of them is a good reason
for refusal.

ITI. In each case what caused re-
fusal was nothing wrong in itself.


The Invitation Refused.—The power
of mental pre-occupation in producing
indifference or aversion to the doctrine
of the kingdom Jesus illustrates in a
popular manner in the parable of the
Great Supper. The forms of pre-
occupation therein mentioned are such
as are most suited to parabolic nar-
ration—such, namely, as arise from the
business and pleasures of ordinary life,
They are not the only forms, or even
the most important, or such as beset
the class of men represented at the
dinner-table when the parable was
spoken. The pre-cccupations of the
wise and learned were of a more digni-
fied and respectable character.— Bruce.


Near the Kingdom, but Not In It.
—Christ spoke the parable to point
out the difference between being in-
vited to enter the kingdom and being
in it, and to show that the invitation
will only aggravate the doom of those
who refuse to comply with it. He
intends to teach the Jews, and through


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


them to teach us, that those who are
near the kingdom may in the end
come short of it—that those who stand
high in spiritual privileges may be
excluded—may exclude themselves—
from the kingdom of God.— Arnot.


The Gracious Character of the King-
dom.—The parable teaches that the
kingdom of heaven is not for the full,
but for the hungry. Everything in it
is significant of grace: 1. The selection
of a feast as an emblem of the blessings
promised implies that they are a free
gift from God. 2. The behaviour of
those invited first—being full, they
despise the Divine gift. 3. Those who
are empty and destitute value it.
4. The avowed motive of the repeated
invitations—that the house may be
filled.— Bruce.


Ver. 16. “A great supper.”—The
kingdom of heaven (1) Satesfies those
who hunger and thirst after righteous-
ness. 2. It brings joys beyond com-
pare. 3. It brings all who believe
into holy fellowship with each other.


A Fit Emblem.—tThe blessings of
salvation are in Scripture fitly com-
pared to a feast—

I. Because of their rich variety and
abundance.

II. Their suitableness to our spiritual
wants.

III. The high satisfaction and en-
joyment which they yield.


“ Many.”—Ie., the whole Jewish
people—by the Baptist, by His apostles,
by His disciples, and by Himself.


Ver. 17. “ His servant.”—The office
of summoning the world to enter the
kingdom of God is one, and the com-
mission to all those who hold it is the
same ; hence, but one servant is spoken
of. This unity of teaching and preach-
ing is the holy inheritance of the Church
from her one Lord.


“ For all things are now ready.”—


CHAP. XIV.


A suggestion of the splendid abund-
ance of the feast prepared.


The Nominally Religious.—It is im-
plied that these men had tacitly, or
in some other well-understood way,
accepted the first invitation. They
gave no intimation that they intended
to decline—they gave the provider of
the feast reason to expect their presence.
They were, therefore, representatives
of those who were nominally, but not
really, the people of God. They were
within the reach of privileges which
they did not value, and were understood
to be well-disposed towards God, until
their true character was revealed by
their being asked to make a decisive
choice between God and the world.


Vers. 18-20. Worldliness of Spirit.
—The temper of these self-excusers is
threefold; the excuses themselves are
threefold ; their spirit is one. The
first alleges a necessity—he must go
and see his land; the second not so
much as this, only his own plan and
purpose; the third not so much as
either of these, but rudely asserts, I
cannot (2.¢., I will not) come. Al are
detained by worldliness, in however
varied forms.—A (ford.


Innocent, but Fatal.—Land—oxen—
a wife;—all innocent; perhaps all
needful; all certainly fatal. They
loved them too much, or the gospel
too little. Their love for them was
perhaps not excessive ; it might have
been but little; but, at all events,
their love for the gospel was less. Or
their love for the gospel might have
been great, very great; but their love
of the world was greater. Still, it
all came to one and the same end
for God will not have a divided
heart. It is the choice of the two
which is presented at all times. To
have married a wife was provided for
in the law as a sufficient plea not to
go forth to war; but the gospel is
higher in its requirements. “ He that
loveth wife or children more than Me,
is not worthy of Me.”—Wdaliams.


393


CHAP. XIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





Ever-Recurring Forms of Danger.—
It may be observed that in describing
the reception which the gospel would
meet with, our Lord mentions the very
things which He notices in speaking of
the old world and of Sodom. He
omits all mentions of their great crimes,
but chooses out, for their resemblance
to the last day, points innocent in
themselves, but of an absorbing worldly
nature. In the days of Lot, which are
likened to the end of the world, ‘‘they
bought and sold” (chap. xvii. 28)—
as here the excuse is, “ I have bought
oxen, and I go to prove them.” In the
former, “‘ they planted, they builded”
—as here the plea is, ‘I have bought
a field; I must needs go to see it.”
Again, in the days of Noah and of
Lot “they married and gave in
marriage”—and the gospel in the
parable is rejected, because “I have
married a wife, and therefore I cannot
come.” The same things, therefore,
are true of the days of the Son of Man,
as appears from Scripture ; whether we
speak of Christ's final coming, or of
the Christian dispensation generally.—
Burgon.


The Thorns which choke the Word.—
The three excuses answer to the three
things which are said to “choke the
Word” in the parable of the Sower
(viii. 14)—“the care of this world,”
“the deceitfulness of riches,” and “ the
pleasures of this life.”


Different Degrees of Contwmacy.—
One may trace here a rising scale of
contumacy: 1. The first of these
guests would be very glad to come, if
only it were possible, if there was not
a constraining necessity keeping him
away. 2. The second alleges no such
constraining necessity, but is simply
going upon sufficient reason on another
errand. 3. The third has engagements
of his own, and declares outright, “I
cannot come.”—Trench.


Hindrances to Faith and Obedience.
I. “The lust of the eye and the


394


pride of life” too often detain men
from Christ.

II, In some cases the business and
cares of life have the same effect.

III. In other cases it is the pleasure
of the world that is a hindrance.


The Excuses Frivolous.—These various
excuses are all frivolous; they simply
veil a disinclination to come to the
feast. For all these persons had been
informed of the coming feast, and
could have chosen another day for
attending to the various concerns which
they now plead as excuses.


Ver. 18. Spiritual Possessions, Occu-
pations, and Joys.—All these excuses
had been anticipated and refuted by
our Lord’s teaching that there is
another field for which we ought to sell
all and buy it (Matt. xiii. 44)—another
plough to be followed (Luke ix. 62);
and now He teaches that there is
another marriage-feast to be preferred
before all earthly nuptials—a marriage-
feast in which the soul is not only a
guest, but is espoused as a bride to
Christ (2 Cor. xi. 2).—Wordsworth.


“< With one consent.” One motive in-
spired them all: indifference towards,
or dislike of, him who had invited them.


“To make excuse.” —By so doing they
acknowledge their obligation to appear
at the feast. In like manner com-
paratively few of those who lead
irreligious lives repudiate religious
obligations, however poor the excuses
may be which they bring forward to
excuse their neglect of them.


“ Have me excused.” —“ Me.” What-
ever may be the case with others, who
can and ought to come, I am obliged to
ask thee to excuse me.


Ver. 20. “A wife.’—Marriage—the
closest and most sacred of all ties—
here stands for all earthly ties; just as
oxen and land stand for all worldly
goods and possessions whatsoever.
‘Surely he takes the text in too large
a sense, that, because it says ‘a man


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


viHAP, XIV.


eee


shall leave all and cleave to his wife,’
therefore he shall leave God. It is but
the father and mother on earth, and
not the Father of heaven, that for her
we may forsake” (Feltham).


“T cannot come.”—“The persons
mentioned before excused themselves
civilly. This man bluntly declares ‘he
cannot come.’ Some damn themselves
in a rude and brutal, others in a civil,
well-bred manner ” (Quesnel).

His language is all the more brusque
because he is assured that he has a more
plausible and adequate reason for
refusing the invitation than others.


Ver. 21. Angry.—The dislike or
hatred which lay beneath the ex-
cuses calls forth anger on the part of
the master. Cf. 2 Sam. xxii. 27:
“With the froward Thou wilt show
Thyself unsavoury.”


“ Streets and lanes.” —Still within the
city, so that by the class here sum-
moned we are to understand the
outcast classes among the Jews, as
distinguished from the Pharisees and
scribes to whom the invitation was
naturally first addressed, and who had
as a class rejected it.


“ The maimed, the halt, and the blind.”
—“The maimed,” whom no woman
would marry (ver. 20); “the halt,” who
could not follow the plough (ver. 19) ;
“the blind,” who could not see fields or
anything else (ver. 18).—Bengel.


Ver. 22. “ Vet there is room.”—1. A
word of encouragement to those who
desire, but have not ventured to come
in. 2. A summons to fresh zeal on
the part of those charged with the
duty of bringing in guests.


Vers. 23, 24. Unlikely Guests.

I. The guests, brought in from the
highways, and hedges, and lanes, may
in the first intention, represent the
spiritually-neglected Jewish populace,
as opposed to the self-satisfied scribes
and Pharisees. ;


“II. The principle involved is; the
kingdom and its blessings are for the
hungry anywhere and everywhere;
there is plenty of room, and I will have
my house full.

III. The probable application is:
privileged Israel self-excluded by her
indifference ; unprivileged heathendom
rendered eligible by destitution.—
Bruce.


Ver. 23. “ Highways and hedges.” —
Those in the heathen world needing,
and many of them longing for, salva-
tion.

As ver, 21 is the subject of the first
part of the Acts of the Apostles
(chaps. i-xii., the conversion of the
Jews), so vers. 22, 23 contain that of
the second part (chap. xiii. to the end,
the conversion of the heathen).—Godet.


The Need for Ifaste—The time was
short, and the master of the house
could not wait; therefore he bade his
servant urge these new guests to fill
the house without delay.


“ Compel.”—Use so much zeal and
importunity that they may feel con-
strained to come in (2 Tim. iv. 2).


Force and Perswasion.—The two
kinds of compulsion are illustrated in
the history of St. Paul. Saul as a
persecutor compelled men and women
to return to or to remain in the Jewish
fold; as a servant of Christ he strove
to urge and persuade his hearers to
enter the Christian fold.


Timidity Overcome.—The poor out-
casts would doubtless naturally be
timid about entering the rich man’s
house; they would scarcely dare to
accept the invitation, A friendly com-
pulsion is necessary in their case.
Those really unwilling to come—the
guests first invited—are not compelled
to attend the feast.


Inducements to Accept the Invitation.
—Inducements to persuade acceptance
of the gospel invitation: 1. Your


395


CHAP. XIV.


naturally miserable and perishing con-


dition. 2. The consideration that “all
things are now ready.” 3. That many
guests have entered. 4. That “ yet


there is room.” 5. That rejection of
the invitation now means exclusion
‘from the feast of heavenly glory here-
after.


“ Filled.” —The great love of God de-
sires a multitude of guests ; not a seat
that is prepared is to be allowed to re-
main vacant. The number of the elect
is proportioned beforehand to the riches
of the Divine glory, and this can only
find complete reflection in a certain
number of human beings. The in-
vitation will therefore last, and con-
sequently the history of our race will
be prolonged, until that number is
reached. Thus it is that the Divine
decree is reconciled with human liberty.
The number of those saved is, com-
paratively to the number of those
called, small, no doubt; nevertheless,
in itself, the number of the saved is
great.—Codet.


“That my house may be filled.”—
He has so made provision that He
must have people that eat, drink, and
are merry, though He should make
them out of stones.—Luther.


Spiritual Wretchedness not a Ground
of Safety.— However, let it be well


eee ee) ee Li ee eae
PS Ie ‘¥


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


observed that to be in a spiritually
wretched state does not confer a favour,
or imply safety. These men were
saved, not because they were spiritu-
ally very low, but although they were
spiritually very low ; they were saved,
although the chief of sinners, because
Christ invited them and they came at
His call. The more moral, and more
privileged, who were first invited,
would have been as welcome and as
safe if they had come.—Arnot.


Ver. 24. “ For I say unto you.”—
In matter of form these words belong
to the parable, but no doubt the look
and manner of Jesus, as He put this
threat in the mouth of the host whose
invitation had been so indifferently
treated by the guests first summoned,
made those present feel that He and
they were the type of persons really
meant.


“ My supper.” —Our Lord half passes
from the parable and speaks words
which seem to express His own decision
rather than that of the giver of the
feast. By so doing [le warns His
hearers of the risk they were running
in rejecting Him—they were acting like
those who had excluded themselves from
the feast. “My supper, to which I
not only invite you, but which J, as the
Son, with the Father, have Myself
prepared for you!”


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 25—35.


Thorough-going Disciples.—Complete surrender of earthly things as the
indispensable condition of discipleship is the teaching of this passage. Crowds
followed Christ, but He will have no recruits enlisted on false pretences, and
rather discourages than stimulates inconsiderate adhesion. The clear presenta-
tion of difficulties stifles no genuine earnestness, but rather fans the flame.
Christ would have the light-minded crowds, following Him with curiosity,
understand that it is no holiday stroll nor triumphal march in which they are
joining, but a procession to a cross. So, if they are not ready for that, they had
better not come after Him, and, at any rate, must come with their eyes open, if
at all.

I. Our Lord lays down the law of discipleship.—There is a twofold require-
ment, the solemnity of the statement of which is increased by that repeated
“He cannot be My disciple.” 1. The first requirement refers to the heart.
Jesus claims the subordination, and, if necessary, the sacrifice of all other love to
the supreme love to Himself, as the prime, indispensable condition of all disciple-


396


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XIV.


ship. We need not wonder at that strong word “hate.” The “hate” which
embraces all whom nature and God bid us love, and our own lives also, cannot
be the earthly passionate loathing, attended by desire to harm, which goes by
that name, but detachment of heart consequent upon supreme attachment of
heart to Jesus—the purifying of earthly love by loving only in Hin, rigid
subordination of the closest ties, and the readiness to sacrifice the tenderest of
these when they come in the way of our higher love to Christ. Mark the
tremendous claim which Christ here makes, in assuming His right to the throne
in all our hearts. What gives Him the right, and how can He satisfy the love
which He demands? Surely He who thus speaks must be conscious of Divinity,
or His claim is blasphemous. Surely He not only is, but does, what deserves
and draws, and will bless with full fruition the fullest love of every heart.
2. The second requirement applies to conduct. The first calls for the surrender
of the dearest ; the second, for the acceptance of the most painful. There is here
a veiled allusion to Christ’s own cross, as if He had said, “I, on this journey in
which you are following Me so blindly and eagerly, am going to My cross. If
you could see, it is already lying on My shoulder. If you follow Me, you, too,
will have to carry a cross.” Note the two halves of conduct which together
make up real discipleship —taking up each the cross which is his own, and
imitating Christ. Every true Christian has his own special burden of humilia-
tion, difficulty, self-denial, to carry. The cross is heavy, and hard to carry ; but
unless we do carry it, we are not His. And all the procession of cross-bearers
go after the Lord. If we follow after Him, our crosses grow light, remembering
His, and with Him for leader and companion.

II. Two illustrative similes enforce the law.—1. The rash builder. This sets
forth discipleship in its aspect of building up the noble and conspicuous structure
of a Christ-like character. That is the life-long work of a true disciple. Life is
not for enjoyment, nor for worldly ends, but for building up a holy character,
and all outward things are but scaffolding to further the building. Expenditure
is needed to secure this end. Building costs money. The building of ourselves
takes and tasks all the resources of a life-time. In other words, we are not
disciples unless we surrender self and all we have. It plainly follows that there
must be deliberate, open-eyed recognition of what being a Christian involves, at
the beginning, if there is not to be failure long before the end. But if we find
that we have not the power to build, are we to give up the attempt? No. For
they who know that they can do nothing of themselves are they who will
most humbly look for, and most certainly receive, the grace that will keep them
steadfast and growing; and they who fail are precisely those who begin with
swaggering self-sufficiency. The bystanders mock, as they have a right to do.
Thorough-going Christians may be disliked, but they are respected. Harnestness
awes and sometimes excites hostility, but inconsistency only amuses. 2. The
rash soldier. This presents Christian life as a warfare. There is not only need
for continuous effort, as in building, but for continual struggle with an enemy
stronger than ourselves. Our Lord here warns men not to begin the conflict
unless they are prepared to fight it out to the death. Does He, then, advise a
man who feels himself too weak to conquer evil to give up the struggle and to
become its tributary slave? That would Be a counsel of despair. If we find
that we have not enough force to meet the enemy, the recognition of our weak-
ness, and the abandonment of all trust in self, will bring an ally into the field
whose reinforcements will make us more than conquerors.

III. The final warning.—Entire self-surrender is necessary in order to our
realising the ideal of the Christian life in our own characters. It is also neces-
sary in order to the discharge of the Christian’s office to society. The true
disciple, who has forsaken all, and taken up his cross and gone after Christ, is


397


omar xiv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





the salt. The action of such souls on the community is to arrest corruption, and
by diffusing a penetrating and sometimes biting, but always purifying, influence
to sweeten and hallow what is on the road to putridity. There is need, however,
for watchful renewal, day by day, of the self-surrender ; for the saltest salt may
lose its savour. It is a slow and often unconscious process. The salt keeps
shape, colour, bulk—only the invisible savour is gone; but everything worth
keeping goes with it. How can the loss be repaired? There is nothing in
the world that can re-salt it. Of course, our Lord does not here close the
door to the possibility of going again to Him, and getting from Him a fresh
gift, even of the grace which we have so carelessly spilt ; but what He means
is, that since disciples are to give, and not get, savour, there are none to give it
them if they lose it. He is always there to give, but that is not the point in
hand. Christians who are not acting as salt are doing no good at all. Saltless
salt is utterly useless, and by no means ornamental. ‘The only thing to do with
it is to cart it away. It may do to lay on a path, but that is all it is good for.
Stern words from gentle lips! But they are true, and need to be laid to heart
by the professing Christians of this as of every time.—WMaclaren.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 25—35.


Ver. 25. “ Great multitudes.” —Christ
reads their hearts and foresees the
future; He knows that multitudes
will fall away from Him, and multi-
tudes ery “Crucify Him” (chap. xxiii.
21). And so He winnows them by
prophecies of tribulation and trial ;
as Gideon winnowed his thirty-two
thousand until he had brought them
down to three hundred (Judges vii.
1-8).


The Fickle Crowd.—Christ placed
no confidence in the multitude loosely
attached to Him; He knew that a
day of temptation would scatter them.
“They that are with Him are called
and chosen and faithful” (Rev. xvii.
14), and such, and such only, will abide
with Him to the end.


Vers. 26, 27. “If any man come...
and hate not.”—Discipleship may in-
volve (1) the sacrifice of affections—the
breaking of earthly ties, and (2) the
endurance of persecution.


Ver. 26. “Come to Me.”—I.e., out-
ward attachment to Jesus. “ Be My
Disciple.” T.e., genuine attachment to
His person and spirit.


Recruits Warned of Hardship.—
Recruiting-sergeants commonly keep


398


out of view what is hard, painful, and
dangerous in the service for which they
would enlist men; but Christ desired
that none should join themselves to
Him without a clear knowledge before-
hand of all to which they were engag-
ing themselves. So to St. Paul, at his
conversion, is shown what great things
he must suffer for Christ’s name’s sake
(Acts ix. 16). Ezekiel, at his first
commission, is told that the men to
whom he is sent are like thorns, briars,
and scorpions (Ezek. ii. 6).


“ Doth not hate,”—We must hate all
things—our friends, our relatives, our
own lives—if they draw us from Christ.
We are to love our enemies ; and that
man is best loved who, if he tempts us
from God by words of carnal wisdom,
is not heard.—Wordsworth.


The Principle already Sanctioned by
Scripture—According to Deut. xxi.
18-21, when a man showed himself
utterly vicious and impious, his father
and mother should be the first to take
up stones to stone him. Jesus here
simply spiritualises this command.—
Godet.


Divinity Implied by the Claims Christ
Makes.—W hat man, that was not man’s


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


"CHAP, XIV.


a os ce ee oe


Maker as well as his fellow, could have
required that father and mother, wife
and children, should all be postponed
to Himself ; that, where any competi-
tion between His claims and theirs
arose, He should be everything, and
they nothing; that not merely these,
which, though very close to a man,
are yet external to him, but that his
very self, his own life, should be hated,
when on no other conditions Christ
would be loved? God might demand
this of His creatures, but how could
Christ, except as He also stood in the
place of God, and was God ?—T'rench.


Christ Demanding Hatred.—This de-
mand must have staggered many who
were now following Jesus. It was
meant to sift the heterogeneous crowd.
This crowding after Him was not
discipleship; they could only become
disciples—they could only obtain those
blessings which he had to bestow—at
a certain “cost.” This cost they ought
to “count.” And these are His terms:
“Tf any man come to Me, and hate
not his father,” etc. Those who heard
Him must have understood Him to
mean that His claims were paramount,
and, in case of conflict, were to override
the claims of the nearest and dearest
relatives. His words were well adapted
to sift the crowd : the unspiritual would
probably be driven away by them in
disgust, while those who were attached
to Jesus, in virtue of their spiritual
susceptibility, would probably still cling
to Him and wait for His own explana-
tions. Of this paradox about “ hating”
father and mother we say (1) that
the whole spirit of Christ’s life and
teaching was enough to prevent His
disciples from understanding the word
in its bare, bald, and literal meaning.
Christ did not “trample under foot
everything that is human—blood, and
love, and country.” So far from com-
manding His disciples to hate their
friends, He exhorted them to love even
their enemies. He Himself respected the
ties of natural relationship. He wept
over Jerusalem. When on the cross


He thoughtfully cared for His mother. -


He taught that the spirit of hatred and
contempt was the very spirit of murder,
and He took little children into His
arms and blessed them. None could
learn from Him that He demanded
from His followers that they should
love Him alone. 2. The word “ hate”
cannot here mean that we ought to
love our relatives and friends with a
diminished affection. This interpreta-
tion would be opposed to the teaching
of Christ and the genius of Christianity.
“‘ Love one another,” says Christ, “as
I have loved you.” ‘ Husbands, love
your wives,” says Paul, “even as Christ
loved the Church.” What limits shall we
set to affection which is thus inculcated ?
Pure and unselfish love cannot be ex-
cessive. We may, indeed, love the
Divine Lord too little ; but we cannot
love any human being too much. And
we shall never love the Divine Lord
more by merely loving our human
friends less. 3. The words “hate his
own life also ” are the key to the whole
aphorism. A disciple is to hate his
relatives and friends in the same sense
in which he is to hate himself. A man
can hate what is mean and base in
himself; he can hate his own selfish
life. Not in the bald, literal sense, for
he still cares for his own true, best life,
and wishes that to be developed and
strengthened. But he does, in a sense,


_ hate himself when the self in him rises


in rebellion against God,and Christ, and
duty. Now, in this sense also a man
may hate his relativesand friends. He
may hate that in them which is mean
and base. He may hate that in them
which seeks to drag him away from
Christ. He may hate the selfishness
lying in their love for him, which
leads them to tempt him into sin. He
may hate the selfishness lying in his
own love for them, which tempts him
to disobey God in order to please them,
or in order to retain their friendship.
Just as he hates all selfish life, so he
may hate all selfish love; and this
hatred he may manifest in deliberately
choosing to renounce the favour and
affection of his friends, rather than
recant his allegiance to Christ. It is


399


‘


CHAP. XIV.


here that we are to look for the ex-
planation of Christ’s demand for hatred ;
in the positive revulsion of feeling with
which the faithful soul turns away
from the temptations of affection, and
in the positive sacrifice of friendship
which may be involved in allegiance to
duty. The strongest and truest love is
that which is capable of the courage
and self-sacrifice involved in the inflic-
tion of necessary pain. And, therefore,
just as he who “ hateth his life in this
world” really ‘‘ keeps it unto life eter-
nal,” so he who, according to Christ’s
paradox, “hates” his friends, really loves
them with a deeper, more abiding, and
more uns¢lfish affection.— Finlayson.


Ver. 27. His Cross.—lT.e., his suffer-
ings, whatever he may be called upon
to suffer in My name, even as I
actually bear the cross and suffer upon
it. Christ here speaks prophetically of
His own crucifixion—an event not
likely to be foreseen by merely human
wisdom, as the cross was not a Jewish
form of punishment.


Vers. 28-32. Building and Fighting.
—The Christian has two kinds of work
to do—building and fighting (cf. Neh.
iv. 17).

I. The positive aspect of the Christ-
jan life; the erection of a structure
which arrests the attention of men,
and for the building of which all the
resources available will be required,

II. The negative aspect of the
Christian life; a perilous war with a
powerful king, which involves the
possibility of being called upon to lay
down one’s life for the cause.


A Bad Beginning; a Disastrous
Close.

I. Christ warns His hearers, and
all in later times, of the shameful close
which may attend a service begun in
a spirit of vain self-confidence.

II. He points out to all the only
wise course for avoiding.such perils as
would thus be before them.


400


(Mier aya en ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


Want of Due Deliberation.

1. The folly of an _ inconsiderate
profession of religion.

Il. Its danger.


Ver. 28. “A  tower.”—Something
more than an ordinary house—a con-
siderable edifice, specially fortified,
which cannot fail to arrest the atten-
tion. In like manner a Christian life
professes to be something more and
better than an ordinary life—to have
stronger anc more enduring elements
in it; and the world can judge whether
the profession is actually realised or
not.


“ Sitteth not down first.” —The sitting
down first, and considering well from
the very beginning all that is involved
in the continuing and finishing, is to
commence with deep thoughtfulness,
not rashly and superficially, in contrast
with that thoughtless running after
Him which was witnessed at this time
and which the Lord intends to humble
and repel.—Stier.


“ Counteth the cost.” —In the spiritual
building, the only true counting of the
cost is that a man should see his own
absolute incompetence and emptiness,
The counting of the cost must always
issue in the discovery of the utter in-
adequacy of his own resources, and the
going out of himself for strength and
means to build.


Ver. 30. “ Was not able to finish ”—
In the “building” which is implied
in discipleship, the completion may be
righteously demanded and expected of
all who have begun ; in this case the
not continuing brings its own fitting
disgrace in the sight of God and man.
The world is compelled to respect the
sincere and, thorough-going Christian ;
it has nothing but contempt for the
half-hearted, who give up the object
which they profess to aim at—the salt
that has lost its savour is trodden
under their feet.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XIV.


Vers. 31, 32. “Cometh... with
twenty thousand.”—The king coming
with twenty thousand soldiers is God,
whose sanctifying power and discipline
must ever be in conflict with our in-
dependent life and will until they are
completely subject to His power. So
far from the prince of this world being
this king, man is naturally at peace
with him, and Christ would not advise
surrender to him.


Ver. 31. Self-assertion a Mode of
Fighting with God.—He fights with
God, as truly, though in another way,
as the openly ungodly, who would fain
be anything in His sight, who, face to


face with God, would assert himself at -


all; who does not renounce all that he
hath, and, as that which is the dearest
to him, and cleaves closest to the
natural man, himself and his own
righteousness the first of all. The
Pharisee in the parable (xviii. 9-12)
reckoned up all that he had where-
with to meet Him who resisteth the
proud and giveth grace only to the
humble; the publican, on the con-
trary, avowed his own inability even
to look his adversary in the face—and
therefore, exclaiming, ‘God be mer-
ciful to me a sinner,” he threw down
his arms, and sought, while there
was yet time, “conditions of peace.” —
Trench.


Ver. 32. “ Desireth conditions of
peace.” —Nothing is said here of scorn
or shame, since to pray for peace in
the presence of the more mighty one
involves no disgrace, but is rather an
act of praiseworthy prudence.


Ver. 33. The Claims of Christ’s
Love.—Christ did not make things too
easy for His disciples. Three times in
this discourse is the tremendous sen-
tence repeated, ‘He cannot be My
disciple,” each time with a condition
of discipleship harder and sterner than
before. Hating our life, carrying our
cross, forsaking all we have—why,
claims like these we should have


DD


thought, would have earned either a
bitter resentment or a silent disdain
from most men, but for two circum-
stances— separately attractive, together
invincible—His sincerity and His
worthiness. He meant what He said,
and He merited what He claimed.
Those claims of His can only be met
by us, and satisfied for Him, through
the wondrous method of sacrifice. He
claims acceptance, docility, imitation,
service, trust, love.—Thorold.


“ Forsaketh not.”—Nevertheless, it is
not enough to forsake all that we
have, unless also we forsake ourselves.
—St. Gregory.


Ver. 34. ‘“ Salt is good.”—If a man,
who ought to teach others, and to
preserve them from corruption, lose
his savour, and become reprobate, how
shall he be seasoned ?— Bede.


The Need of Entire Sedlf-sacrifice.—
How significant is this admonition of
the Lord, following instantly on the
absolute necessity of entire self-sacri-
fice! ‘Salt is good, but if the salt
have lost his savour, wherewith then
shall it be seasoned?” The inference
is indisputable. The salt of the Christ-
ian life is sacrifice, and if the spirit
of sacrifice die out of it, and the
essence of that spirit, which is love,
become chilled, and its activities and
devotions presently diminish, anddecay,
and disappear, the salt of the life is
gone, and its growth paralysed, and
its influence killed, and its testimony
silenced. The bane of the Church of
God, the dishonour of Christ, the
laughing-stock of the world, is in that
far too numerous body of half-alive
Christians who choose their own cross,
and shape their own standard, and
regulate their own sacrifices, and
measure their own devotions; whose
sacrifices do not deprive them of a
single comfort fiom one year’s end to
another, and whose devotions never
make their dull hearts burn with the
love of Christ.— Thorold.


401


CHAP. XV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





CHAPTER XV.


CRITICAL NOTES.


VER. 1. Publicans and sinners.—/.¢., tax-gatherers, odious to the whole nation on account
of their occupation and their unscrupulousness in carrying it on, and persons from whom the
religiously minded held aloof because of their gross and sensual life. The parables imply
that they came to Jesus because they were penitent—a fact which should have led the
Pharisees to rejoicing rather than to murmuring.

Ver. 2. Murmured,—J.¢., among themselves. Receiveth sinners, etc.—An important and
affecting testimony to Christ’s attitude towards the sinful; He admits them into the circle of
disciples, and treats them as now worthy, because of their penitence, of fellowship with Him.

Ver. 4. What man.—The word is emphatic. Christ appeals to ordinary human feelings—
pity for the lost, desire to recover a valuable possession, and parental solicitude (in the three
parables respectively)—as explaining and justifying His conduct. An hundred sheep.—This
parable illustrates the Divine compassion, as the loss of one out of a hundred would be no
great matter to the owner. The wilderness.—J.¢., the plains on which sheep were pastured.
Until he find it —Persistent and careful search (cf. Ezek. xxxiv. 6-11 /f.).

Ver. 5. Not mere self-interest, but love and pity, explain the gentleness with which the
shepherd treats the sheep when he finds it (cf. Isa. xl. 1, 2). “No blows are given for the
straying—no hard words; mercy to the lost one—and joy within himself—are the shepherd’s
feelings ; the sheep is weary with long wanderings—he gives it rest” (Alford).

Ver. 6. When he cometh home, etc.—The joy is so great that it needs to be imparted.
Those who have fellow-feeling with the shepherd, who are animated by the compassion he
manifested, rejoice with him ; so would the Pharisees and scribes have done, when they saw
sinners recovered from the error of their ways, if they had partaken of the spirit of Christ.

Ver. 7. Joy in heaven.—A glimpse into the unseen world (cf. Matt. xviii. 10). Just
persons.—The reference is to those who thought themselves righteous, and who had never
been guilty of the conduct figuratively represented by the straying of the sheep. The truly
penitent enter into a more blessed condition than that of those who have never risen above
a higher standard of conduct than that of mere legal obedience.

Ver. 8. Ten pieces of silver.—This parable illustrates the prectousness of the human soul.
The loss of one out of ten is a much more serious one than that in the preceding parable.
Perhaps the ten coins were a set worn as an ornament, according to the custom of Hastern
women. The piece of money specified is the Greek drachma (worth about 8d.), and equal to
the Roman penny (denarius). Light a candle.—Rather, ‘“‘a lamp” (R.V.). The houses in the
East were commonly without windows.

Ver. 9. Which I had lost.—Observe the difference between this and “ which was lost” in
ver.6. In the one case the bewildered animal wanders away, in the other the piece of silver
is an inanimate thing, unconscious of its own value and loss. A certain fitness in the com-
parison to a coin arises from the latter bearing the image and superscription of a king. So,
too, the soul though lying in the dust, and unaware of its miserable state, bears traces upon
it of Him in whose image it was made and to whom it belongs.

Ver. 10, In the presence of the angels.—And shared by them, as is implied in the words
“ Rejoice with me.”

Ver. 11. A certain man.—Our heavenly Father, since Christ never represents Himself thus.
He always speaks of Himself as a Son, though often as a possessor, or lord. Two sons.—Z.e.,
to represent the professedly religious and openly irreligious classes of men, whose presence
led to the discourse. Both are Jews. The idea that the elder son represents the Jews and
the younger the Gentiles seems foreign to the parable ; for (1) the Jew can scarcely be said
to be the elder son, as the call of Abraham took place a couple of thousand years after the
Creation, and (2) the reception of the Gentiles into the kingdom of God was not yet plainly
revealed. But in character the sons may be said to be representative of mankind, for we
have in them examples of two great phases of alienation from God—the elder is blinded by
his self-righteousness, the younger degraded by his unrighteousness.

Ver. 12. The younger.—As the more thoughtless and easily deceived. Give me the portion
etc.—Not an unheard-of request, though it does not seem to have been customary among the
dews to do as here described. Something like it, however, occurs in the life of Abraham


402


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XV.





(Gen. xxv. 6). The law prescribed that two-thirds fell to the elder son (Deut. xxi.17). “In
this case the father reserves to himself the power during his life over the portion of the
first-born ” (ver. 31) (A/ford). The yielding to the request of the younger son strikingly sets
forth the permission of free-will to man, and also the fact of God’s bestowing many gifts
upon even the unthankful and disobedient. The request indicates a state of mind from
which every kind of sin takes its rise—the desire to be independent of God and to enjoy a
liberty which is just another name for licence. So was it with our first parents, who were
attracted by the prospect of “ being as gods, knowing good and evil.”

Ver. 13. Not many days.—The purpose he had had in view was soon disclosed. Far
country.—To be rid of all restraint. The distance to which he wanders suggests a likeness
to the strayed sheep of the earlier parable (ver. 4); his manner of life in the far country
recalls the condition of the silver piece lying in the dust (ver. 8). Wasted.—From this he
gets his name of “the prodigal,” the waster (Latin, prodigus).

Ver. 14. When he had spent all.—Probably very soon, as the course of sin is usually a brief
one. Began.—This mark: a crisis in his life. To be in want.—He had “spent his money for
that which is not bread” (Isa. lv. 2). ‘This famine is the shepherd seeking his strayed
sheep—the woman sweeping to find the lost. The famine, in the interpretation, is to be
subjectively taken—he begins to feel the emptiness of soul which precedes either utter
abandonment or true penitence” (Alford). In this figurative manner the weariness and
disgust which naturally result from a sinful course are set forth.

Ver. 15. Joined himsclf.—The word is a strong one--‘‘ he clave unto ’”’—became a hanger-on
—sponged upon another, and was forced to do dirty work. /\ eitizen.—Rather, “‘ one of the
citizens” (R.V.) We may take this “citizen” as representing the tyrannous power of sin.
The Prodigal had broken away from a loving father, and found himself in subjection to a hard
task-master. To feed swine.—Doubly “‘egrading—the task of a slavo, and one intensely
repulsive toa Jew. This represents the degradation at the end of a sinful course to which
a man is subjected, as it were, against his will.

Ver. 16. He would fain—He craved and got his desire (cf. for similar use of the verb,
chap. xvi. 21). He was driven to assuage his hunger with what could scarcely be called food.
Husks.—Not pods of some othe fruit, hxt the fruit of the carob-tree, used for feeding
domestic animals. No man gavo.—J.’., anything else, anything better. It is absurd to
imagine that it means “No man gave even husks to him,” He could provide himself with
them, even if the swine were thereby stinted in their food. The desertion by those on whom
he had wasted his substance, and whom he had probably reckoned as friends, is a very
natural touch in the parable.

Ver. 17. He came to himself.—Sin is in reality a being beside oneself: true life is that
lived, not in gratification of sclf, but in subordination to God and in communion with God.
Here we are evidently on a highe: spiritual plane than in the two preceding parables; the
whole process of loss and recovery is transacted within the soul of che Prodigal. It is of his
own free-will that he wanders away; but then, his return is voluntary also, How many hired
servants !—His own hard lot asa hired servant reminds him of the happier condition of those
of the same class in his father’s house. And I.—Who am still a son, though an unworthy
one.

Ver. 18, I have sinned.—Perhaps rather, “I sinned ”—referring not merely to the riotous
life he had lately led, but to the initial act of leaving his father’s house (so in ver. 21).
Against heaven and before *ice.—In the spiritual interpretation these two are one and the
same ; it is the parabolical form that necessitates the double expression.

Ver. 19. It is noticeable that he nowhere gives up his sonship. He uses the address
“father,” and asks to be reinstated in his place as a son (though he confesses that he is
unworthy of it), For even in the request which he thinks of proffering, but which he after-
wards omits, he does not wish to become a hired servant, but to be made as one of the hired
servants.

Ver. 20. Arose and came.—Not always the weual course followed, but certainly the proper
course—for the Prodigal is now an example of penitence. A great way off.—The idea is
suggested by the father’s having been on the outlook for the son’s return, and of his having
been animated by a love which made bim quick-sighted to discern the distant figure of the
penitent Prodigal. The running to welcome, and the touching signs of joy at the son’s
return, correspond to the “ seeking ” in the other parables, for they strengthen the resolution
of the penitent, which might not have been strong enough to enable him to carry through
his purpose.

Ver. 21. It is significant that he omits the request to be made “as a hired servant.” The
love with which he was met awakens the filial spirit in all its intensity, and any such request
would have been a kind of outrage.

Ver. 22. Said to his servants,—His joy is too full to allow him to answer his son; he
instantly issues orders to the servants to celebrate his return. Bring forth.—A better
reading is, “ Bring forth quickly” (R.V.). Best robe.—For him who came in rags. “ Best.


403


ee ee Ses ty Pre


CHAP. XV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





—Lit., ‘‘first.” No reference to a dress he had formerly worn as a son—for it was as a son
that he had left his father’s house. Ring, etc.—Signs of being a free man. Slaves wore no
rings and went bare-footed.

Ver. 23. The fatted calf.—Reserved for some special feast or anniversary. Let us eat and
be merry.—Joy again alluded to as resulting from recovery of the lost, as in vers.6,9. “Us”
—including servants, as entering into the joy of their Lord (Matt. xxv. 21, 22).

Ver. 24. Was dead.—Cf. Rev. iii. 1; Eph. v. 14, ii. 1; Rom. vi. 13, for similar comparison
of a state of impenitence to that of death. :

Ver. 25. Now, his elder son.—A reproof to the Pharisees and scribes. Some have wished
the parable had closed with ver. 24. But the elder son is still a son and in need of repent-
ance. In one respect he is, though less heinously guilty than his brother, in greater danger,
because of the risk of self-deception. “As regards the penitent, this part of the parable sets
forth the reception he meets with from his fellow-men, in contrast to that from his father”
(Afford). In the field.—Probably working—part of the hard, but self-chosen service of
which he complains in ver. 29. Music and dancing.—Surely this mention of appropriate
signs of joy on such a solemn occasion should prove that these amusements are not
necessarily worldly, or sinful, or unbecoming, for a Christian. Meant.—Lit., “might be.”

Ver. 27. Safe and sound.—Lit., ‘‘in good hcalth.” ‘A very prosaic rendering of the
father’s enthusiastic and even poetical utterances” (vers, 24, 32) (Speaker's Commentary).
No stress need, however, be laid upon this—the servant simply describes matters as they
appear from his point of view.

Ver. 28. Entreated him.—As Christ was now by this parable entreating the Pharisees and
scribes.

Ver. 29. Lo, these many years, etc.—He does not say “father,” and he speaks of his past
service as having been like that of a slave. Neither transgressed.—The virtual boast of the
Pharisaic party (cf. chap. xviii. 11, 12). Never gavest me a kid.—This answers to the younger
son’s “ give me” (ver. 12); a similar sin in both cases—a separation of their interests from
the interests of their father. My friends.—Respectable people, very different from my
brother’s disreputable associates. The “kid” is contrasted with “the fatted calf.”

Ver. 30. Thy son.—He will not say “ my brother.” Devoured thy living.—Implying blame
to his father for giving him the means and opportunity for running riot. With harlots.—A
detail implied, perhaps, in ver. 13, but out of place on his brother’s lips. Only the bitterest
jealousy could have prompted the reproach. Killed for him.—‘ Making him not only my
equal, but my superior,”

Ver. 31. Son.—The father still affectionate even towards the self-righteous and uncharitable
son. Ever with me.—No need for extraordinary joy in his case. All that I have.—Rather
“all that is mine is thine” (R.V.). The younger son had wasted his share; all that the
father had was the elder son’s. There is no impoverishment to the righteous in consequence
of favour shown to sinners (cf. Matt. xx. 14).

Ver. 32. It was meet.—The form is general—“it was a right” thing—justifying the joy
and leaving it still open for the elder son to join in it, Thy brother.—In contrast with the
words “thy son” (ver. 30).


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—10.


The Lost Sheep and the Lost Coin.—These parables illustrate the fact that a
more active interest in any possession is aroused by the very circumstance that
it is lost. The sheep that is lost is not on that account disregarded by the
shepherd, but receives for the time greater attention than those that remain
in the fold. The piece of money that has gone a-missing becomes on that very
account of greater immediate importance to the woman than all she has safe
in her jar in the cupboard. 80 it is with God. The very circumstance that
men have strayed from Him evokes in Him a more manifest and active solicitude
in their behalf.

I. God suffers loss in every sinner that departs from Him.—tTo the Pharisaic
mind this was a new light on the character of God. The Pharisce himself
wrusted little to tenderness, much to rigid law. Naturally he thought of God also


404


‘i


= =


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XV.
a ES a A a SE cee ee


as standing upon His rights, enforcing His will by compulsion, and with equanimity
punishing and driving into permanent exile those who had strayed from Him.
It is a revelation to them to hear that the lostness of the sinful is God’s loss ; that
God suffers more than the sinner in the separation. For God loves the sinner,
and this love is wounded, whereas the sinner has no love for God that can be
wounded by separation. It is God who suffers, and not the heartless sinner,
who, without a thought of the wounds he is inflicting, goes his own wretched
way, and courts the destruction which Christ died to save him from. All the
broken-heartedness of parents who, year by year, watch the failure of their efforts
to lead some misguided child to well-doing ; all the crushing anguish of wives
who see their husbands slowly hardening in vice and sinking out of the reach
of their love ; all the varied misery that love must endure in this sinful world i
is after all but the reflection of what Infinite Love suffers in sympathy with
every sinner who spurns it and chooses death. Look at the sorrow of God in
Christ, and say whether the loss which God suffers in your separation from Him
is true or feigned.

Il. The very fact of our being lost excites action of a specially tender kind
towards us.—God does not console Himself for our loss by the fellowship of
those who have constantly loved Him. He does not call new creatures into
being to fill up the blank we have made by straying from Him. He would
rather restore the most abandoned sinner than blot him from his place to
substitute an archangel. So long as things go smoothly, and men by nature
love God, and seek to do His will, there is no anxiety, no meeting of emergencies
by unexpected effort, hidden resources, costly sacrifice. But when sin brings
into view all that is tragic, and when utter destruction seems to be man’s
appointed destiny, there is called into exercise the decpest tenderness, the
utmost power of the Divine nature. This appears in—(1) the spontaneity of the
search God institutes for the lost. The shepherd, missing one of his flock,
straightway goes in search of it. He does not expect that it will seek him; he
goes after it. He knows the recovery of the sheep depends wholly on himself,
and he prepares for trouble, provocation, risk. And so God is as truly before-
hand with the sinner as the shepherd with the sheep. The initiative is God’s,
and all that you desire to do in the way of return to righteousness is prompted
by Him. He has already sufficiently shown that He is alive to the emergency
and that no trouble is too great, no sacrifice too great, while there is a possibility
of saving the human soul. (2) God’s search is also persistent. The woman of
the parable sweeps out every dusty corner; she shakes out every article of
clothing; she lifts boxes that have not been lifted for years; she carefully
searches drawers where she knows the coin cannot be; she reads the face of
every one who has come near her house for a month; she exhausts every
possibility of finding her piece of money. And so God makes diligent search.
He leaves no stone unturned. With active, intelligent, unwearied search, He
strives to win the sinner to purity and love. Christ astonished men on earth
by the company into which He found His way, and by the affection with which
spoke to low and worthless people ; and so does He still, by means less observable,
but equally efficient, seek to win men to the recognition of His love, and of all
the good He makes possible.

III. The exceeding joy consequent on the restoration of the sinner.—The
joy is greater than that over “the just which need no repentance,” because the
effort to bring it about has been greater, and because for a time the result has
been in suspense. So that when the end is attained there is a sense of clear
gain. The value of the unfallen soul may intrinsically be greater than the value
of the redeemed ; but the joy is proportioned, not to the value of the article,
but to the amount of the anxiety that has been spent upon it. To the sinner,

405


aie
3


CHAP. XV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


then, these parables say, It is your unspeakably happy privilege to give God joy.
There is no joy comparable to the joy of successful love; of love, that is to
say, not only recognised and returned, but which succeeds in making the object
of it as happy as it desires, and does so after many repulses and misunder-
standings and hazards. This is God’s greatest joy. When God succeeds in
securing the happiness—the inward purity and rectitude, and therefore the
happiness-—of any one who has been estranged from Him, there is joy in


heaven. What can more worthily give joy to intelligent beings than the
increase of goodness? This joy we have it in our power to give to God.—
Dods.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 1—10.


Vers. 1, 2. Christ in Society.—It is mistake could be greater. He nowhere


astonishing how often we read of Jesus
being at feasts. He began His ministry
by attending a wedding. Matthew
made Him a feast, and He went and
sat down among the publican’s motley
guests. He invited Himself to the
house of Zaccheeus, another publican.
Indeed, His eating with this class of
persons came to be notorious. But
He repeatedly dined with Pharisees as
well. There was no fear of Him, in
any company, obscuring His testimony
for God. In these occasions of table-
talk He dignified life, and embraced
golden opportunities of doing good.
You will be surprised to find how many
of His words are spoken to His fellow-
guests at meals. Some of His most
priceless sayings, which are now the
watchwords of His religion, were uttered
in these commonplace circumstances.
—Statlker.


Receiving Sinners.—We are indebted
to the Pharisees for this testimony to
our Lord, and His way with men. He
takes His text from their lips. They
would make Him a sinner because He
seeks to save such sinners as they have
never thought of saving. ‘They would
have it understood that He prefers
such sinners; that these form the best
material out of which His disciples
and apostles can be made. And much
preaching founded upon this course of
action of our Lord has tended, unin-
tentionally, to give a similar impression
in these and other times, as if the best
preparations for conversion and a holy
life were a gross and degraded life! No


406


teaches that reckless and open vice is
the best way to meet Him, or the best
prior education for His disciples.—
D. McColl.


Publicans attracted to Jesus.—The
tax-gatherers were the home heathen
of Palestine, and none were more
scorned than they. These and other
outcasts were drawn to Jesus. They
kept far from other religious teachers,
but somehow they could not help being
drawn to Him. He had a magnet-
like power over them. Just as the
swallow is drawn to the sunny south,
as the flower turns to the sun, and the
chicken to the mother bird, so great
sinners, shunning others, turned to
Jesus in the days of His flesh. But
the most decent and religious people
murmured scornfully. To defend
Himself and shame them Jesus spoke
the three parables of grace in this
precious chapter.— Wells.


It is an Epitome of the Gospel.
Originally, it was the saying of foes, not
of friends. In this cavil there spoke
for once the commonly suppressed voice
of a self-ignorant and self-flattering
world. The world exactly inverts the
judgment of God and heaven. God
hates the sin, yet loves the sinner; the
world casts out the sinner, but will eat
and drink with the sin.

I. The world’s definition of “sinners.”
—Those who have transgressed the
world’s morals. The world has its
tariff of sins, and its register of sinners.
The solemn saying of the Old Testa-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP; XV.





ment is forgotten by the religious
world, ‘‘ By Him actions are weighed.”
Weighed, not counted. Weighed,
rather than measured.

Iil. They meant, This man loves
the company of the wicked.—“ A man
is known by the company he keeps.”
-\ taunt which found no sanction from
His judges. Pilate and Herod agreed
as to His innocence. The taunt has
had no acceptance with posterity.

III. The words are true in their
amplitude, and in their grandeur.—
Christ refuses none. With what mind
on their part? With what view on
His? Not resolving to continue in
their sins. Not to bid them sin on.
He takes them to forgive, to heal, to
help, to go and sin no more. Christ
receives no man except to rid him of
his sin, and because that is his desire.
— Vaughan.


Jesus Christ ignoring Social Distinc-
tions.—In reference to the various
classes of Palestinian society Jesus was
not the slave of custom or class. He
broke through them in obedience to
the requirements of ‘‘ judgment, mercy,
and faith.” Scribe and Pharisee stood
aloof from Him. Publican and sinner
drew near. But His “‘ whosoever will”
was equally for all. There was to be
no respect of persons. Just as gladly
would He have ministered in the
fellowship and ministries of the faith
to Pharisee as to publican. He
often did, and does so still. Barriers
are self-erected. Beneath all social
accidents were souls. And these, in
their priceless value, would survive
earthly distinctions. He traversed
social distinctions in the interest of
that higher society which might, with-
out clashing with them, be inclusive of
all. In so acting He ran counter to
the principles and narrow-minded, cold
hearted practice of exclusionists. In
His love for man, He aroused the
hostile opposition and criticism of cer-
tain men. Custom, indeed, is not to be
violated for the sake of singularity.
Bat the example of Christ justifies the
doing of it for the sake of the great


things of “‘ judgment,mercy, and faith.”
—Campbell.


Ver. 1. Holiness United with Love.—
That which attracted publicans and
sinners to Jesus was holiness, united
with love; they were repelled by the
haughtiness of the Pharisees. Goodncss
appeared to them in a guise they had
never before known or even dreamed of.


“ To hear Him.” —Not merely to see
His miracles. The motive that drew
them was of a spiritual character, and
contrasted strikingly with that of many
who came to the Saviour. Hence, He
“received ” them, welcomed them, and
opened up to them the treasures of
Divine love.

It was precisely these who felt they
had no means to build the tower, no
forces to meet the opposing king; and
hence they sought resources from One
who manifested power, and through
Him desired “conditions of peace.”

The humble hear and learn; they
find the grace of God in the word
issuing from the lips of Jesus. The
proud murmur and condemn; their
dark understandings would fain quench
the love of God where it shines most
brightly.


Ver, 2. “ Murmured.”—A twofold
ground of offence: 1. Jesus receives
persons of evil name and repute.
2. He allows Himself to be received by
them, and consents to sit at their
tables,


“This man receiveth.’—They were
scandalised at His procedure, and in-
sinuated—on the principle that a man is
known by the company he keeps—that
He must have some secret sympathy
with their character. But what a truth
of unspeakable preciousness do their
lips, as on other occasions, uncon-
sciously utter !—Brown.


A Culpable Pride.—There is truth in
the Pharisaic principle of abstaining
from intercourse with sinful and defiled
men, if it proceed from anxiety to avoid


407


<


CHAP. XV.


being tempted by their sins. In them,
however, it was the result of haughty
feeling which made them keep at a
distance from such unfortunate men,
even when their minds showed an in-
clination towards something better.—
Olshausen.


Christ Eating with Sinners.—The
words were meant as a _ reproach.
1. How much Christianity has done
to change the prevailing estimate of
men and things! It is no reproach
now for a teacher or minister of reli-
gion to seek out the sinful. Such
conduct is understood now, thanks to
the gospel. 2. Still, we are cruel in
our treatment of sinners in private and
common life. How severely do we
judge when we ourselves are not at the
bar. To “receive sinners and eat with
them ” is still a crime in Christendom.
And, of course, in some senses it would
be a crime. To prefer by choice the
company of the immoral: this would
be a just reproach—no virtue, but the
very contrary. All depends upon the
motive. If we would imitate Jesus in
His treatment of sinners, let us imitate
Him by His grace in His principle and
in His motive. 3. He was not the
friend of the sin, but the friend of the
sinner. He would not leave the sinner
in his sin. Not to embolden them in
evil, but to win them for good. Sothe
friend of the sinner must, to be Christ-
like, be the foe of the sin.— Vaughan.


Vers. 4-10. The Lost One Sought.—
The twin parables have much in
common. They both exhibit the seeking
love of God, Jesus shames the Phari-
sees for their pride and holding aloof.
He gives them two short parables,

I. The lost one.—The two pictures
of outdoor and indoor life were very
familiar to His hearers. It is a figure
of all, even of the Pharisees, if they
had only known it.

II. Who seeks it.—The seeking
Shepherd is a common figure in Church
windows and in sacred pictures. Jesus
is still seeking the lost,—by His Spirit,
in His Church, through His people.

408


ne o hy


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,


III. How He seeks it.—The Incar-
nation, The earthly life. The aton-
ing death. The Church, too, holds up
the candle of the Word. Joy fills His
heart at the discovery and restoration
of even one wandering sheep, one lost
coin.— Watson.


Christ’s Sympathy for Sinners.
I. A yearning sympathy.
II. An active sympathy.
III. A tender sympathy.
IV. A joyful sympathy.
Walker.


The Lost Sheep and the Lost Coin.
I. Love sorrowing.
II. Love seeking.

III. Love rejoicing.

Lessons.—1. The value of the soul.
2. God does not need to be made
willing to save you. 3. Here is un-
surpassed encouragement for every
penitent.— Wells.


God’s Love for the Lost.
I. The loss.
II. The finding.
III. The rejoicing.—Zaylor.


The Persistence of Thwarted Love.—
I. But first let me say a word or two
about the more general thought brought
out in both these clauses—of the Shep-
herd’s search. Now, beautiful and
heart-touching as that picture is, of the
Shepherd away amongst the barren
mountains searching minutely in every
ravine and thicket, it wants a little
explanation in order to be brought
into correspondence with the fact which
it expresses. For His search for His
lost property is not in ignorance of
where it is, and His finding of it is not
His discovery of His sheep, but its
discovery of its Shepherd. We have to
remember wherein consists the loss
before we can understand wherein
consists the search. Now, if we ask
ourselves that question first, we get a
flood of light on the whole matter.
The great hundredth Psalm, according
to its true rendering, says, “It is He
that hath made us, and we are His;


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XV.


————————————


.. we are... the sheep of His pas-
ture.” But God’s true possession of
man is not simply the possession in-
herent in the act of creation. For
there is only one way in which spirit
can own spirit, or heart can possess
heart, and that is through the volun-
tary yielding and love of the one to the
other. So Jesus Christ, who, in all
His seeking after us men, is the voice
and hand of Almighty Love, does not
count that He has found a man until
the man has learned tolove Him. For
He loses us when we are alienated from
Him, when we cease to trust Him.
Therefore the search which, as being
Christ’s is God’s in Christ, is for love,
for trust, for obedience. If, then, the
Shepherd’s seeking is but a tender
metaphor for the whole aggregate of
the ways by which the love that is
Divine and human in Jesus Christ
moves round about our closed hearts,
seeking for an entrance, then, surely
the first and chiefest of them, which
has its appeal to each of us as directly
as to any man that ever lived, is that
great mystery that Jesus Christ, the
eternal Word of God, left the ninety
and nine that were safe on the high
pastures of the mountains of God, and
came down among us, out into the
wilderness “to seek and to save that
which was lost.” And, that method
of winning—I was going to say, of
earning—our love comes straight in
its appeal to every single soul on the
face of the earth. Do not say that
thou wert not in Christ’s heart and
mind when He willed to be born and
willed ‘to die. He seeks us by every
record of that mighty love that died for
us, even when it is being spoken poorly,
and with many limitations and imper-
fections. And here, in our midst, that


unseen Form is passing along and.


speaking to our hearts, and the Shep-
herd is seeking His sheep. He seeks
each of us by the inner voices and emo-
tions in our hearts and minds, by those
strange whisperings which sometimes
we hear, by the suddenly upstarting
convictions of duty and truth which
sometimes, without manifest occasion,


flash across our hearts. He is seeking
us by our unrest, by our yearnings after
we know not what, by our dim dissatis-
faction, which insists upon making itself
felt in the midst of joys and delights,
and which the world fails to satisfy as
much as it fails to interpret. He seeks
us by the discipline of life, for I believe
that Christ is the active providence of
God, and that the hands that were
pierced on the Cross do move the wheels
of the history of the world, and mould
the destinies of individual spirits.

II. And now, in the second place, a
word about the search that is thwarted.
“If so be that He find.” That is an
awful if, when we think of what lies
below it. The thing seems an absur-
dity when it is uttered, and yet it is a
grim fact in every life—viz., that
Christ’s effort can fail, and be thwarted.
Not that His search is perfunctory or
careless, but that we shroud ourselves
in darkness through which that love
can find no way. God appeals to us,
and says, ‘‘ What more cowld have been
done to My vineyard that I have not
done unto it?” His hands are clean,
and the infinite love of Christ is free
from all blame, and it all lies at our
own doors. J must not dwell upon the
various reasons which lead so many men
among us—as, alas! the utmost charity
cannot but see that there are—to turn
away from Christ’s appeals, and to be
unwilling to “have this Man” either
“to reign over them ” or to save them.
One great reason is because you do not
believe that you need Him. Some of
us think we are in the flock when we
are not, Some of us have no inclina-
tion for the sweet pastures that He
provides, and would rather stay where
weare. We donot need todo anything
to put Him away. It is a very easy
matter to turn away from the Shep-
herd’s voice. “‘ Icalled, and ye refused.
I stretched out My hands, and no man
regarded.” Thatisall! Thatis what
you do, and that is enough.

IIT. So, lastly, the thwarted search
prolonged. “Till He find!” That is
a wonderful and a merciful word. It
indicates the infinitude of Christ’s


409


CHAP. XV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





patient forgiveness and perseverance.
We tire of searching. ‘‘Can a mother
forget” or abandon the seeking after a
lost child? Yes! if it has gone on for
so long as to show that further search
is hopeless, she will go home and nurse
her sorrow in her heart. For that is
another thing that this word “ till”
preaches to us—viz., the possibility of
bringing back those who have gone
farthest away and have been longest
away. The world has a great deal to
say about incurable cases of moral
obliquity and deformity. Christ knows
nothing about ‘incurable cases,”—
Maclaren.


“That which waslost.”—-None of these
parables is meant to set forth with
completeness either what wanderers
have to do to go back to God, or what
God has done to bring wanderers back
to Himself. If this had been remem-
bered, many misconceptions would
have been avoided. They were meant
to show us that a human instinct
which prizes things lost, because they
are lost, has something corresponding
to it in the Divine nature, and so to
vindicate the conduct of Christ.

I. The varying causes of loss.-—
The sheep, the coin, the son—<cach was
lost. But in each case, the reason for
the loss was different. The sheep was
heedless. It was lost through heed-
lessness. Many men live just so, and,
all unwitting, wander from the right
road. How considerate of our Saviour
to put this explanation of men’s condi-
tion in the foreground. In the second
parable, the drachma did not lose itself,
but, by the law of gravitation, rolled
into a dark corner. It had no power
of resistance. So there are people who
are things rather than persons, so
entirely have they given up their wills
and so absolutely do they let them-
selves be determined by circumstances.
There are masses of men who have no
power toresist temptation. Thisthought
lightens the darkness of much of the
world’s sin. The third parable is a
picture. The other two are parabolical
representations ; this is the thing itself.

-.410


The exercise of self-will, impatience of
control—these are causes of loss that
underlie the others, and which make
for every one of us the sinfulness of
sin. It is rebellion, and it is rebellion
against a Father’s love. There is the
individual choice in each case, desiring
a separation, aud kicking against con-
trol.

If. The varying proportions of loss
and possession.—A hundred, ten, two.
One per cent, ten per cent, fifty per
cent; a trifle—more serious—heart-
breaking. The ascending proportion
suggests increasing pains and anxiety.
There is something in human nature
which makes anything that is lost
precious by reason of its loss. Its
absolute value may be little: its relative
worth is great. Divine love goes after,
not the greatest world, but the lost
world.

ILI. The varying glimpses we have
here into God’s claims upon us and His
heart.—Ownership describes His rela-
tion to us in the first two parables: love
is the word that describes it in the
third. It is a most blessed and heart-
melting thought that God accounts
Himself to have lost something when
a man goes away from Him. God
prizes us, is glad to have us, feels a
sense of incompleteness in His _pos-
sessions when men depart from Him.
Think of the greatness of the love into
which the ownership is merged, as
measured by the infinite price which
He has paid to bring us back. Let. it
lead us all to say, “I will arise and go
to my Father.—Jbid.


The Twin Parables. — These two
parables are an inseparable pair. They
are a double star; you cannot tell how
much light comes from the one, or how
much from the other.

I. Compare their structure.— 1. They
are alike.—In each there is a loss, a
seeking,a joyful finding. 2. They differ
in the extent of the loss, the manner
of the loss, and the toil of recovery.

II. Compare their teaching.—
1. They are alike in teaching the lesson
as to the lost condition of the sinner,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XV.





the willingness and power of God to
save the sinner, and the importance
with which God and angels regard each
sinner’s salvation. 2. They give
different views of the sinner. He is
wayward, weak, and foolish, like a
sheep. He is dead and helpless, like the
tarnished coin. The shepherd repre-
sents Christ’s active and suffering work
for man’s salvation; the woman’s
work illustrates better the work of
salvation in the soul itself—enlighten-
ing, cleansing, transforming work,
necessary to fit it for close relationship
with God.—Taylor.


Vers. 1-7. The Lost Sheep.

I. The shepherd misses one when it
has strayed from the flock.

II. He cared for the lost sheep.
Although he possessed ninety and nine,
he was not content to let one go.

III. He left the ninety and nine for
the sake of the one that had wandered.

IV. When he finds it he does not
punish and upbraid it.

V. He lays the sheep upon his
shoulder.

VI. Far from being oppressed by the
burden, he rejoices when he feels its
weight upon his shoulder.

VII. He invites his neighbours to
rejoice with him over his success.—
Arnot.


Ver. 4. The Bewildered, the Uncon-
scious, and the Voluntary Sinner.—The
parable of the Lost Sheep represents
the stupid and bewildered sinner ; that
of the Lost Piece of Money, the sinner,
unconscious of himself and of his own
real worth ; that of the Prodigal Son
the conscious and voluntary sinner, the
most aggravated case.—Al/ord.


“ What man ?”—J esusappeals to those
who had condemned His conduct, and
asks whether they do not in the lower
order of things usually manifest the
pity which they blame in Him.
“ Does not a shepherd show compassion
towards a sheep that has wandered
from the fold? Shall not I much more


show compassion to a poor, wandering
sinner?” It is pity rather than self-
interest that moves the shepherd, for
the loss of one out of a hundred sheep
would not be very serious. His kindly
feelings are excited towards the sheep
which has not the sense to find its way
back to the fold, and which cannot
defend itself against its enemies.


“In the wilderness.” —I.e., in the place
of pasturage, where they were safe.
The section of the nation who were
faithful to the law and to religious
duties, enjoyed means of grace which
those who had openly broken with the
covenant between God and His people
had deprived themselves. They were
in the place of pasturage, and if they
made diligent use of their advantages,
would certainly attain to salvation.—
Godet.


The Office of the Shepherd was to Seek
the Lost. It was the office of the shep-
herd to seek the lost sheep (Ezek. xxiii.
6, 11, 23), yet with this the Pharisees
and scribes found fault.


Vers. 5, 6. Love Manifested—The
loving heart of the shepherd is mani-
fested (1) in the perseverance with
which he seeks the wandering sheep ;
(2) in his carrying the exhausted animal
upon his own shoulders; (3) in the joy
with which he bears the burden ; (4) in
his summoning his friends and neigh-
bours to partake in his happiness.


Ver. 5. “ Found it.”—It is one by
one, and not in masses, that souls are
saved. Jesus saves the Samaritan
woman by convincing of the depth of
her need, and leading her to seek the
Living Water ; He saves Zaccheeus by
inviting him to receive Him into his
house as his Guest and Redeemer. He
saves Nicodemus by showing Him the
necessity of being born again before he
could enter into the kingdom of heaven;
and He saves Mary Magdalene by de-
livering her from the power of seven
evil spirits.


411


. CHAP. XV.


ae


(aa ro


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





“ On His shoulders.”—For He bare
our sins in His own body on the tree
(1 Pet. ii. 24; Isa. liti, 4-6; Heb. ix.
28).


Ver. 6. “ Rejoice with Me.”—It is a
beautiful principle of our nature that
deep feeling, either of sorrow or of joy,
is almost too much for one to bear
alone, and that there is a feeling of
positive relief in having others to share
it. This principle our Lord here pro-
claims to be in operation, even in the
Divine procedure.— Brown.


Christ's Joy in Finding the Lost.—
Christ experienced a perfect rapture
of delight when He found a lost sheep ;
witness His bearing at the well of
Sychar, when His joy over the repent-
ance of the woman of Samaria made
Him forget hunger, insomuch that the
disciples wondered if any man had
given Him to eat. That joy, hoped
for or experienced, made all His
burdens light, made even the cross
itself, abhorrent to His _ sentient
nature, more than bearable. There-
fore, in drawing the picture of a faith-
ful Shepherd, He might with a good
conscience put in this trait, “ rejoicing.”
—Bruce.


Ver. 7. “I say unto you.”—Let us
not, in this “J say unto you” miss
a slight yet majestic intimation of the
dignity of His person: “‘ I who know,
I who, when I tell you of heavenly
things, tell you of Mine own (John i.
D1, iii. 11), announce to you this.”—
Trench.


“ Joy shall be in heaven.” —We can
scarcely avoid the thought that here
the prospect of that joy hovered before
His soul, which He, the Good Shepherd,
was especially to taste when He, after
finishing His conflict, should return
into the celestial mansion of His
Father, and should taste the joy pre-
pared for Him.—Van Oosterzee.


“ One sinner that repenteth.”’—He does
not joy over the sinner as a sinner, but


412


over him repenting. He joys over his
repentance, over the sinner ceasing to
be a sinner.


Unity of the Kingdom of the Good.—
The kingdom ol the good thus appears
as standing in mutual connection and
loving unity, so that if one member
rejoices, all members rejoice along with
it. Heaven and earth are joined
together by the bond of perfectness,
love.—Olshausen.


“ Need no repentance.”’—The Phari-
sees, indeed, were not called to manifest
a repentance like that of the publicans
and sinners, for they had kept from
gross vices; yet even in them a profound
change of heart was needed. They
murmured at that which caused great
joy in heaven, and thereby showed
how far they werefrom true communion
with God.


Something Higher than Legal Right-
eousness.—The ninety and nine just
persons are those who are righteous
according to the legal standard, than
which there is, however, something
higher, even as there is something more
inward. And unto this more blessed
condition the truly penitent sinner is
translated, so that his conversion ig
more a matter of rejoicing than the
strict observance of the law by others.
—Speaker’s Commentary.


Vers. 8-10. The Lost Coin.—A totally
distinct idea is conveyed by the parable
of the Lost Piece of Silver from that in
the parable of the Lost Sheep. Pity
moves the Shepherd ; _ self-interest
moves the woman to patient search.
And so Christ teaches that man has
value in the sight of God. He is made
in the image of God, he is destined for
service, and therefore God has need of
him.

I. The Owner of the silver piece as
representing God. 1. Her anwiety to
find. The coin, like the soul of man,
is valuable in itself; it is one of a
number, or set, and if it be lost the
store is broken in upon, and if it be


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XV.


i SS Ee ee, ee


not found, another may get it, whose
it is not. 2. Her diligence in seeking
—light brought into dark places, defile-
ment swept away. 3. Her success. 4.
Her joyfulness.

II. The silver piece as representing
the soul of man. 1. Its innate value.
2. Its unconsciousness of loss. 3. Its
helplessness, 4. Its proper place in
God’s keeping.


The parable teaches—

I. That man is lost—1. By ignor-
ance of the truth. 2. By falling into
vice. 3. By his own heedlessness.

II. That he may be found and re-
stored to his true place and value.

III. That his recovery occasions
joy.—1l. To himself. 2. To Christ.
3. Tc friends and neighbours. 4. To
angels and to the spirits of the just
made perfect.


Ver. 8. “ Ten pieces.” —The ten pieces
of silver indicate in passing that the
woman is not so rich as to be indifferent
to the loss of even one piece; that is,
one soul is estimated by the Spirit in
the Church, not in the proportion
which one piece would bear to the
hoard of a man with millions, but in
its proportion to the scanty store of
such a woman as this.—Stier.


“Piece of silver.”.—A drachma. Man,
made in the image of God, and bearing
a Divine superscription.


“ Sweep the house.” —The parable re-
ferring originally to the Jewish people,
the “‘house” may be taken as repre-
senting the Church; the lighting of
the candle and the sweeping, as repre-
senting the Spirit’s giving light to the
world, stirring up the dust of world-
liness which conceals the sinner’s true
worth, and so applying the truth that
he is found.


Ver. 10. “Joy in the presence of the
angels.”

I. God rejoices over returning sinners,
and that just because they were once
lost.


II. God delights to have the inhabit-
ants of heaven share in His gladness.
“Tf the ‘sons of God’ shouted for joy
and sang together at the first creation
(Job xxxviii. 7), by how much better
right when ‘a new creation’ had
found place, in the birth of a soul into
the light of everlasting life (Eph. iii. 10 ;
1 Pet. i. 12)” (Trench).


Joy Shared with the Angels.—Note
carefully the language here employed :
“in the presence of the angels of God.”
True to the idea of the parables, it is
the Great Shepherd, the Great Owner
Himself, whose properly the joy is over
His own recovered property: but so
vast and exuberant is it (Zeph. iii. 17),
that, as if He could not keep it to Him-
self, He calleth His whole celestial
family to rejoice with Him. In this
sublime sense it is joy before or “in
the presence of the angels”: they only
catch the flying joy, sharing it with
Him.— Brown.


An Unexpected Good.—The angels
delight in beholding a continued and
uninterrupted course of righteousness.
But yet in the deliverance of a sinner
God’s mercy shines out so brightly that
Christ attributes to angels a greater joy
in it, arising out of an unexpected good.


Divine Joy over Repenting Sinners.—
Not joy among the angels, but joy in


“the presence of the angels.” The joy
of God Himself.
I. What is implied in sinners


repenting ?—There are many incorrect
and superficial views on repentance.
Sorrow in consequence of sin has
nothing to do with repentance. A man
may even dislike sin and not experience
true repentance. Repentance is a
change of mind and heart, leading a
man to turn from sin and turn to God.
There must be both changes—in mind
and heart. Beliefs and sentiments in
regard to spiritual things must be re-
nounced, and others embraced in their
stead. The affections must cease to be
under a selfish or worldly bias, and
become directed to God and the things


413


CHAP. XV.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


ea


of God. This experience is sweeter to
God than even the songs of heaven.

II. What is implied in God rejoic-
ing ?—Absolutely there can be no
accession to the happiness of the ever-
blessed God, and yet there must be a
real meaning in this language. This
joy of God is the (1) joy of mantfested
mercy. He “ delighteth in mercy” and
in every opportunity for its exercise.
(2) Joy of gratified benevolence. God is


benevolent as well as merciful. He not
only pardons, but crowns with blessing.
(3) Joy of recovered possession. Man was
made for God—has wandered from God.
The bringing back of the wanderer, the
repairing of injury, the renewal of
what has been defaced, the healing
of the wounded—such a change the
all-loving Father cannot look upon
but with complacency and delight.—
Alexander.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.— Verses 11—82.


The Prodigal Son.—In the parable of the Prodigal Son we have the most
luminous statement anywhere to be found of the original development of evil in
the soul of man, and also of the awakening of those better elements in the nature
which prove the kinship between man and his Creator. The Prodigal, whose
story is given with such detail, serves two purposes: I. In the first part of his
career he is a warning—he is a typical sinner. II. In the second he is an
example—he is a model penitent. In the representation of the headstrong,
disobedient son we may recognise some of the lineaments of our own characters,
and learn to hate the sins that defile us; while in the account of his penitence
and humility we may see in what attitude of heart, and with what words upon
our lips, we should return to our heavenly Father.

I. The typical sinner.—The germ of evil—the bitter root from which so much
that is hurtful springs—is plainly disclosed to us here. It is self-will. The ill-
disposed son resented his father’s authority, and wished to be free to do what he
chose without being checked or remonstrated with—to feel, in short, that he
was his own master. Of course, in the actual human story a good deal might be
said in favour of his desire to live his life on his own responsibility. The condition
of childhood and tutelage, in the natural course of things, lasts only for a time, and
it is a mistake to prolong it unduly. A timo comes when each individual must
feel the responsibilities that belong to maturity of age, and when the continued
exercise of an external control does more harm than good. And it is a test of
the wisdom of a parent to know when to rolax the yoke which it wasa good thing
for his children to bear in their youth. The desire of the younger son to leave
his father’s house and to begin life on his own responsibility might have been a
perfectly natural and healthy feeling, and might have been gratified with the
full consent of his father, and with the best feelings on both sides. It is only
when we consider the spiritual meaning of the parable that the heinousness of
this son’s feelings and actions comes clearly into view. God is the father, man is
the son. The rule of the Father is a spiritual one: His voice is the voice of
conscience. The desire to escape from His control is wholly unjustifiable—it is
the desire to put pleasure in the place of duty, to shake off the obedience which
we as creatures owe to the law of God, and to defy all prohibitions that debar
our taking those things that seem good and pleasant to the eye. Subjection to
the will of God is the condition of our being and happiness: ruin and desolation
follow upon a repudiation of that condition. And if we interpret the parable
according to this principle, we may say that the fall of the younger son dates
from the moment when he claimed his rights—when he separated his interests
from the interests of his father—and not simply when, in the far country,
he wasted his substance in riotous living. Morally he was as guilty the day he
left his father’s house as he was at any subsequent period: all the evil was in


414


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XV.





germ in his heart which afterwards appeared in full maturity in his life. And
our understanding this fact makes clear to us the many peremptory statements
of the Word of God that all men, the respectable as well as the disreputable, are
guilty before God. The fact of disobedience and depravity may be more
apparent in some cases than in others, but that all are guilty is undeniable.
For if the essence of sin lies in self-will, who can claim to be innocent? There
are, of course, gross vices and disorderly habits into which we may never have
fallen, but the root of them all is in that self-will which has often led us wrong,
and self-righteous congratulations upon our comparative cleanliness are utterly
out of place in view of that besmirched goodness which is all that the best of us
have to boast of. The Prodigal being depicted by Christ as a typical sinner, we
are to expect to find in him sin at its very worst, and it is very instructive to
notice wherein the baseness of his conduct consists. In reading the parable, this
is perhaps the last thing in it that we notice—if, indeed, it does not escape our
notice altogether. We use the word “prodigal” glibly enough, and perhaps think
of it as meaning one who “breaks out” into a very disorderly life, and goes
on recklessly in the bad way. It has quite a different meaning. The Prodigal
is the waster; and though the word is not found in the parable, it is derived from
the phrase in ver. 13, “ he wasted his substance in riotous living.” His prodigality
is his sin: he begins by asking for a share of his father’s goods; he gets it,
carries it off, and wastes it. It is true that he wastes it in riotous living, but no
stress is laid on that circumstance. The elder brother, with a rancour which we
can easily understand and excuse, insists upon the shamelessness of the vice into
which the Prodigal had fallen; but even with him the essence of the fault he was
unwilling to allow to be forgiven did not lie in it, but is expressed in the words,
“he hath devoured thy living.” Nay, it is not the sensual life which the penitent
accuses himself of, or which the manner of his punishment accuses him of,
but the wasteful life. It is not said that he had become corrupt in soul,
or that his health was shattered by his riotous courses, but that his waste
brought him to want—that at last he would fain have filled his belly with
husks, and could not. It is not said that he was struck with remorse for the
consequencess of his evil passions, but only that he remembered that there was
bread enough, and to spare, for the servants at home. Is prodigality, then, such
a hateful thing that it should be branded as the lowest form of sin? Are there
not worse vices than it? Scarcely, if we look at it aright. It is selfishness, pure
and simple—the sin of an ignoble or undeveloped creature. Nothing baser can
be found than the resolution to indulge self, whatever it may cost—heedless of
how others may suffer, heedless of the loss involved, heedless of the voice of
conscience, and of the law of God, and of the terrible sentence of condemnation
which such conduct is bound to draw down upon itself. It is not without reason
that Christ lays stress upon the Prodigality of the Prodigal as the essence of his
baseness; for, compared with this utter and brutish selfishness, other forms of
sin have a certain air of dignity and superiority. Evil passions are often the
errors and backfalls of noble souls: they are often the perversion of feelings
which, if they had been rightly curbed and directed, would have brought no
shame with them. But the resolute determination to indulge self in spite of all
checks of conscience and religion is the final gulf in which the sinner lands; or,
to change the figure, it is the root from which everything that is mean, and foul,
and corrupt, springs, and by which it is fed. And therefore it is that all vital
religion begins with the breaking down of the stubborn will, and its subjection
to the wise and holy will of God. The Prodigal, then, is the typical sinner, on
whose tragical history all should look with sympathy and terror—with sympathy
because he is akin to us, and with terror because we perceive the likeness
between ourselves and him.


415





CHAP, XV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





The model penitent.—We may see in him the model penitent, and learn in
what attitude of soul, and with what words upon our lips, we should return to
our heavenly Father. In the manner in which the better mind was awakened
in him, he is not necessarily an example to us. It was when the sting of hunger,
of absolute beggary, penetrated his soul that he returned to himself and thought,
with scorn, of the evil courses that had brought him to that pass. But that is
only one of many ways in which the voice of God makes itself heard. There
are many other kinds of experience that lead to the wholesome change and
repentance manifested by this penitent. A severe illness, the sudden death of
a friend, an unexpected calamity, a word of warning, the discovery that an evil
habit has taken strong hold of us,—in some one of these ways the attention may
be directed to our spiritual danger, to the vast distance by which sin has separated
us from God, to the loss and risk to which we are exposed by remaining away
from Him and in rebellion against Him. But however it may be that we ‘“‘ come
to ourselves,” we can find no better pattern of penitence in word and action than
the Prodigal affords us in the later part of his history. We can be quite sure of
this, for Christ of set purpose draws the picture to show both how true repent-
ance expresses itself, and how it is received by the Almighty Father. Note—
1. The penitent Prodigal complains of no one but himself, and speaks of no un-
worthiness but his own. He says nothing against his evil companions —nothing
against those who lured him on to fresh courses of vice—nothing against the
citizen who left him to feed on husks—nothing of the false friends of whom no
man gave unto him; above all, he has nothing to say of the corruption of human
nature, or the corruption of things in general. He says that he himself is un-
worthy, as distinguished from honourable persons, and that he himself has sinned,
as distinguished from righteous persons. An outsider might notice that he was
weak, and had been led into sin by companions more hardened and corrupt than
himself. But that is nothing to him. All he knows is that he was led because
he was willing and eager to go, and he does not cast a stone at his associates
because he knows he was as morally guilty as any of them. This is a mark of
true penitence. Whenever you hear any one excusing himself or herself on the
ground of bad companions prevailing over a disposition that was naturally good,
you may surely conclude that the penitence is insincere, even if your suspicions
that such is the case have not been aroused by the whining tone of voice in which
the words are always uttered. There are no excuses that avail to cover guilt.
No stress of temptation, no inexperience, no inherent weakness of the nature, no
solicitation of evil companions—are worth mentioning. Thesinner has no right to
mention them, though the judge may take them into account. The fact remains,
when all is said, that the sinner is responsible for his guilt, and his only resource
is to make the manly, the simply true confession, ‘‘I have sinned; I am unworthy.”
And that is the hard lesson to learn, and the beginning of faithful lessons. All
right and fruitful humility, and purging of heart, is in that. Then too, (2) another
mark of true penitence is discernible in the shame of the Prodigal. He abases him-
self before his earthly father, as well as before God. That is well worth noticing.
“Tt is easy to call yourself the chief of sinners, expecting every sinner round you
to decline, or return the compliment ; but learn to measure the real degrees of
your own relative baseness, and to be ashamed, not only in heaven’s sight, but in
man’s sight, and redemption is indeed begun.” Observe the phrase, “I have
sinned against heaven”-—against the great law of that, and “ before thee”—
visibly degraded before my human sire and guide, unworthy any more of
being esteemed of his blood, and desirous only of taking the place I deserve
among his servants. This element of shame is essential to true penitence, and
often seems to be wanting in those who retail their religious experience, and
describe the depth of depravity in which they were once sunk. If their state-


416





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XV,





ments are true, shame should seal their lips. Another mark (3) of true
penitence is the desire to be henceforward subject to authority ; not simply to
have the past wiped out, and to be at liberty to enter on another course of self-
pleasing and freedom. The Prodigal had left a father’s house ; he desires to come
back to a master’s—“ make me as one of thy hired servants.” This is the spirit
in which he returns, though the actual request is not proffered. Redemption
must begin in subjection, and in the recovery of the sense of fatherhood and
authority ; just as all ruin and desolation began in the loss of that sense, “The
lost son began by claiming his rights. He is found when he resigns them. He
is lost by flying from his father, when his father’s authority was only paternal :
he is found by returning to his father, and desiring that his authority may
be absolute, as over a hired stranger.” By all these marks—by humbly
confessing our guilt, by feeling shame on account of it, and by sincerely
desiring to be ruled and controlled by the will of God—is that true penitence
to be recognised which will avail to open to us our Father’s house and our
Father’s heart.


Wandering.—After the younger son had secured his portion of the family
inheritance, he went out of his father’s house and ‘took his journey into a far
country.” At last he was free! The old restrictions that had fettered his
childhood and youth were thrown off; the old duties that had waited upon him
and dogged his comings and goings these many years were cast aside and forgotten ;
the monotonous orderliness and subordination of the peaceful home was a thing
of the past. Henceforth he was his own master, and the world was at his feet.
It is this delusive sense of freedom which lends a kind of enchantment to the
early stages of wrong-doing ; which persuades a man that he is evidencing his
strength; that he has ceased to be a child under a wiser care and guidance, and
become old enough to see the world and learn something of life. There are few
things more tragic than to hear young men talking about “ seeing life,” when it
is really death they are seeing. And when a man begins to talk much or loudly
about being free, it means, as a rule, that he is enslaving himself. At the start,
however, there is a delusive sense of freedom. It is no longer necessary to keep
hours, obey rules, perform tasks; the world is before one, with its mysteries, its
joys, and its vastness ; the home, with its subordination and restriction, is behind.
The young man has his portion in his wallet; his staff is in his hand; he has
strength, freshness, youth ; why should he not throw himself into the tumult of
life, and test his power? And so the wanderings begin, and the father’s house
grows dim and shadowy in a past that seems pallid and vague beside the rich,
full present. There is no rest, it is true; but there is the variety of constant
change. There is nothing by the way that satisfies; but expectation points on
to new sensations and experiences. From city to city, from country to country,
the ardent traveller makes his way. He has no plans; that is part of his
emancipation; he is doing as he pleases. If he wishes to stay, he stays; if
he feels impelled to go, he goes. He sees men about him who are tied to times
and places by duties, and whose necks are bowed by yokes of care; he has no
duties and cares. He has broken out of that venerable old prison in which so
many good but commonplace people have locked themselves all their lives; he
breathes the open air, and lives on the broad earth. If he wishes to pluck a
certain fruit, the fact that it is forbidden gives it a higher flavour ; if he is drawn
to do a certain deed, the fact that it is sinful makes it more attractive. He is
no longer a child in leading-strings, to be frightened by the bugaboos of law,
duty, morality, God; he is a grown man, and he has put away those childish
things. He is free! And all the time the father’s house, builded in purity, self-
sacrifice, love, and service, grows dimmer against the horizon, until it dips below

EE 417


CHAP. XV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





that faint, far line. He has exchanged it for the world, and henceforth the
world is his home.—‘‘ The Outlook.”


Vers. 17-19. The Prodigal Son.—This young man was like a good many
young men of our own time and all times. He thought himself too wise
to be longer guided by his father; he thought himself too strong to be longer
governed at home. So he went away from home. When he loses his money,
he loses his friends; for friends that are bought with money disappear when the
money disappears. He had never learned a trade; he had never acquired
the art of honest industry; he had-never acquiréd the simple ability to give
the community enough to make it worth while for the community to give
him enough to live on. I think he must have acquired one virtue patienbo—
or he could not have taken care of swine. Perhaps he acquired honesty also,
and would not even take the husks without permission. When he came to
himself, he said, “‘ What a fool I have been! Here I am, cold, houseless,
friendless, starving, and in my father’s house the servants have enough, and
more than enough. I will go back, and apply for a position as servant in my
father’s household.” What I want you to see is that this whole course of this
young man from his father was a course of folly, and the
return to his father was a return-to wisdom) It was when he came to himself
that he said, “TI will arise and go to my father.” Sin is madness. To say of a
man that he is shrewd, but wicked, is a lie. No shrewd man is wicked; no
wicked man is shrewd. Sin is short-sighted. To begin with, the man who dis-
regards God’s lawsisa foolish man. In one realm we all recognise that. No man
would call a man wise who disregarded the laws of nature. Weall understand that
natural laws do operate, and no man can say, “ I will act as though natural laws
do not operate.” But when we get the natural laws that come closest to us, then
we are more doubtful. Sanitary laws—those we think we can disregard. We
cannot violate the law of gravitation, but we can violate the laws of health, and
that will not hurt much! O fools and blind! The laws of God are immutable,
eternal, unchanging; no man can disregard them. Has not science taught us
even so much as that? And yet the world is full of men who disregard the moral
laws. If the policeman tells us to halt, most of us are wise enough to halt; we
do not attempt to brush him aside. But when God says, “ Halt!” when God
comes to a man who is going in the course that he knows is leading down to hell,
and thinks he can turn around and go up-hill again, and God says in his con-
science, ‘Stop! you are going in the wrong direction!” he brushes God aside
and goes on. ‘‘ The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God.” But there are
greater fools than he. There is the fool who says, ‘‘ There is a God; but I am
going to live as though there was not any ; and there are thousands of them—
tens of thousands of them.” But God is more than a Law-giver ; he is a Life-
giver ; and when a man tries to live without God, he is trying to live without the
source and reservoir of life. No man knows what life is. Science traces back
phenomena to their origin; but when it gets to this question—What is life? no
man can answer. Once, when a boy, starting at a brook that flowed through
my grandfather’s place, I followed it up for miles and miles, until at last I came
to its source, the little springs in the hills, and the little baby rivulets that,
flowing together, formed the beginning of that brook. But the water in the hill
that gave forth the springs was hidden from sight. I had gone as far as I could
when I got to the original springs; but what lay behind the springs, the
reservoir in the hill—that I could not see. So we have followed life back to its
source, traced the life of man through the various forms of science back to
the original germ, the very beginning; but there we are stopped. Where does
this spring, this baby rivulet, come from, which, growing larger and larger, makes


418


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XV.





this stream of wondrous life, with all the diversified phenomena, in one nation ?
It is God. God is life, and all phenomena are the manifestation and the revela-
tion of the Divine life that lives and moves in every living thing. Man can
make almost everything but life; that he cannot make. All vital phenomena
are the forth-putting of life—that is, the forth-putting of God Himself; and
when a man undertakes to live without God, do you know what he is doing?
He is trying to live without life. There is just so much God in you as there is
life in you. If you have some little intellect, that intellect is of God; if you
have some little affection, that affection is of God; if you have some little
honesty, that honesty is of God. And if you come up to this point, and stop and
say, ‘I will have no more of God,” you are saying, “I will have no more of life.”
That is what the wise Hebrew prophet meant, ‘“‘ Whoso findeth Me, findeth life ;
whoever sinneth against Me, wrongeth his own life. And they that hate Me
love death.” Oh, to live in this world that is all full of God, with God knocking
at every door, God knocking at the heart, the brain, the eye, the ear, God
knocking at every avenue of sense, every avenue of a man’s being, and then to say,
“T will live without Him”! But how many there are that are doing it! All
the desires that are in men, all their eager quest for wealth, all their strenuous
pushing for power, all their outreachings for knowledge, all their aspirations
and dreams of love and hope, all their desires to be in any respect greater
than they are to-day, are the hungerings of a child after its father. The
Law-giver and Life-giver, He is also the Love-giver. We have not sounded the
depths of the meaning of the simple text, “‘God is love.” It is the very nature
of the Divine to pour Himself out. He is not like Brahm—absorbed, silent,
abstracted ; He is for ever pouring Himself forth for the sake of others. He did
not wake up one morning six thousand years ago, and say, “ Go to, I will make
a world.” No, no; He has always been living ; the whole universe is full of the
Fatherhood of God; the universe is infinite as God is infinite, and love is infinite
as God is infinite; and it is the nature of God to be for ever pouring Himself out
that others may share His life, that others may be created to be life-bearers,
living souls. God is love. Then you may turn it about—Love is God. And all
the forms of love that life makes us familiar with are utterances of God. And
God is perpetually trying to tell us who He is and what He is, not merely through
the broken utterances of preachers, scribes, and prophets, but through the
eloquent voices of life. The babe looks up into its mother’s eyes, and says to the
mother, “God is love.” The little boy nestles up to the mother’s breast, and falls
asleep in her arms, and, filled by the love surging through her, is saying to her,
“ God is love.” The young man goes away from home, and in his home-sickness
writes back to mother with the thirstings and the hungerings of love; and the
thirstings, and the hungerings, and the home-sickness, are saying to him, “ God
is love.” To live as though there were no Law-giver, to live as though there
were no Life-giver, to live as though there were no Love-giver, is also to live as
though there were no Hope-giver. Do you know how full this nineteenth
century is of despair? And do you know that all pessimism is atheistic, and all
atheism is pessimistic? Man may have a certain measure of virtue without
God; he may stand in the trenches, and fight bravely, and be willing to die,
borne through the peril and the storm by his mere fatalism or his mere human
courage, as a trained horse may stand in the battle till he is shot down. But no
intelligent man can keep alive his hopes unless he keeps alive his faith in God.
To be without God is to be without hope in the world. And the philosophy of
Schopenhauer and Hartmann, and the gloom in Amiel and Allard, all bear the
game witness : to be without God, without the sense of God, the knowledge of God,
the faith in God, the assurance of God, is to be without hope. And, on the other
hand, to be with Him is to be sure of hope, sure of the future. I am not certain


419





et aoe oy, 8: 5


ne
a Peet


cnar.xv.  HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





what Icando. Are youcertain what you cando? Tam not certain what all good
men put together can do, Are you certain what they can do? But I do know
what God can do. God has undertaken to make out of this human race a family
of children like Himself, bearing His image, loving Him with His love, and
returning His life back to Him, and receiving it from Him again. I know that
He who has undertaken to do this will do it. The earth, which feels the brooding
spring, does so because it is turning its face to the sun. It could not feel the
brooding spring if there were no sun; and humanity, when it feels within itself
the brooding of hope, the beginning of that nearer and larger and better life
which it anticipates, turns its face toward God, and takes this life and light from
Him. You are not living without God, and cannot. When you get rid entirely
of God, you will get rid entirely of life. When a man comes to himself, he turns
his face toward God. It is so simple: first, to see in God the Law-giver, and
obey your conscience, whatever it tells you to do or be; for it is God’s voice.
Next, to see that life is ever larger and wider, and still larger and wider, and
that it is from the God that is about you and would be within you. Then, to
hear in all love-songs and love-voices the voice of God speaking to you, and to
find God in every voice of love in all the world. And so, with your face toward
God and your heart full of hope, to rejoice, as the strong man to run a race,
because God isin you. For all that is noble, all that is worth having, all that
is worth being, is God in you; and all you need to do is to open your eyes to see
Him, and your ears to hear Him, and your hearts to take Him in, that your life
may be His life.—<A bboté.


Vers. 11-32. The Prodigal and His Brother.—Most readers must sometimes
have wished that this parable had closed with ver. 24, and left us rejoicing in
the joy of the father over his regained and penitent son. The second part of the
parable seems to jar with the first. The “elder brother” is a mere discord in its
music and robs it of its natural and happy close. The oldest interpretation
(naturally suggested by vers. 1, 2) sees in the younger son a type of the pub-
licans and sinners, and in his elder brother a type of the scribes and Pharisees.
But this interpretation is not wide enough. We feel that our Lord is dealing,
not with men, but with man; not with classes or nationalities, but with the
entire race: and hence we demand an interpretation of His words that shall
cover all classes and include the whole family of man. If the earliest interpreter
saw in the younger son a type of the publicans, why may we not see in the pub-
licans a type of all sinful but penitent men of every race? If they saw in the
elder brother a type of the Pharisees, why may we not see in the Pharisees a
type of all who trust in themselves that they are righteous, and despise others ?
Nay, more; if we can each find in ourselves that which identifies us with
the prodigal but penitent son, may we not also each of us find in ourselves
some traces of his narrow and self-righteous and unloving brother? This gives us
an interpretation in which we can rest. Our Lord spoke to the publicans and the
Pharisees, and in speaking to them He showed every man the publican and the
Pharisee in his own breast. The great aim of His ministry was to convince men
that they were the sons of God, and to impart to them a filial spirit. If we were
set to define a good son, on what more essential points could we fix than these?
1. That his father’s service was his delight. 2. That on the mere prompting of love
he at all times kept his father’s commandments. 3. That under all changes and
temptations to distrust, he confided in his father’s wisdom and care. In all these
characteristics of sonship the Prodigal was for a time frankly and glaringly
deficient. So far from affectionately depending on his father’s bounty and love,
he claimed what he called “his own portion of goods,” that he might expend it as
he would. So far from rendering his father a free and willing obedience, he felt


42)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE, CHAP XV.


that he should never be free until he had escaped from his father’s control. So
far from taking a delight in service, and finding no place so dear as home, and
no society so congenial as that of the inmates of his home, he was persuaded that
he should never taste real pleasure till he could break away from the restraints
of his father’s service and follow the impulses of his own will. Here, then, we
have the open and jovial sinner depicted to the very life. But is the elder son in
any way a better son? Does he show a more filial spirit? Not a whit. Loving
dependence, free obedience, gladand disinterested service, are the distinctive marks
of sonship. He has not one of these. On his own showing, he is a servant rather
than a son ; his father is much more a master to him than a father. He dislikes
the restraints to which he has submitted at least as much as the Prodigal who
would not submit to them. His obedience is not free, but servile. He has been
serving for wages, for reward, and he complains that his wages have been
calculated on far too low a scale—that he has earned far more than he has
received. Obviously, then, the elder son was as far away from his father’s heart
and spirit as the younger son had been from his father’s home, and had sunk into
a bondage from which it was still harder to redeem him. We must remember
that in this parable we have the story of two prodigals, rather than of one; of
two men, that is, who wandered away from God—who lost their standing as sons
by losing the spirit of sons ; and that the self-righteous censor of his brother, the
cold and insolent critic of his father, although he had never left his house, had
strayed even farther from God than the reckless Prodigal who, under all his sins
and sinful impulses, had a son’s heart in him, and was at last drawn back by it
to his father’s arms. The parable teaches that those who esteem themselves
saints, because they busy themselves with religious dogmas and rules, may be
made of harder and more impenetrable stuff than the transgressors whom they
eye with sour suspicion and disdain. But it teaches us a lesson still more
surprising than this, It teaches us that, let men be as bad as they may, and
whether they show a wild, wilful, and wanton spirit, or a cautious, selfish, and
mercenary spirit, or whether they are the slaves of impulse or of conventionalism,
God is always a good Father to them all. The truth is that we may each of us
only too easily find both these men in himself, and therefore God’s grace to the
one should be as welcome and pathetic as His grace to the other. As there is
some hope that even the Pharisee may become a penitent, so there is much
danger that even the penitent may become a Pharisee—that when he is “con-
verted ” he may become as narrow, and hard, and bigoted as ever his brother
was, and sit in judgment and condemn those who were “in Christ” long before
he was, and who have done far more to serve Him. We may well rejoice,
therefore, that our Father in heaven is good to both—that when we return to
Him, He has compassion on us; and that, even when we are angry with Him,
and will not go in, He is not angry with us, but comes out and entreats us,
re-kindling a filial and fraternal spirit in us by His fatherly generosity and
love.—Cox.


Ver. 18. Going to the Father.—It is only necessary to remind you very briefly
of the story of the Prodigal Son, from which this sentence is taken: how this
younger son had grown weary of the restraints and the companionships at
home; how he had demanded that the father should divide the estate while
the father was still living; how the father had consented ; how, a little while
after that, the boy, still dissatisfied, had taken all and gone off into a far
country. How long it took this prodigal son to come to himself, how long it
took him to decide that he was foolish, and to make the resolve to arise and
go back to his father, we do not know. But we know how the modern prodigal
does ; how long he cogitates ; how many hindrances stand in his way. He has


421


OHAP. XV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


lived his worldly life, and at length grows dissatisfied, and begins to think that
he will szek for satisfaction somewhere else. And first there comes to him a
citizen of the far country, who says, ‘‘ You are mistaken; you do not need to
go outside this far country. It is true you have been a failure ; you have lived
with harlots; but you do not need to do that. There are very reputable women
living in this country, there are very excellent men in this country; be
temperate, be honest, be industrious; the carob-pods are not bad eating if you
know how to cook them. And if you are frugal and honest—but not too honest
—you may come in time to own herds of swine—yes, and employ a swineherd
—who knows? You do not need religion; all you need is to be a reformed and
reputable citizen of this far country.” Still he is not satisfied; still he thinks
he will go and find this Father of his. Tnen Philosophy comes to him, clad in
academic robes and with its book in hand. ‘ My friend,” it says, “you are
mistaken; there is not any Father, and there is not any home; your notion that
once you were with your Father and at home is a dream ; I have been on the
highest hill hereabout, and I have swept the whole horizon, from north to south,
and from east to west, with my spy-glass, and I cannot see any Father’s home nor
any Father. It is true this far country is a poor one; nevertheless, there is nothing
better ; certainly you and I do not know of anything better. Do not waste your
time in going after a Father who, for aught you know, has no existence.” Still
this young man is not satisfied. He looks about for some wiser and better
counsellor. And then the dogmatist comes, holding a Creed in one hand and a
Bible in the other; and the dogmatist says, “These men are all wrong; this
far country cannot satisfy you; carob-pods are poor eating; you do need a
Father, and there is a Father; but you are mistaken in thinking you can find
Him now; He is afar off, and you are in a far country, and you must wait until
you die before you can see your Father. But I have a splendid definition of
Him ; it describes all His attributes, and gives a full account of His government :
take that. Or, if you are not satisfied with that, here is a book which tells about
Him; for He was once in this far country, and lived here with certain of His
children, and this book tells what His children knew about Him: either take
what His children have said He says, or take our definition. That is the very
best you can do.” Still he is not satisfied, and he turns to find another counsellor
at his side, clad in a long white robe, and with the cross upon his breast. This
counsellor says, “They are all mistaken ; the citizen of this country is mistaken
—the world will never satisfy you; the agnostic is mistaken—there is a Father ;
the dogmatist is mistaken—you do not have to wait until you die. But still the
Father is not here. You are in a far country, and you cannot get away from
the confines of it; but the Father has sent the Church here to take His place ;
the Church is the vicegerent of the Father, the representative of the Father ; the
Church will tell you more or less infallibly what you ought to know, and more
or less infallibly what you ought to do; the Church will hear the confession of
your sins and will pronounce absolution, and so take from you the burden of your
sins. Give up the idea that you can see your Father here, and take a Church.”
Those are the four counsellors that stand at the side of every man who is wonder-
ing whether he can arise and go to his Father. Over against them all—citizen
of the world, agnostic philosopher, dogmatist, ecclesiastic—I want to put before
you the simple truth that you can go to your Father here and now. In the first
place, it is certain that the far country will not satisfy you. It has neve:
satisfied. You are immortal, and this world is transient. Suppose you do
succeed—suppose you get all you desire. You are fond of study, and you get
books and opportunity to study ; you are fond of influence, and you get that;
you are fond of the power that money gives you, and you get money and the
power that money gives, What then? In ten, twenty, thirty, forty, or fifty


422


HOMILETIC COMMEN1ARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XV.
a ee ee ee oe le


years, the ship that never failed to touch at every door will touch at yours, and
you will go on board and will leave your books, and your bonds, and your stocks,
and your influence, all behind. You cannot take them with you What then ?
You are spiritual, and this world is earthly and terrestrial ; how can you expect
it will feed you? If a man is hungry, and you show him a picture, will a
picture satisfy his stomach? How can you expect things will satisfy the hunger
for reverence, for hope, for love—in one word, for God? You are more than a
machine, more than an animal. The man who says to you, “Be honest, be
true, be pure, be good, leave the harlots alone, lead an honest and temperate life
and you will succeed,” gives you wise counsel; but if he tells you that that is
enough, he is telling you a lie. Then there is that other counsellor, the agnostic.
He tells you that there is no Father and there is no hcme—at all events, no
Father and no home than we can know about. I affirm, on the contrary, that
we can and do know the invisible and spiritual, directly and immediately. You
have eyes to see the outward thing and you have ears to hear the outward voice,
you have senses that deal with this world in which you live; use them, use them
carefully, follow them whithersoever they lead, but do not think that you have
no other sense and no other knowledge than that. You have also a power of
vision that deals with the infinite and the eternal; you have in you an eye that
can see the invisible, and an ear that can hear the inaudible. God is not a
dream ; the home is not a vision ; and God and the home are not mere pictures
which poets have painted out of their imagination ; they are the reality which
men of Divine vision have seen and presented to men of duller sight. The
dogmatist comes to you with his Bible and his Creed, and he tells you that you
cannot hope to see and know God here and now: meanwhile, take what the
Creed and the Bible tell you. What do the Creed and Bible tell you? This:
that God is a living God; that God is in the hearts of His children, inspiring
them, talking with them. If to-day any man in the Church should say, “ God
does not hear prayer,” orthodox theology would condemn him. But the Bible
does not more distinctly reveal the truth that God hears prayer than it does the
truth that God speaks to man. It is imagined that this Bible remains to show
that God was once upon the earth, though He has gone now; He did inspire
Isaiah, but He inspires no one to-day; He did speak to prophets, but He
speaks to no one now. No: God was in His world: God is in His world. If
any man holds up the Creed, therefore, to you and says, “ Take a definition
of God, instead of God,” he is offering you what is not bread. The Creed is
a definition of God; if it will help you to find Him, take it. The Bible is a
guide-book to God; if it will guide you to Him, take it. But take it that it
may guide you to Him; never take it in the place of Him. Enoch walks the
world to-day, and God is with Him. I call you to Gcd—not to a Creed, not
to a book. And, finally, the ecclesiastic stands by your side ; offers a Church—a
Church as God’s representative in tne world. Of course, I do not object to the
Church, or I should not be a member of it. What I do object to is the state-
ment that the Church is the representative of God in the world, as though
God were not here Himself. If the Church has not God in the heart of it,
the Church is nothing; it is a mere ethical institution. The very message,
the very ministry, the very function of the Church is to say to the world,
not, “ We are a representative of God, we personate God,” but “ We are the
witness to a God who is in the heart of His children here and now.” So I
call you to arise and go to your Father. I call the little children to go to
their Father. They cannot understand the Creed; they need not. They cannot
comprehend the Bible; they need not. They cannot comprehend theology ;
they need not. But a little child, better than most older people, can under-
stand that God is in conscience and in love—in father-love and mother-love.


423


i i te vas wae
CHAP XV, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


I call you, young men, to arise and go to your Father. We should be glad
to have you flocking into our church, but I do not call you to the Church; I
wish I could meet you in the Sunday-school, studying the Bible, but I am not
calling you to the Bible. I call on you to arise and go to your Father, and I
declare to you that there is in you a power of vision, and that you can see Him
face to face. Fathers and mothers, I call on you to go to your Father. How
can you take this little child who is put into your hands and train Him for this
life and beyond, unless you have a better, a wiser Friend than the minister or
the school teacher? Old men that draw near to the confines of eternity, come,
come to your Father. If the book will help you, take the book; if the Creed
will help you, take the Creed ; if the Church will help you, take the Church ; but
do not stop content with any one of them. Do not wait for death—God is
here; do not think to look back across the centuries for Him ; He who was
there is here. “The far country,” says Augustine, “is forgetfulness of God.”
You have come out of the far country when you have turned your thought,
your inspiration, your love, to your Father, and forget Him no more.—
L. Abbott.


Vers. 18, 19. Not Worthy to be called God’s Son.—The estimate which we
have of ourselves depends upon the standard with which we compare ourselves.
This man had formed a different measure of himself in his previous experience,
because his standard had been different. He had thought himself a good fellow,
and al] his companions assured him that he was a good fellow. Liberal,
generous-handed, flinging money right and left—measured by the harlots and
drunkards, he was a good fellow. The judgment was not strong, so measured.
When he ceased spending his money riotously, and had come to settle down to
something like industry, and measured himself with the swineherds that were
about him, he thought himself perhaps better than the average. Very likely
he was. He was of a good family, and they very possibly looked up to him.
Measuring himself by the swineherds with whom he was living, he was superior.
But when he turned his thoughts backward, and compared himself with the
father whose home he had abandoned, then he said, “‘I am no more worthy
to be called thy son.” It was a new standard that he had adopted, and there-
fore a new judgment that he reached. This is the question I want to put
before you: Are you worthy to be called God’s son? Lawyer—you are worthy
to be called good lawyer ; merchant—worthy to be called good merchant ; friend
—worthy to be called good friend ;—all of it true. But now take this other
standard: God’s son—are you worthy to be called God’s son? What does this
phrase, “God’s son,” mean? How shall we apply the measurement? We will
look across the centuries, and gaze for a few moments at the portrait of One
who was called God’s Son; we will try to think how He lived, under what
impulses, under what guidance, with what deeds; and then we will lay our
lives alongside His life and ask ourselves, Are we worthy to be called God’s
son? Highteen centuries ago, then, this Man was born in the province of
Rome. Man, you say? do you call Him Man? Yes, I call Him Man. Like
ordinary men? Ah, that is just the question I want you to answer. I want
you to put yourself beside Him, and see whether ordinary men are like
this Man. But He was Man and Son of God, and we are men and sons of
God. Are we worthy to be called sons of God? This is the very question.
This Man comes out into life at thirty years of age with His purpose fully set.
How He had formed it we do not know. He appears as unexpectedly and as
surprisingly as Elijah in the Old-Testament and John the Baptist in the New-
Testament time; but when He appears His purpose is fully set, His life is
consecrated to one great, resplendent idea—to bring about the kingdom of God

424


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE, CHAP. XV.





in the world—and from that purpose He never turned aside. With this con-
secrated, settled, resolute purpose went a great, inspiring, ardent, consuming
love. I hardly know how we can apply the word “self-sacrifice” to Christ.
There was no self to be sacrificed. He lived as a man that did not think of
Himself. So ardent was He in His work that He went without His meals,
and forgot to be hungry. How easily He puts aside the ordinary things for
which we live, we all know, but other and subtler appeals also spoke to un-
heeding ears. The poet and the prophet long at times for solitude. Who has
not sung to himself the psalmist’s song, ‘“‘Oh that I had wings like a dove!
for then would I fly away, and be at rest!” And we may be sure that all
the triumph of apparent popularity, and the jostling crowds, were more odious
to Him than to any poet or prophet that ever walked the earth. The subtle
temptations to the hfe of a recluse, the life of simple prayer and meditation,
He put behind Him, as the grosser temptations that appeal to grosser men.
The lark flies from the earth, and carries its song heavenward ; but this Singer
flew down to earth and went into the cage that He might sing to men who
were encaged. Where pain, and gloom, and suffering, and sin were, there this
Singer carried His song and His prayer. Sometimes, on the other hand, the
poet and the prophet long for companionship. He grows utterly lonely ; he
wants some one to walk beside, some one at least that will understand him and
commune with him. And so did this Man. And He gathered twelve about
Him; the best He could find, nearest to Him in spirit and in purpose—and
yet how far away! They could not understand Him. They could not under-
stand Him, because they were not free from selfishness. When they sat about
the Last Supper, they quarrelled for precedence. These were the men he had
to depend on ; these the very best; and yet how He lived for them, and loved
them—through their misunderstandings, their narrownesses, their quarrels,
their desertions, their denials! And yet this love of His was not a Puritan’s
love. It was love, not conscience. He did not do the things of which He
might have said, “I ought to do”; He did all the things that all the impulses
of His nature moved Him to do; for all those impulses were to love and
service. And so His heart was full of sympathy for men. Though they could
not touch Him, yet He could touch them. He is walking the highway; the
crowds are about Him; in the distance is heard the cry, “‘ Room for the leper!
room for the leper!” It was not enough to say, “ Be well?”—He touched
Him.

This love was shown in nothing so much, I think, as in His wrath. He
could be angry—and He was at times. And when He was angry, how the
men were afraid of Him! When He stood in the Temple courts, surrounded
by the Pharisees, and launched out indignant denunciation against those that
made long prayers for a pretence and devoured widows’ houses, He faced a
crowd of angry men, but they dared not touch Him; there was a flashing in
His eye, and a thunder in His voice, that held them back. With all this love,
with all this sympathy, with all this loneliness at times, there was a wonderful
purity. Perhaps you will think me irreverent, or, at least, unorthodox, if I
say it—sometimes it seems to me that Paul understood human nature better
than Jesus Christ did. Paul understood how the spirit and the flesh battle
against each other. Paul understood how the animal is pulling the spirit
down, and the spirit, shackled and bound, cannot emancipate itself. It was
Paul who wrote, “For what I would, that I do not; but what I hate, that I
do”; and Paul who wrote, “ Wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me
from this body of death?” But Christ says, ‘The prince of the world cometh,
and hath nothing in Me.” With all this love, with all this purity, with all
this service, went a wonderful hopefulness. Jesus of Nazareth was the Optimist


425


CHAP. XV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


of the centuries. Coming forth at the time when the world was at it lowest
moral ebb, when there had been no prophet in Palestine for centuries, when
there was nothing but corruption, when there was no virtue and no true
civilisation even in Rome, when literature there was well-nigh dead and moral
life had died, this Man rang out His clarion note from pulpit to pulpit, and
from valley to valley, and from hillside to hiliside, “The kingdom of God is at
hand!” And, inspiring all, the source of all this, He walked with God. “The
words that I speak to you, I speak not of Myself ; the Father doeth the works.”
And He so walked with God that in His hours of loneliness He found in God
His companionship, in God His Rest and His Refuge. ‘Take this life and put
it alongside your life, and then answer the question, “Am I worthy to be
called my Father’s son?” In the coming days let this Presence go with you.
If sometimes your will grows weak, let His strong Manhood nerve you to a
better consecration ; if sometimes the world, with its subtle temptations, comes
in upon you, let His unselfish service drive out the motives that belong only
to the far country ; if sometimes ycu are discouraged and in despair, let His
smile rest upon you and His strong words say to you, “‘ Be of good cheer; I have
overcome the world” ; if sometimes you look on another’s wrong with unblushing
cheek, catch the tones of His voice, and let there be thunder in your heart
against others’ iniquity ; if sometimes the wrong upon yours<lf brings the blush
of anger to your cheek, look on Him who looked on Peter with forgiving eyes,
and be ashamed that your selfishness is angry, ard not your love. Am I
worthy to be called God’s son? What are you doing? You are trying to make
bread out of stone—good bread, doubtless, for yourself, for your children
perhaps, and for oth rs; but this is not Christ’s work. And you—you are
tempted to fly from the top of some great pinnacle and let all the world look
on and clap and say, “‘ Wonderful man he is!” This is not God’s work. And
you—you are trying to do God’s work in the world, but the devil has stayed
at your side and said, “‘ Promise to follow me, and I will show you a better
way to purify politics, cleanse the Church, set society right.” This also is
not the work of God’s son. To be God’s son, it is at least this: To have a
life wholly consecrated to God’s service; to have a heart wholly full of His
unselfishness and self-forgetting love. Axe you worthy to be called God’s
son 1—Jbid. \





SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 11—322.


Vers. 11-32. The Two Brothers— _ pretation. And so the elder son’s


The point of this parable, as of the
two preceding, is God’s joyful welcome
to a returning sinner, in contrast with
the angry jealousy of the ae ees.
That is the lesson of the story, and
hence it is essentially a repetition of
the parables of the Lost Sheep and the
Lost Coin,

I. But the conduct of the Pharisees,
implied before, is now plainly held up
to view.—Ior the elder son represents
the Pharisee, and no one else. All
other applications are beside the mark.
The two verses which open the chapter
vindicate this as the only correct inter-


426


conduct is no episode, but an essential
part of the parable, the statement, in
fact, of what is half the lesson of all
three parables. If it is objected that
Christ could not speak of the unloving
and unlovely Pharisees in the words
“Son, thou art ever with me,” the
answer is ready. Here, as_ often,
Christ simply takes him at his own
estimate for the moment, shows him
thereby how unlovely he really is, and
so makes manifest in the only possible
way his necd of repcntance and
restoration.

Il. The younger son is the “ publi-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP, XV.


a a Ee ee ee


can and sinner,” the openly irreligious
everywhere. His sin is not denied
or palliated. It is drawn in imperish-
able colours. But Christ had a gospel
for such. The Pharisees had none.
They did not think God could forgive
such. Not so, says Jesus, God goes
after the lost, seeks diligently, wel-
comes back with great and generous
joy.— Hastings.


Two Types of Sinners, and God’s
Love for Them.

I. The outcast but penitent sinner.
—1l. His home privileges. 2. His
selfish and wicked life. 3. His misery
and unrest. 4. His penitence.

II. How the father dealt with him.
—1l. Readiness to receive. 2. Free
and complete forgiveness. 3. Restora-
tion to sonship and privileges.

III. The self-righteous and proud
sinner——1. Equally unworthy with
his brother, for he was boastful, un-
brotherly, unfilial—a picture of the
Pharisees, and of the self-righteous
generally.

IV. How the father dealt with
him.—1. Loving and gentle entreaty.
No rebuke. 2. Still recognises him as
ason. 3. Still offers him all the un-
deserved privileges of sonship.

V. Which of the two do we most
resemble ?— Taylor.


The fevelation of the Father.—The
locus classicus for Christ’s teaching as
to the revelation of the Father, the
belief of which tends to make men
become citizens of the kingdom, is the
fifteenth chapter of Luke, and especially
the parable of the Prodigal Son. There
God appears as One who takes pleasure
in the repentance of sinners, such as
the reprobates of Jewish society, be-
cause in these penitents He sees prodi-
gal children returning to their Father’s
house. By these parabolic utterances
Jesus said to all, however far from
righteousness, God loves you as His
children, no more worthy to be called
sons, yet regarded as such; He de-
plores your departure from Him, and
desires your return; and He will


receive you graciously, when, taught
wisdom by misery, you direct your
footsteps homewards. It is not alle-
gorising exegesis to take this meaning
out of the parable. Jesus was on His
defence for loving classes of men
despised or despaired of, and His
defence in part consisted in this, that
His bearing toward the outcasts was
that of the Ditine Being. He loved
them asa Brother ; God loved them as a
Father.— Bruce.


The Lost One’s Return.—Some have
called this parable a gospel within a
gospel. It is full of tender and loving
teaching.

I. The son at home.
II. The son far from home.

III. The son at home again.—
Watson.


The Lost Son.—I. The son glad to
leave home.—1. The choice. 2. The
parting. 3. The absence.

II. The son glad to return hcme.—
1. Thoughts of home. 2. The home-
ward journey. 3. The happy meeting.

III. The lessons of the story.—
How like the ingratitude of many is
the younger son’s conduct! How bitter
the fruits of selfishness! How tender
the Divine forgiveness !— Taylor.


A Parable of Two Sons.—I. There
are two ways in which people fall
from their right attitude to God.—
1. Some men ignore God, or choose to
forget Him. 2. Others dread God too
much to revolt from Him, and do
what they can to earn the Divine
favour. The two varieties run down
to the same identical root. In the one
case you are an alien, in the other a
slave; in neither a child. Both are
proud and selfish. Neither is loving.

II. The methods by which our
Father is for ever seeking to bring us
into a childlike relation to Himself.—
1. Of God’s way with the prodigal.
2. With the legalist.— Dykes.


The Condition of Humanity.—Man,
viewed as the object of the Saviour’s


427


CHAP. XV.





solicitude, is lost (1) as a straying
sheep is lost, through thouyhtlessness ;
(2) as a piece of money is lost to use,
when its owner cannot find it ; (3) as a
prodigal is lost, who in waywardness
and self-will departs from his father’s
house to a distant land, and there lives
a life utterly diverse from that of the
home he has left, and so living has no
correspondence with his family, but is
content to be as dead to them, and
that they, in return, should be as dead
to him. Such were the thoughts of
Jesus concerning man when He des-
cribed him as ‘“ lost.” — Bruce.


./The Prodigal Son: his (1) self-
will; (2) folly ; (3) misery ; (4) repent-
ance.

II. The loving father: 1. His long
waiting for his son. 2. The fervency
and rapture of his joy on receiving
him.

III. The relentless elder brother:
1. His moral correctness. 2. His
severity and pride.


The Parable tells us—

I. Of man’s original estate, as a
child in his father’s house, happy, and
wanting nothing.

II. Of the misery that waits on sin,
especially heavy in the cases of those
who go to great excess in evil.

Ill. Of the true way in which to
return to God.

IV. Of the Divine compassion that
hastens to welcome the penitent.

V. Of the envy which some, even of
God’s children, manifest at such great
kindness being spent on such as have
been grossly sinful.

VI. Of God’s forbearance towards
our infirmities and unbecoming feel-
ings.


I. The Prodigal’s departure.
II. His return.
III. The reception he meets with.
IV. The character and conduct of
the elder brother.


Vers. 11-24. The Prodigal.
I. His departure.—Multitudes tread


420


=e


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


this path. The way to death is thronged.
The ‘‘ seven devils ” that hold the reins,
and direct the course, urge myriads of
“younger sons” to their ruin. Yet
there is hope. There are two pieces of
good news for every prodigal: 1. God
is angry with you, not pleased. His
anger is against your departing. Were
He pleased when you go away, you
could not expect Him to be pleased
when you come back. 2. Christ Him-
self, by His word in this parable,
makes a path for the prodigal’s return.
Why did He paint this picture? To
leave open a way from the “far
country” to the Father’s home and
bosom.

II. His return.—“‘ He came to him-
self.” This suggestive word marks the
turning-point. His conduct had been
madness as well as sin. He makes
self-discovery, and resolves to return.
Worthless though he is, the father
gladly receives the penitent prodigal.
It is the history of one actual case.
A story made by Christ, and so made
as to serve a purpose. The purpose is
to show how He receives even the chief
of sinners. No conceivable degree of
provocation closes His heart against
him that cometh.—Arnot.


The Lost Son.—There is, perhaps, no
page in the Bible which comes home so
perfectly to the understanding of every
human being as this. But, human as
the story is, the parable is truly
Divine. There are two distinct pic-
tures, or compartments rather, in the
one composition,

I. The prodigal’s progress.—A pos-
tasy, profligacy, penalty. The picture
is not overdrawn.

II. The penitent’s return and re.
ception.—Reflection, resolution, return
and reception, confession, restoration,
rejoicing. Man’s redemption is a
momentous event in the annals of God.
He alone perfectly understands it, and
most of all rejoices over it, for to Him
our nature belongs, and He alone
knows what it is worth. Other beings,
however, including men themselves, are
called to rejoice along with God in this,


1!


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XV.





The mark of their nearness to God in
spirit will be the degree in which they
are taken up about human salvation—
are concerned for it, and delight in its
accomplishment.— Laidlaw.





Fi Religious Experience.
—Five scenes which correspond to the
phases of religious experience through
which the Prodigal Son passes De-
parture from home (vers. 1-13)—his
sin. ee His miserable ee (vers.
14-16)—his punishment. Lis regrets
(vers. 17-19)—his repentance. ‘His
return (vers. 20, 21)—his conversion.

His restoration to his place as a son
and to his father’s favour (vers. 22-24)
—his justification.


Ver. 11. Grace and Faith.—In spite
of the admirable manner in which
Jesus had employed the two former
figures, since they are borrowed from
the world of nature, they do not fully
serve His purpose. They do, indeed,
to some extent, describe the feelings
towards the sinner which fill the heart
of God, but they do not set forth the
part which the sinner himself plays in
the drama of conversion. He needs
to find a figure, borrowed from the
moral sphere, and consequently from
human life. Grace is represented in
the first and second parables, grace and
faith in the third (cf. Eph. ii. 8).—
Godet.


A Definite Revelation of God's
Thoughts towards Us. — Jesus here
drops the interrogative form which in-
troduces the two preceding parables.
He no longer appeals to his hearers
to say what a shepherd, and what a
woman, in the circumstances supposed,
would probably do. He now reveals


in definite terms the thoughts~-of-Go
towards our sinful race.

Vers. 11, 12. Dissatisfaction.

I. Dissatisfaction implied in the
demand of the son: 1. The cause of
dissatisfaction, impatience of restraint,
2. The. expression of dissatisfaction.
3. The guilt of dissatisfaction.


II. The effect shown, in the act of
the father. 1. This act gives no
sanction to the son’s demand as right.
2. This act allows freedom to a sinner
to follow his own choice. 3. This act
confers powers which might be used
for spiritual profit.— Ritchie.


Vers. 11-13. The Soul and tts Sin.

I. Whence the soul’s sin springs—
out of a desire for bad freedom.

II. Where sin places the soul.

If. That to which sin dooms—
waste, shipwreck.


Ver. 12. The Arrogant Claim.

I. The younger son comes to his
father to demand his portion.

II. He lays claim to his portion as
a debt, which he thinks his father owes


him,

i The_younger.”—It is scarcely by
accident iat the younger son is chosen
to play the part of the prodigal. For
it is for the young—to those who are
innocent and unsuspicious, to those
whose hearts are light, and who have
had but little experience of the world’s


ways—that the world’s temptations
have the greatest_charm, a are
most likely to long for freedom, and


least capable of avoiding th , ers
it brings.








“ Guv ”—Over against the Prodi-
eae ented. “Give me my portion of
goods,” is the children’s ery, ‘“ Give us
day by day our daily bread”; they ~
therein declaring that they wait upon
God, and would fain be nourished from
day to day by His hand.—7Z'ench.


Weary of Home, Anxi


World.—Two things urge the-younger
ban cenmemnnt iatiied . .
son to make this request :\_1./He is
wearied of his father’s house. The
world abroad attracts him. So is it
wi e sinner. He desires to escape
from the restraints of holiness and to
be at liberty to please himself.


laperience Alon ure.—Tnhe
father sees that the moment has come


429


cuar.xv.  HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





in which the son can only be cured enters on the downward course. It
by experience, and he gives him up _ begins in feeling before it manifests
to his own will. This is the point to itself in action.

which the heathen had arrived at the


epoch of judgment described by St “4 far country.”—An image of the
Paul (Rom. i. 24-28)—that of “ being sinner’s deep apostasy from God.
given up to their own lusts.” A ees


time comes when God ceases to strive “ Wasted.” —Lit. “ scattered.” As
against the inclinations of a perverse © lightly, swiftly, as “all had —been
heart and lets it have its own way.— gathered together” is all dissipated
Godet. again. sae


Ver. 13. I. Preparation for leaving Thehiotous Spendthrift,
his early home.—1. The time of pre- I. All sinners, when they have de-


paration. 2. The act of preparation. parted from God, are §

II. Departure into a far country. great wasters. 1. All receive their
—1l. The leaving his father’s house. portion of goods. 2. Unregenerate
2. The journey into a far country. sinners consume these on their own


III. Wasting his substance with lusts, the faculties of body and soul,
riotous living.—1. The substance and their earthly treasures.
wasted. 2. The substance wasted II. They waste what they have
with riotous living.—Ritchie. received in riotous living. 1. They
have cast off the government of God
Wanderer. 2. They trample on His holy laws.
LT) ats to depart from God.— 3. They put Sikeninenes under the
The explanation of this action is: government of the great adversary of
1. Alienation of heart. 2. The allure- God and man.—Jones.
ments of evil. 3. The weakness of the
nature. 4. The illusions of Satan. Vers, 14-16. I. His want, through
II. All sinners that are carried away famine in the land.—l. The mighty
with the love of sin do actually leave famine in the land. 2. His want in
God and depart.—1. They do not know _ the famine.
what is to be found in God. 2. They II. His work with a citizen of that
are at enmity with Him. 3. They are country.—1l. His joining himself to a
averse to His laws and government. citizen. 2. His work with the citizen.
III. They go into a far country.— III. His wish for the husks, to relieve
1. This Prodigal set off emmediately, as his 1. The desire for husks.
soon as he received his portion. 2. His 2. The desire unfulfilled.— Ritchie.
father’s bountifulness did not render
him dutiful. 3. The distance to which wees 14, ee Sources of Misery. —
he wandered was not so much of place 1. exchanged fo u-
as of state. 4. All who are now the tion. Tree or Satan: Two
children of grace, and on the way to sources of misery: inward griefs, out-
heaven, were once wanderers like him. ward sorrows. : moard grieh







Jones. I. The heart itself consumed by
loathing, remorse, loneliness, and

* Not_many_days.”—For a little, despair.
therefore, he lingers in his father’s II. Outward calamities, such as the


house after he has formed the resolu- famine here specified, against which
tion to depart and has liberty to do the Fase deprived of the consolations
so. And so in the case of the sinner, of réligion, strives in vain.

apostasy of heart often precedes apos- We


tasy of life. It is by degrees, perhaps Ver. 14.“A mighty famine” —-Ex-


almost imperceptible at first, that he ternal circumstances hasten the con-
—





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XV.





sequences of sin, and are used by God
to lead to repentance. Thus the father
seeks his son by so ordering events that
he shall feel his real condition. In like
manner, in the history of the prophet
Jonah, the great storm and danger
upon the sea are used to lead him to
repent of his disobedience.


The Grievous Famine.


he AI things under the sun quickly


decay. and disappear.
II. Alienation’ from God leads to
overty, mi and _suffering, and


these are intended to drive sinners
from the far country back to their
Father.

III. This Prodigal’s destitution. 1,
He was stripped of the means of self-
gratification. 2. He is convinced of
the emptiness and vanity of all things
under thesun. 3. He wants something
which he has not, but does nut know
what he wants.—Jones.


The affecting lines of Byron well illus-
trate this experience of the prodigal :—
“ My days are in the yellow leaf;

The flowers, the fruits of love are gone;

The worm, tlie canker, and the grief,

Are mine aione.

The fire that on my bosom preys
Is lone as some volcanic isle;
No torch is kindled at its blaze—

A funeral pile!”


Vers. 15, 16. The Willing Slave.

I. It is with the strongest reluctance
that sinners leave this far country.
1. They believe nothing of what they
hear of the country where they live.
2. They believe nothing of what they
hear of the Redeemer’s kingdom. 3.
The far country is suitable to their sin-
ful inclinations. 4. They have a deep-
rooted enmity against God and holiness.

II. Deep conviction of sin leads to
fear, but many are still very unwilling
to return to their Fathei’s house.
1. They enter the service of a hard
master. 2. They are set to poor and
mean employments. 3. Their only
liberty is to choose in what fields they
will work. 4. They try various means


to satisfy their cravings, yet all in vain.
—Jones.





5. itizen.’?—Notwit hstand-
ing all the Prodigal’s folly and sin, he
did not become a citizen of that far
country. He felt himself, while there,
an exile from home; and when his
misery becomes intolerable he does not
sink into apathy and despair, but his
thoughts return to his father and his
father’s house.


L “Sent him into his fields,’ “The world
and every one of its citizens is a hard
master, in whose services the most
pitiable wages are given; yea, not
even food to eat. Well for every


prodigal who is constrained to realise
this and does realise it.—Stier.


Ver. 16. Degradation. — He who
would not, as a son, be treated liberally
by his father is compelled to be the
servant and bondslave of a foreign
master; he who would not be ruled
by God is compelled to serve the devil ;
he who would not abide in his father’s
royal palace is sent to the field among
hinds; he who would not dwell among
brethren and princes is obliged to be
the servant and companion of brutes ;
he who would not feed on the bread of
angels petitions in his hunger for the
husks of the swine.—Corn. @ Lapide.

Sratin fain.” —Between carnal and
spiritual pleasures there is usually this
difference : the first, when we are with-
out them, excite in us strong desires ;
but after their possession they cloy and
dissatisfy. It is quite the contrary
with spiritual pleasures. We have a
distaste for them as long as we are
without them ; but possession produces
the desire of them, and the more largely
we partake of them the greater is our
appetite and hunger.—/S. Gregory.


The Swine Cared For, the Swineherd
Neglected.—The swine were valuable;
they would fetch a good price in the
time of famine. They were cared for,
but the wretched swincherd was left to


431


CHAP. XV.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





look after himself. This was his return
for squandering his living upon pre-
tended friends !


Vers. 17-20. The Soul and its Re-
pentance.

I. Repentance is kind and right-
minded thought about one’s self.

Il. Repentance is dissatisfaction and
regret.

ILI. Repentance is confession of sin.
IV. Repentance is also humility.

V. Repentance is also resolution
toward the Father.

VI. Repentance is the actual move-
ment of the soul toward the Father.
1. Recognition of sin. 2. Sorrow for
sin. 38. Forsaking of sin.


Ver. 17. I. His restoration to him-
self.—1. He came to an understanding
of what is true. 2. He came to a
conscience of what is right. 3. He
came to an affection for what is good.
4, He came to a will for what is holy.

II. His review of his condition.
—l. He expresses a bitter sense of
present misery. 2. He expresses a
deep conviction of his past folly.
3. He expresses a grateful remem-
brance of his father’s bounty. 4. He
confesses a fervent desire for the joys
of his early home.


The Solemn Pause.

I. Till now he was in a state of
moral madness,

II. But the Prodigal is now come to
himself—z.e., to his right senses. 1. He
never before gave himself the trouble
of thinking. 2. Now he begins to
think seriously.

III. Two subjects fill his whole soul.


1. The iness of those who enjoy
such abundance in hi ’s_ house.
2. His own starying-condition in a


distant land.—/ones.





va “Came to himself.” —W ords of deepest
significance, saying, as they do, that to
come to one’s self and to come to God
are one and the same thing; that when
we truly find ourselves we find Him,
or, rather, having found Him, find alse


432


ourselves ; for it is not man in union
with God, who is raised above the
true condition of humanity, but man
separated from God, who has fallen
out of and below that condition.—
Trench.


One Not in His Right Mind.—F¥or
one who could so act — forsake such
a father and desert such a home,
to incur nothing but misery, insult,
and the pangs of hunger—can only
be spoken of as one not in his right
mind.—Burgon.


A Change of Feeling—He began
by despising his father’s house and
by longing to escape from it. Now
he looks with disgust upon the country
for which he had exchanged it, and
desires to return home. He chooses
what he had left; he leaves what he
had chosen.


© How many !” — Behold the sad
catastrophe of rash and thoughtless
voluptuousness. It turns the man out
into a strange country who might have
lived happy in his father’s house; it
makes a beggar of one that was rich ;
it changes the condition of a son into
that of a slave; it compels him to
feed filthy swine who disdained the
dutiful service of a gracious father.
—P. Chrysologus.


Vers. 18, 19. I. An earnest resolu-
tion to arise.—1. He resolves to exert
a will for deliverance. 2. He resolves
to put forth activity in the right
direction. 3. He resolves to set out
in a new course. 4. He resolves to
go to an expected end.

II. A true repentance of sin.—1. The
confession of sin. 2. The aggravations
of sin confessd. 3. The unworthiness
to be called the son of such a father.
4, The request to be made as a hired


servant.


The Preparatory Address.

J. The sinner must come and confess
his sins unto God, or never find mercy.

JL How this confession must be


Yar 3
PTS 4S (dbs, st


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XV.





made. 1. It must be a true confession.
2. It must be such as the occasion
requires, 3. In it there must be both
faith and repentance.

ITI. What encouragement has the
sinner to confess his sins unto God?
1. God is a Father. 2. His delight is
salvation. 3. He has made ample
provision for the redemption of the
sinful. 4. He invites all to take
advantage of it.—Jones.


Ver. 18. “TZ will arise.” — He will
“arise,” for he has till now been gro-
velling in the dust. He will “ go,” for
he is a very long way off. To his
“father,” for at present he dwells
among swine.


The Pious Resolution.

I. “I will arise.” 1. This is a most
dangerous country to abide in. 2. It
contains nothing to supply my numerous
wants. :

II. “TI will go tomy father.” 1, All
things naturally draw towards home.
2. The Holy Spirit begins His work
by creating hunger and thirst after
righteousness and resolution to return
to God. 38. Where there is life there
is progress. 4. The sinner has nowhere
to go at last for help and comfort but
to his God.—Jones.


“ Against heaven.”—He alone really
confesses his sins who has regarded
them mainly as sins against God—
against a higher, heavenly order’ of
things; and this is the best sign that
a sinner has come to himself. Cf.
Ps. li. 4: “ Against Thee, Thee only,
have I sinned and done this evil in
Thy sight.”


“ Before thee.” —“ In respect of thee ”
—i.e., by wasting his substance and by
occasioning him great unhappiness and
some disgrace.


Ver. 19. “ Make me as one of thy
hired servants.” — An ancient writer
says, in commenting on this verse,
“O, Lord Jesu! Preserve us from
such husks as the swine did eat, and


EF


instead thereof, give unto us the true
Bread ; for Thou art steward in Thy
Father’s house. As labourers, vouch-
safe to hire us also, although arriving
late ; for Thou dost hire men, even at
the eleventh hour,—and givest to all
alike the same reward of life eternal.”


“ Make me as one.”—He wishes that
there may be no distinction between
him and the least of the day-labourers,
and promises thereby that he will
diligently serve and be obedient as a
day-labourer. He wishes to be re-
leased, at any price, from his wretched
condition, and with deeds to prove the
sincerity of his confession of sin.—Van
Oosterzee.


Vers. 20-24. The Soul and its Re-
ception.

I. The reception of a longing and
watching love.

Il. A quick reception.

Ill. A reception of utmost wel-
come.

IV. A reception of larger answer to
prayer than one dare hope for.

V. A reception of perfect reinstate-
ment,


Ver. 20. The Turning-Point.

I. “And he arose.” 1. He rises up
and comes forth from the regions of
the dead. 2, He cannot stay in the
far country.

II. “ And he came to his father.”
1. The sinner left God : now he returns
to God. 2. He had nowhere else to
go. 3. He came quite home. 4. He
came without delay.

III. There are great difficulties in
the sinner’s way to return to his
Father. 1. Hissins. 2. His vileness.
3. His hardness of heart. Yet there is
a new and living way by which he
may go.—Jones.


I. The return of the son.—l. The
setting out on the homeward way.
2. The progress in the new course.
3. The return to his father.

II. The welcome of the father.—
1. The father’s observation of his son


435


CHAP. XV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


ee


afar off. 2. The father’s compassion
on hisson coming to hishome. 3. The
father’s welcome to his son returning
to him.— Ritchie.


“ Ran.’—The coming of the father
to meet his son here figuratively ex-
hibits the sending of the Son of God,
—Von Gerlach.


“ Ran.”—The return of the sinner is
expressed by the word going (ver. 18),
but God’s coming to the sinner by
running. God makes greater haste to
the sinner than the sinner does to
God; God makes much of our first
inclination, and would not have it fall
to the ground.


“ Kissed him.” — No cold, formal
greeting—deosculatus est. He kissed
him repeatedly and fervently — de-
voured him with kisses.

“One parable cannot exhaust the
whole truth; but in this parable we
may say that the Saviour and Mediator
is concealed in the kiss which the
father gives the son” (Riggenbach).

The Prodigal was utterly destitute of
merit, even in his repentance. For it
was not until le had exhausted every
resource, and death stared him in the
face that he resolved to return home.
Yet he was received with ardent
welcome, and without upbraiding.
Thus is it with the sinner. Although
we return to God only, as it were,
when we cannot help coming, He
receives us with open arms; He takes
the sin away and does not cast it up
to us.


Associates Left Behind.—The Prodigal
leaves behind him the companions and
instruments of his lusts. This is a
distinctive feature of true repentance.
In the act of fleeing to his father he
leaves his associates, and his habits,
and his tastes, behind; and conversely,
as long as he clings to these he will
not—he cannot—return to his father.
—Arnot.


434


The Compassionate Father.

I. His father saw him: 1. God
takes notice of the very beginning of
the new creation in the soul. 2. He
sets the greatest value on the least
grace, for He sees how great it will be
at the last.

II. The father had compassion on
him aud ran to meet him. 1. Ccem-
passion on his most miserable condi-
tion, and his deep distress of mind.
9. Runs to meet him, because of the
great delight in seeing him returning
home, and because he wished to succour
and comfort him.

IIJ. He fell on his neck and kissed
him ; in like manner God pities His
enemies, but delights in those who
come home to Him, who are members
of Christ, and are led by His Spirit.

IV. In regeneration God and man
meet ; they meet in peace and love;
and they meet to part no more for
ever.—Jones.


Imperfect Contrition, and Cod’s Re-
sponse to it.—The father’s kiss conveys
and implies the assurance of forgive-
ness. In the rehabilitation of this
outcast youth there are two stages—
(1) the human, and (2) the Divine.
The Divine must have necessary pre-
ference over the human. The son
would not seem to have reached any
very high plane of moral life and
feeling when the father met him. He
was hunger-hunted, that was all.
That penitence? It looks more like
scheming self-interest. The action has
scarcely any strain of moral sentiment
and aspiration in it whatsoever. He
was moving on a comparatively ignoble
level, but the level led by unmistakeable
gradients that their father’s eye could
follow into the far-off future up to
something nobler and better at last.
The first movements of the man’s mind
before it has been transformed by the
magic effusion of the father’s love
cannot escape some strain of the old
sordidness. If it is the wrath to come
rather than the wretchedness he is
leaving behind that excites his first
movements toward home, his repent-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


ance is still open to the impeachment
of self-interest. The father, however,
saw the dip, and trend, and direction,
in this pathway of imperfect motive.
The soul is not noble in its first steps
of penitential movement towards home.
It is made so by the touch of God’s
reconciling love.—Selby.


Ver. 21. The Penitential Confession.

I. The Prodigal Son returns to his
father’s house in a very different state
of mind from that in which he left it.

II. We see here a penitent, ap-
proaching mercy’s door, confessing his
sins and praying for pardon. 1. He
comes as a true penitent. 2. He seeks
for no excuse, and does not even use
his penitence as a plea.

III. His deep distress, which is both
unavoidable and beneficial.

IV. He dwells upon the magnitude
and aggravations of his sins.

V. He manifests deep humility. —
Jones.


The Prepared Speech only Half Said.
—Why did he not say all he had
intended? Because he was prevented
from saying more by the kisses of his
father, and the other tokens of his
father’s love.


I. The confession of sin made.—
1. The confession is filial in its spirit.
2. The confession is personal in its
character.

II. The aggravations of sin acknow-
ledged.—1. It is sin committed against
sovereign authority. 2. It is sin
committed in the face of fatherly love.

III. The conviction of unworthiness
expressed.—1l. The sense of unworthi-
ness altered. 2. The appeal to paternal
compassion implied.—Aztchie.


Repentance of Fear and Repentance of
Love.—There is a profound difference
between the confession uttered by the
Prodigal Son (ver. 21), and that which
the depth of his misery had extorted
from him (vers. 18, 19). The latter
was a cry of despair. Now distress
has passed away, and the confession


CHAP. XV.


has become the cry of repentant love.
The words are the same—‘“T have
sinned ”—but the tone in which they
are uttered is different. Luther
recognised the difference very clearly ;
and the repentance of love as distin-
guished from the repentance of fear
was the true principle of the Reforma-
tion.—Grodet.


Vers. 22-24. Free and Complete For-
giveness. — The forgiveness granted is
both freely given and complete in its
character. It is not preceded by any
humiliating penance, or period of pro-
bation, or any successive stages of
restoration to favour. In an instant
he is reinstated in the place, and
invested with the dignity, of a son.

The Prodigal is not put through a
preparatory discipline, lodged in some
sad and dreary moral quarantine, till
some of the loathsomeness and defile-
ment of sin be worn off him. His rags
are exchanged for princely clothing ;
a feast is prepared to relieve his hunger
and thirst.


Christ
Lessons :—

I. That God receives and forgives
a sinner who comes back repentant.

II. That He delights in the act of
thus forgiving repentant sinners.


here Teaches Two Great


Ver. 22. I. The robe of filial accept-
ance.—1. The best robe—best for
covering, endurance, and _ beauty.
2. The bringing forth of the best
robe, the open exhibition and free
offer of Jesus’ righteousness. 3. The
putting on of the best robe.

II. The ring of filial distinction.—
1. This is a token of filial relation.
(2) This is a badge of filial privi-
lege. 3. This is a pledge of filial
inheritance.

III. The shoes for filial life—
1. The shoes prepare for walking in
the comfort of a son. 2. The shoes
prepare for walking in the freedom of
a son. 3. The shoes prepare for
walking in the service of a son.—
Ritchie.


435


CHAP. XV.


“The best robe.” — Cf. Zech. iii.
4, 5: “And He answeredjand spake
unto those that stood by, saying, Take
away the filthy garments from him.
And unto him He said, Behold, I have
caused thine iniquity to pass from
thee, and I will clothe thee with
change of raiment. ... And they
clothed him with garments,” See also
Isa. lxi. 10; Rev. iii. 18.


“ The best robe.”

I. When a sinner truly repents and
turns to God, no mention is made of
his past offences.

IJ. The father ordered his servants
to clothe, adorn, and feed his starving
son. 1. The children of men are the
objects of God’s care and kindness.
2. He employs some servants to
convey His gifts and blessings to His
children.

III. The father ordered the best
robe to be brought for him: 1. A
mark of His love. 2. A meet dress for
the company he was now to move in.

IV. A ring for his hand: (1) as
symbol of the covenant of everlasting
union ; and (2) as an ornament.

V. And shoes for his feet ; he must
now walk in a new way, which he
never knew before.—Jones.


Vers. 23, 24. I. The provision for
joy in the penitent’s return.—l. The
bringing forth of Christ’s atoning
sacrifice as the provision of joy.
2. The partaking of Christ’s atoning
sacrifice as the substance of joy.

II. The grounds of joy over the
penitent’s return.—l. He was dead,
and is aliveagain. 2. He was lost, and
is found.— Ritchie.


Ver. 23. The Richest Feast.

I. This feast is the great salvation
by Christ crucified.

II. The children of grace feed and
live on the provisions which their
heavenly Father has treasured up for
them in the fulness of Christ.

IIT. The benefits of actual feeding
on the gospel feast are truly great and
lasting: (1) Believers thus come into


436


Fie te eL ioe" - ah


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


closer union with Christ; (2) into
communion with Him; (3) are trans-
formed into His image; (4) and grow
in grace, and in meetness for heaven.—
Jones.


Ver. 24. I. Angels rejoice over the
coming back of a sinner to God.

IJ. Believers rejoice over the return
of a brother to their Father’s house, :
because he is a brother; because they
themselves know the happiness of the
saving change; because this change
brings honour to their Saviour.

III. God rejoices over the restora-
tion of a son to filial life and love.

IV. The penitent rejoices in the |
welcome to his Father’s heart and
home—the joy of rescue, of acceptance,
of a new nature, of communion, of
possession and hope.—Rzéchie.


“ Dead . ». lost.” The word “ dead”
describes the misery into which the
Prodigal had sunk; “lost” describes
the father’s experience of deprivation
during his son’s absence. These two
aspects of sin correspond to the repre-
sentations in the two preceding par-
ables: the son had strayed away (like
the lost sheep), the father had lost
something (as the woman had lost the
piece of silver).


The Great Rejoicing.

I. The cause of the joy: 1. The
penitent son as one alive from the
dead. 2. As one lost who had been
found.

II. The nature of the joy: universal,
high, and eternal.—/ones.


Vers. 25-32. Vindication of the
Family Joy.

J. The elder brother's anger at the
Prodigal’s reception.—l. The occasion
of his anger. 2. The expression of his
anger.

II. The father’s vindication of the
family joy.—l. The father’s forbear-
ance with an unfilial spirit. 2. The
reasons he alleges for the joy.

IIIf. The lessons of truth here con-
veyed.—1. God’s love to fallen men,


Oa a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XV





2. Christ’s condemnation of the self-
righteous, of their pride and contempt
for others. 3. The Divine welcome
to great sinners.— Ritchie.


A Picture of the Legalistic, Grudging
Pharisee.
I. Jealous discontent.
II. Unfair complaints.
III. A gentle answer.
Taylor.


Ver. 25. ‘Was in the field.” —The
vividness and beauty of the story is
heightened by the fact that the elder
son, at the return of his brother, is
not in the house, but has spent the
day in hard, slavish service, and now
first returns home at eventime, when
the feast was already in progress.


More Perilous Faults. — The elder
son is still a son, nor are his faults
intrinsically more heinous — though
more perilous, because more likely to
lead to self-deception—than those of
the younger. Self-righteousness is sin
as well as unrighteousness, and may
be even a worse sin (Matt. xxi. 31, 32);
but God has provided for both sins a
full sacrifice and a free forgiveness. —
Farrar.


The Mirror Held Up to The Pharisees.
—The Pharisees had said at ver. 7,
at leac4 in their hearts, ‘‘ These ninety
and nine just persons are ourselves,
however!” And again, while hearing
of the lost son, “ This does not assuredly
point to us!” Another mirror is now
held up before them—“ But here see
yourselves ! ”-—Stier.


Ver. 27. “Safe and sound.” —How
nice is the observance of all the lesser
proprieties of the narrative! The
father, in the midst of all his natural
affection, is yet full of the moral
significance of his son’s return—that
he has come back another person from
what he was when he went, or while
he tarried in that far land; he sees
into the deep of his joy that he is
receiving him now indeed a son—once


dead, but now alive; once lost to him,
but now found alike by both. But the
servant confines himself to the more ex-
ternal features of the case, to the fact
that, after all he has gone through of
excess and hardship, his father has yet
received him safe and sound.—Trench.


Vers. 28-32. The Father's Condescen-
sion and Kindness. — Note (1) the
father’s condescension, and (2) his
kindness in dealing with the elder son.
He does not send a servant, but goes
himself. He entreats him to lay aside
his displeasure and to come in to wel-
come home his brother and to partake
of the feast. And notwithstanding
his son’s boasting and rude attack, he
continues composed and loving, and
answers with meekness.— Foote.


Vers. 28-30. An Unlovely Character.
—Note (1) the elder brother’s dis
pleasure at the kind reception of his
prodigal brother ; (2) his self-righteous
pride; (3) his ungracious complaint ;
(4) his malicious exaggeration of his
brother’s misdeeds, and his ignoring
the change that had taken place in
him ; and (5) his refusal to acknow-
ledge him as his brother.


Vers. 29, 30. Zwo Complaints.—
The elder son has two complaints to
make: 1. He himself has been harshly
treated. 2. His unworthy brother has
been too kindly treated. The father
replies to each of these charges in
vers. 31, 32.


Ver. 29. “Do I serve thee.”—He
thus shows that he was a slave. His
father was regarded by him as a
master—nay, aS an unjust master—
and he looks back upon his many years
of ill-requited labours. Though in his
father’s house, he has utterly lost the
filial spirit, while his brother even when
far away had retained some measure of
it. He is, therefore, so to speak, the
real and more entirely Jost son.


No Confession of Shortcoming.—
Observe that while the younger son


437


CHAP. XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





confesses with no excuse, the elder son
boasts with no confession. This at
once proves his hollowness, for the
confessions of the holiest are ever the
most bitter.—/arrar.


“« Never gavest me.”—He falls into
the very sin which his brother com-
mitted when he said, ‘“‘Give me the
portion of goods that falleth to me.”
He, too, is feeling that he does not
truly possess what he possesses with
his father, but that he must separate
something off from his father’s stock


Both words are implied in the tone of
the two speeches.


Vers. 31, 32. The Privilege of Service.

I. Fidelity in service is a privilege,
and not servitude.

II. A sinful life is a disaster, and
not happiness to be envied. For the
elder son contrasts his own hard
and unremitting service with the
careless and self-indulgent career of his
younger brother. ‘He has enjoyed
all the pleasures of sin, and now he
enjoys all the happiness of salvation !


I have never known anything but
painful obedience to Thy command-
ments !”


before he can count it properly his own.
—Trench.


Ver. 30. “Thy son.”—Some such
word as “ precious” —‘“‘this thy precious
son” would bring out the elder brother’s


Ver. 31. “Son, thow art ever with
me.” —Though the son does not say,


implied contempt still more clearly; ‘ Father,” the father address him
while ‘this thy dear brother,” in as “Son.” This sets forth God’s for-
ver. 32, would suggest the father’s bearing kindness toward the self-


affectionate reproof more adequately. righteous and uncharitable.





CHAPTER XVI.
CRITICAL NOTES.


Vur, 1. And He said also.—This implies that there is a certain, though perhaps not very
close, connection between the discourse in this chapter and that which precedes it. The
chapter mainly consists of two parables bearing upon the right use of riches in this world
with regard to the prospect of another world. This subject was specially appropriate to the
two classes of publicans and Pharisees—the one of which amassed ill-gotten gains, and the
other of which was covetous (ver. 14). To His disciples.—The parable of the Unjust
Steward, though of special bearing, perhaps, upon the publicans, was not addressed exclusively
to them. A certain rich man.-—In the interpretation of the parable the Rich Man can only
represent God, who is possessor of all things. A steward.—A man of business, or agent.
Such persons were often slaves, but it is evident from vers. 3, 4 that this man was free. By
the steward we are to understand disciples, or every man in Christ’s Church. Accused.—
pate a malicious, but certainly a true, accusation. Had wasted.—Rather, “ was wasting”
(R.V.).

Ver. 2. How is it that I hear this of thee ?—Or, “ What is this that I hear of thee?” (R.V.).
Probably the A.V. is to be preferred—i.e., not ‘What is the nature of this report?” but
“What ground is there for the report ?—produce books and vouchers.” Thou mayest be.—
Rather, “Thou canst be no longer steward” (R.V.). The steward not denying the report, it
was impossible to retain him in his office. The dismissal is to be understood of the day of
death. I cannot dig.—Rather, “TZ have not strength to dig” (R.V.). His strength had been
enervated by his soft life.

Ver. 4. Iam resolved.—The word in the original implies a sudden plan—an idea that has
just dawned upon him. They.—Je., the debtors. Receive me.—J.e., give me shelter. This
is one of the points of comparison on which stress is laid in ver. 9.


438


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XVI.


: Ver. 5. Every one.—Rather, ‘‘each one.” Debtors.—It is doubtful in what relation these
“debtors” stood to the “lord.” They were either tenants who paid rent in kind, and
whose rent was now lowered, or persons who had received advances of food from the Rich
Man’s stores, which they had not paid for, and the amounts of which were now fraudulently
altered. Probably the latter explanation is the better of the two. The first,—Two specimen
cases are given; the varying reduction in the two implies that consideration was paid to the
different circumstances of the respective debtors.

Ver. 6. Bill—R.V. “ bond” ; the literal term is “ writings.” Quickly.—Evidcntly a secret
and ee arrangement ; the debtors, too, seem to have been dealt with separately and
privately.

Ver. 8. The lord.—Rather, “his lord” (R.V.), and not Christ. Wisely.—J.¢., prudently
and skilfully. Both the Rich Man and the steward were “children of this world,” and
were therefore characteristically inclined to overlook the fraudulent part of the transaction,
in view of its cleverness and success. Wiser.—More shrewd, In their generation.— Rather,
“for their own generation ”—i.¢., in their lower sphere; in looking after their own interests,
Children of light.—Cf. John xii. 36; Eph. v. 8; 1 Thess. v. 5.

Ver. 9. I say unto you.—“ J,” in opposition to “the lord”; “ you,” in opposition to “the
steward.” Of the mammon.—J.., “ by means of ” (R.V.). “Mammon” is an Aramaic word for
“‘wealth”—not for “god of wealth,” as commonly explained. ‘“ Mammon of unrighteousness ”—
z.¢., wealth which is so generally regarded as personal property, and squandered accordingly,
instead of being considered as a trust committed by God to our charge ; unrighteously
claimed as one’s own, and unrighteously employed. Make friends.—The imagery is taken
from the parable. As the steward procured grateful friends, who received him when
dismissed from office, so may we, by charitable deeds, provide friends to welcome us into
heaven (to welcome on arrival, not to open heaven to us). When ye fail_—Rather, “ when
it shall fail”—7.e., mammon. Everlasting habitations.—Rather “the eternal tabernacles”
(8.V.)—i.e., as contrasted with the temporary refuge secured by the steward for himself.

Ver. 10. He that is faithful, etc.—In the spiritual sphere the interests of steward and
lord are identical; while in the parable the steward secured his own future welfare by
defrauding his master. He was guilty of unfaithfulness ; but we may, by showing a foresight
like his, and by using what is entrusted to us in deeds of charity, show true faithfulness to
our Lord. Our characters are tested in this way, by our taking means for securing our
eternal welfare or by our neglecting to do so. The contrast between the ‘‘least” (or ‘‘a
very little,” R.V.) and ‘‘much” corresponds to that between “ unrighteous mammon” and
“true riches” (in ver. 11), and between ‘‘that which is another man’s” and “that which is
your own ”’ (in ver. 12).

Ver. 13. No servant, etc.—“ Mammon” and “serving” in this verse show that it is still
connected with the preceding section. We are entrusted with the “ unrighteous mammon,”
but are not to be servants to it. God requires the undivided service of our hearts
(cf. James iv. 4; Col. iii. 5). :

Vers. 14-18, In this section, the connection of which with the preceding and following
parables is not at first sight apparent, we have evidently the heads of a discourse addressed.
to the Pharisees. The thread of connection seems to be the following. The Pharisees
derided the teaching of Jesus concerning riches, and plumed themselves upon their righteous-
ness. Jesus contrasts merely outward and legal righteousness with that inward righteousness
which approves itself to God (ver. 15), He declares that the period of outward legal
righteousness came to an end with the preaching of John the Baptist; that the kingdom
of God is now preached and every one (7.¢., publicans and sinners) presseth into it. Yet no
reproach was thus cast upon the Law; there was no relaxation of the standard of holiness
—nay, in the kingdom of God a strict observance of the rules of conduct was insisted upon.
The scaffolding of the legal system was taken away, but the inward principle of the Law
is eternal (ver. 17), The example given of the indissolubility of the moral law and of the
revelation, through Christ, of a stricter morality than that of the Mosaic enactments, is
taken from the law of adultery. The paragraph vers. 14-18 forms an introduction to the
parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus. The words (ver. 15) “ that which is highly esteemed
among men” are illustrated by the picture of the brilliant and sumptuous life of the Rich
Man ; the words, “is abomination in the sight of God” correspond to the statement of the
terrible chastisement in hell which falls upon him; while the permanent value of the
Law (ver. 17) is asserted over again by Abraham—*“ They have Moses and the prophets; let
them hear them” (ver. 30). In contrast, too, with those who press violently into the kingdom
of God (ver. 16), is the life of the self-indulgent sinner, who is indifferent to everything but
his own ease and comfort.

Ver. 14. Covetous.—Rather, “lovers of money” (R.V.). Derided.—The literal meaning of
the word is “to turn up the nose at.” Derided the idea; that is, that riches hindered religion,

Ver. 15. Justify yourselves.—t.e., declare yourselves to be just, or righteous, Highly
esteemed.—Rather, “exalted” (R.V.); lit. “lofty.”


439


eas me a. yiheral o


CHAP, XVL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





Ver. 16. The law, etc.—Christ here clearly distinguishes between the Old and the New
Dispensation. Presseth into it—Rather, “ entereth violently into it” (R.V.) (cf. Matt. xi.
12, 13). The allusion is to the eagerness with which some classes of the community received
the message of the kingdom (cf. Luke vii. 29; John xii. 19).

Ver. 17. One tittle —The word used described the little turns ef the strokes by which one
letter of the alphabet differs from another somewhat like it.

Ver. 18. Whosoever putteth away his wife.—The allusion here to the law of divorce is
probably a reference to the fact that the Pharisees were lax in their opinions on this point.
They allowed divorce for any cause: Christ forbade it, except for the one cause of “ fornica-
tion,” The expression in this verse might seem to forbid divorce altogether, but in other
passages where the matter is dealt with, the one exception is specified (see Matt, v. 32;
xix. 9).

Ven 19. A certain rich man.—No name given him, while the beggar has a name (ver. 20).
He is often called Dives (Latin for “rich”). Clothed in purple.—His outer dress of costly
Tyrian purple, his inner of fine linen from Egypt. Fared sumptuously.—Or “living in mirth
and splendour” (R.V. margin). No charge of gluttony or other sensual vice can be founded
on these words. He enjoyed the pleasures of this life which his wealth could purchase,
instead of providing friends against the day of death (ver. 9). His luxuriousness was of the
type described in 1 John ii. 16.

Ver. 20. Lazarus.—A form of Eleazar, which means “God my help.” This name is
evidently chosen to indicate the beggar’s piety, upon which, however, the parable lays no
stress, as the Rich Man’s sin was neglect of a brother man, and not neglect of a pious brother
man. The word translated ‘“ beggar” means simply a poor man. Full of sores.—As persons
of his class often are—cutaneous disorders, from meagre diet, and neglect.

Ver. 21. Desiring.—And evidently obtaining his desire: accepting willingly the crumbs,
though they were insufficient to satisfy his hunger. The dogs.—The wild, ownerless dogs that
roam in the streets of an Eastern city, and act as scavengers. Licked,—In contrast with the
inhumanity of men towards the beggar is set the pity of the dogs: they licked his sores
as they lick their own.

Ver, 22. The beggar died.—No mention made of burial, as in the case of the Rich Man:
the funeral rites of a pauper attract little attention. Was carried.—J.e., his soul was carried.
Abraham’s bosom.—J.e., the happy side of Hades, where the saints were regarded as resting
in bliss. The figure is that of a banquet: the beggar is placed in a seat of honour next
Abraham, The reclining at table by which the head of one person almost rested on the lap
of another, explains “ Abraham’s bosom” (cf. John xiii. 23), And was buried.—Splendid
obsequies, in accordance with the rank and wealth he had enjoyed. Taken in connection
with what follows, there seems a strain of irony in the mention of the Rich Man’s burial.

Ver. 23. In hell.—Rather, ‘in Hades” (R.V.), the baleful side of the world of spirits.
There can be no doubt that in the representation of the state of matters in the future world,
as given in this parable, Christ uses figurative language, in accommodation to the prevailing
Jewish ideas of His time, rather than reveals that world as it is. In torments.—Perhaps we
are to understand by this the anticipation of condemnation—the final condemnation being
still in the distance.

Ver. 24. Send Lazarus.—As, having been his inferior on earth, he may bé employed still as
aservant. The Rich Man is now the suppliant, but is not yet accustomed to the reversal of
his lot. Tongue.—Which had been an organ of luxury. Am tormented.—Rather, “am in
anguish” (R,.V.); the word differing from that in ver. 23.

Ver. 25. Son.—Solemn and calm reply: no mockery of his state, no grief concerning
him either. Receivedst.—Or “ receivedst to the full.” All thy good things.—“ All thou didst
account good, came to an end with life.” ‘“ hy good things.” Notice that the corresponding
word is not used of Lazarus’ “ evil things.” He did not, probably, regard them as evil, but as
part of God’s discipline towards him.

Ver. 26. And beside all this.—Je,, “‘ Even if it were not so, God’s decree has placed thee
where thou art, and a great gulf between us, so that it is impossible to grant thy request.”
So that they.—Rather, “in order that” none may pass it. Is fixed.—For ever impassable.

Vers. 27, 28. I pray thee, therefore.—His brethren were living carelessly as he had lived.
In his solicitude on their account we have a certain change in his disposition—his selfishness
gives way: and in this change we would gladly believe there is the germ of a better life,
The general tone, however, of the parable forbids much stress being laid on this,

Ver. 30. Nay, father Abraham.—Not “ They will not hear them,” for he could not tell that;
but “Leave them not to that uncertain chance; make their repentance sure by sending a
messenger from the dead.”

Ver, 31. If they hear not, etc.—The words of Abraham are stronger than those of the Rich
Man—even the lesser work of perswasion, not to speak of the greater of bringing to repent-
ance, could not be wrought by this means, The possibility of sending such a messenger is not
denied. There is no impassable gulf between Hades and the world. Lazarus of Bethany


440


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XVI.


(whose name so strangely corresponds to that of the beggar here) crossed it, and so did
Christ Himself. The Pharisees did not believe, though confronted with the fact of the resur-
rection of some from the dead. Christ, after His rising again, did not go to them—the fact
is here asserted that they would not have believed, even if He had done so. The reason for
such unbelief has its explanation: mere marvels have not necessarily any moral value, and
soon pall upon those who witness them.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—13.


The Prudent Steward.—There is at first sight a difficulty in the interpretation of
this parable; apparently there is a commendation of evil by Christ. We see a
bad man held up for Christian imitation. The difficulty passes away when we
have learned to distinguish the essential aim of the parable from its ornament or
drapery. It is not Christ, but the master, who commended the Unjust Steward.
And he did so, not because he had acted honourably, faithfully, gratefully, but
because he had acted wisely. He takes the single point of prudence, foresight,
forecast. We constantly do this in daily life. We are, perhaps, charmed by
a tale of successful robbery ; we wonder at its ingenuity, feel even a kind of
respect for the man who could so contrive it; but no man who thus relates it is
understood to recommend felony. ‘This steward had planned, he had seen
difficulties, overcome them, marked out his path, held to it steadily, crowned
himself with success. So far he is an example. The way in which he used his
power of forecasting may have been bad; but forecast itself is good.

I. Wisdom of this world.—There are three classes of men: those who believe
that one thing is needful, and choose the better part, who believe in and live for
eternity—these are not mentioned here ; those who believe in the world and live
for it ; and those who believe in eternity, and half live for the world. “ What
shall I do?” Here is the thoughtful, contriving, sagacious man of the world.
In the affairs of this world the man who does not provide for self, soon finds
himself thrust aside. It becomes necessary to jostle and struggle in the great
crowd if he would thrive. Note the kind of superiority in this character that is
commended. There are certain qualities which really do elevate a man in the
scale of being. He who pursues a plan steadily is higher than he who lives by
the hour. There may be nothing very exalted in his aim, but there is something
very marvellous in the enduring, stcady, patient pursuit of his object. You see
energies of the highest order brought into play. It is not a being of mean
powers that the world has beguiled, but a mind far-reaching, vast, throwing
immortal powers on things of time. Such is the wisdom of this world, wise in
its contriving selfishness, wise in its masterly superiority, wise in its adaptation of
means to ends, wise in its entire success. But the success is only in their genera-
tion, and their wisdom is only for their generation. If this world be all, it is
wise to contrive for it and live for it. But if not, then consider the words,
“Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee ; then whose shall those
things be that thou hast gotten ?”

Il. The inconsistencies of the children of light.—“ The children of this world
are wiser,” etc. This is evidently not true of all. There have been men who
have given their bodies to be burned for the truth’s sake ; men who have freely
sacrificed this present world for the next. To say that the wisest of the sons of
this world are half as wise as they, were an insult to the sanctifying Spirit. But
“children of light ” is a wide term. There is a difference between life and light.
To have light is to perceive truth and know duty. To have life is to be able to
live out truth and to perform duty. Many a man has clear light who has not
taken hold of life. So far as a man believes the body nothing in comparison
with the soul, the present in comparison with the future; so far as he has
felt the power of sin and the sanctifying power of the death of Christ; so


441


CHAP. XVI. HOMILETI. C COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


far as he comprehends the character of God as exhibited in Jesus Christ ;—
he is a child of light. The accusation is that in his generation he does not
walk so wisely as the child of the world does in his. The children of the
world believe that this world is of vast importance. They are consistent with
their belief, and live for it. Out of it they manage to extract happiness. In it
they contrive to find a home. To be a child of light implies duty as well as
privilege. It is not enough to have the light, if we do not “ walk in the light.”
To hold high principles and live on low ones is Christian inconsistency. If a man
say that “it is more blessed to give than to receive,” and is for ever receiving,
scarcely ever giving, he is inconsistent. If he profess that to please God is the only
thing worth living for, and his plans and aims and contrivances are all to please
men, he is wise for the generation of the children of the world; for the generation
of the “ children of light ” he is not wise. The wisdom of the steward consisted
in forecasting. He felt that his time was short, and he lost not a moment. The
want of Christian wisdom consists in this, that our stewardship is drawing to a
close, and no provision is made for an eternal future. ‘‘ Make to yourself friends.”
Goodness done in Christ secures blessedness. A cup of cold water given in the
name of Christ shall not lose its reward. Wise acts, holy and unselfish deeds,
secure rewards. “ Everlasting habitations.” Nothing is eternal but that which
is done for God and others. That which is done for self dies. Perhaps it is not
wrong, but it perishes. You say it is pleasure; well, enjoy it. But joyous
recollection is no longer joy. That which ends in self is mortal; that alone
which goes out of self, into God, lasts for ever.—Robertson.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 1—13.


Vers. 1-9. The Unjust Steward.

I. The steward dismissed.

II. The steward providing for the
future.

III. The steward commended.

IV. The lessons for disciples.—
1, Every one is a steward. 2. Be like
this steward in prudence, and use of
opportunity. 3, Be unlike him in dis-
honesty. In this he is a warning.—
Taylor.


Christian Prudence.

1. The stewardship of the unjust
steward.—1l. Careless. 2. Dishonest.
3. Commended.

II. Our stewardship.—l. We are all
stewards. 2. We shall have to give
account. We must keep our eye on
the future.— Watson.


I. Wisdom’s eye.—1. Looks far for-
ward. 2. Looks also around.

II. Wisdom’s hand.—Is quick to do
whatever needs to be done. The wisdom
of the steward’s plan would have been
folly, if it had not been carried out at
once. — Wells.


442


Special Reference to the Publicans,
—Apparently, though not certainly,
these parables were spoken that the
publicans might distinctly understand
how their ill-gotten gains were to be
used. They were to be taught that,
though their past is forgiven, they have
a duty to do with the gains they have
made. And they are addressed as men
thoroughly versed in all the ways of
monied men, wide awake to appreciate
hard work, vigilance, enterprise, and
promptitude. And the aim of this first
parable is to impress on them the
necessity of carrying over with them
into the kingdom of God the qualities
which had made them successful in the
kingdom of mammon.—Dods.


The Two Parables in this Chapter.
—Note the connection between the two
parables in this chapter: the one sup-
plements the other. The idea common
to them both is the connection between
employment of earthly goods and life
beyond the grave. The Unjust Steward
represents the man who secures his
future lot by a wise use of fleeting


Mi


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XVI.


ee eed ee eee


wealth ; the Rich Man is a representa-
tive of those who ruin their future by
a neglect of present opportunities of
preparing happiness in the world to
come.


General Teaching of this Parable.—
The sum of this parable is that we


_ should deal humanely and benignantly


with our neighbours, that when we


—come to the tribunal of God the fruit


of our liberality may return to us.—
Calvin.


The Parable Teaches Two Lessons :

I. The general one a lesson of pru-
dence in the use of temporal possessions
with a view to eternal interests.

II. The special one a lesson as to
the way of using these possessions which
most directly and surely tends to pro-
mote our eternal interests—viz., by the
practice of kindness towards those who
are destitute of this world’s goods.—
Bruce.


To Use the World for God.—The
parable teaches Christian prudence,
Christ exhorting us to use the world
and the world’s goods, so to speak,
against the world and for God.—T'rench.


I. The fault and its punishment
vers. 1, 2).

IT. The sudden resolution (vers. 3, 4).

III. The execution of the plan
(vers. 5-7).

IV. The Master's praise (ver. 8).

V. The counsel to disciples as an
application of the parable (ver. 9).


Vers 1, 2. I. Every human being is
simply a trustee.

II. We shall have to answer for
our trust.


Ver. 1. “ Accused.”—The accusation
may have been prompted by malicious
motives, but the sting of it lay in its
truth. In like manner it is not so
much the malevolence of our great
spiritual adversary that we have to
fear as the just grounds for accusation
which our conduct may afford.


Ver. 2 “ Hear this of thee.”—The
steward had abused the trust his master
had placed in him, and is called to
account. In like manner God has
entrusted much to man, and will be
strict in requiring from him an account
of his stewardship. He is not treated
as one who, from the utter corruption
of his nature, must inevitably go wrong,
but as one who is fully responsible for
all his actions.


Ver. 3. “ What shall I do?”—He
tacitly admits his guilt, and instantly
faces the situation and endeavours to
make the best of it. His self-indulgent
life has incapacitated him for hard
work of an honest kind; his pride
forbids him to beg for alms from those
who had known his former circum-
stances of affluence and power.


Ver. 4. ‘“ Receive me.” —Here we come
across the great lesson of the parable.
The steward, when put out of one home,
is anxious to secure another. In like
manner the fact that we have to leave
our home on earth, when death comes,
should make us anxious to provide for
ourselves an abiding home in the world
to come.


Vers. 5-7. Beneficence a Passport to
Heaven.—The steward acts so as to
secure benefits for the debtors, with-
out any pecuniary benefit to himself ;
and this points the moral of the parable
—hbeneficence is a passport into the
eternal habitations,


Ver. 5. Obligations.

I. The grounds of our obligations.—
The gifts of God, the gift of His Son,
peace of mind, the society of the good.

II. The discharge of our obligations.
—Cherish our blessings, live up to our
privileges, scatter our blessings among
others.


What we Owe to God.—Man is a
debtor to God. He is continually
forgetting this. Our indebtedness to
God need not paralyse us into a sudden
despair. Christ is our ransom for the


443


"S5


CHAP. XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,


ve Fhe








awful obligation of “ten thousand
talents.” But His love should constrain
us into His service. There are two
things to consider: 1. The cause.
2. The nature of our indebtedness to
God.

I. The cause.—Each of us owes an
infinite debt to God for creation,
redemption, election, and grace. To
us, especially, life should be a noble
and beautiful thing. But more blessed
than the first creation is the second.
Another mystery of the Divine love
is election—a fact which confronts us
everywhere. ‘The sovereign, righteous,
loving will of God alone accounts for
our privileges. Thank Him, too, for
grace—the continual, overshadowing,
indwelling, inexhaustible gift of the
Holy Spirit.

II. The nature of this debt.—We
owe God worship, righteousness, trust-
fulness, and love. In worship we must
render substance, testimony, service.
The law of God is to be fulfilled by us
in our sanctification. Nothing honours
God like trusting Him, or wounds Him
like failing to trust Him. This is a
service always open to all. Best, and
last, and sum of all, we owe God love.
Paying this we pay everything, and
yet feel that nothing is paid. It is
His nature to care for our love. God
is not content with loving; He desires
to be loved. But it must be a com-
plete love—tlove of mind, will, and spirit.
—Thorold.


Vers. 6, 7. “ Write fifty .. . write four-
score.”—There is nothing of spiritual
significance in these amounts. They
represent merely the shrewdness with
which the steward dealt with each
debtor, with sole reference, probably,
to the greater or less ability of each
to render a grateful return to himself
when cast upon the world.—Brown.


Vers. 8-12. Christian Prudence.

I. Prudence.—Is a shorter form of
providence. It has great value in
human life. It is needed in our con-
duct, in relation to our money, in our
undertakings, and in our companion-


444


ships. Christian prudence will show
itself in making provision for the future
world.

II. Worldly prudence and its teach-
ing.—The prudence of the worldly man
is in advance of the spiritual prudence
of the religious man, as the aims of the
former are all directed to one single
end—viz., worldly prosperity. The
religious man’s aims are too often
divided. Because worldly things are
near and visible, they are apt to share
the affections which should be wholly
centred on “the things which are
unseen.”

III. Christian prudence. — Christ
not only drew lessons from the dis-
honest steward, but He proceeded to
give us a rule for the wise use of


‘money. Use riches, not as our own,


but as the stewards of God. Use them
as He directs. We are not to make
getting rich our aim. We are not to
love riches. We are to use them freely
for deeds of charity and mercy. Christ
also gives encouragements to pru-
dence. Faithfulness in dealing as God
would have us with the “unrighteous
mammon ” is to be the means of train-
ing us for, and proving our fitness for,
the true riches. Worldly riches are
not “true”; we cannot hold them per-
manently ; they do not satisfy the soul.
The knowledge and love of God alone
satisfy the soul. These, and all that
follows with them, are a sure and
lasting possession.—TZaylor.


Ver. 8. The Follies of the Wise.—The
world can teach the Church many
lessons, and it would be well if the
Church lived in the fashion in which
men of the world do. There is eulogium
here ; recognition of splendid qualities,
prostituted to low purposes; recogni-
tion of wisdom in the adaptation of
means to end; and a limitation of the
recognition, because.it isonly “in their
generation” that the “children of this
world are wiser than the children of
light.” ;

I. Two opposed classes.—Our Lord
so orders His words as to suggest a
double antithesis, one member of which





has to be supplied in each case. He
would teach us that the “children of
this world” are “children of dark-
ness” ; and that the “ children of light”
are so, just because they are the
children of another world than this.
Thus He limits His praise, because it
is the sons of darkness that, in a
certain sense, are wiser than the
enlightened ones. And that is what
makes the wonder and the inconsistency
to which our Lord is pointing. Men
whose folly is so dashed and streaked
-with wisdom, and others whose wisdom
is so blurred and spotted with folly,
are the extraordinary paradoxes which
experience of life presents to us.

' II. The limited and relative wisdom
of the fools.—The steward would have
been a much wiser man if he had been
an honester one. But, apart from the
moral quality of his action, there was
in it what was wise, prudent, and
worthy of praise. There was courage,
fertility of resource, adaptation of
means to end, promptitude in carrying
out his plans. Bad the design indeed
was, but clever. He wasa clever cheat.
The Jord and the steward belong to
the same level of character, and vulpine
sagacity, astuteness, and qualities which
ensure success in material things, seem
to both of them to be of the highest
value. The secret of success religiously
is precisely the same as the secret of
success in ordinary things. Nothing
is to be got without working for it,
and there is nothing to be got in the
Christian life without working for it
any more than in any other. Tha
reasons for the contrast are easy to
understand. “This world” appeals
to sense, “that world” to faith. And
so trifles crush out realities.

TII. The conclusive folly of the
partially wise.—Christ said “in their
generation,” and that is all that can be
said. Let in the thought of the end,
and the position is changed. Two
questions— What are you doing it for?
And suppose you get it, what then?
—reduce all the world’s wisdom tostark,
staring insanity. Nothing that cannot
pass the barrier of these two questions


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.
eee ee en ee ee


CHAP. XVI.


satisfactorily is other than madness, if
it is taken to be the aim of a man’s
life. You have to look at the end
before you serve out the epithets
“wise” and “foolish.” The man who
makes anything but God his end and
aim is relatively wise and absolutely
foolish. Let God be your end. And
let there be a correspondence between
ends and means.— Maclaren.


Mismanagement of Eternal Interests.
—TIn this verse, Christ, after telling the
story of the dishonest steward, speaks
on His own behalf. Oar Lord adds
this comment of His own to the com-
mendation pronounced by the steward’s
master.

I. This maxim is literally true.—
Worldly people are more quick-sighted
than Christians as to worldly interests.
The very goodness of the Christian is
against him in the business of life.
He is unwilling to think evil, and un-
ready to counterwork it. So the world
often has its laugh at the Christian.

II. The text is true as a serious
reflection on the ordinary manage-
ment of a Christian life——Those who
profess to be living for eternity do not
act so wisely, with a view to that high
and glorious end, as those who scarcely
aim at anything beyond time, act with
a view to that comparatively low and
poor ambition. There are only these
two classes of men—the “children of
this age” and the “children of light.”
The former are characterised by the
absence of a definite pursuit and well-
grounded hope of an immortal life in
heaven. But the latter do not always
associate this high aim of life with true
wisdom in the choice of means.
Worldly men, in accuracy of eye,
steadiness of hand, and strength of
effort, outstrip Christian men. These
latter should copy, as regards spiritual
realities, the good method of worldly
men whose life-aims are purely secular.
It is not enough to have a higher aim
than worldly men. How does the
Christian live, in view of, and in pur-
suit of, this higher aim? Is he wise?
Is he prudent? Or is he languid,


445


CHAP. XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE..





indifferent, slothful? How searching
such an utterance of rebuke as Christ
speaks here is to all who profess to be
“children of light”? The Christian
should be inventive, resolute. Too
often he is living below his privileges
and opportunities. Great exertions
should accompany great expectations.
It is so in things earthly. Give a
man hope, and you give him zeal;
make success doubtful, and you destroy
endeavour. Let not the hope, the
zeal, the diligent endeavour of the
worldling, rebuke the sloth, the aimless-
ness, the languor, of a “child of the
light ” !—Vaughan.


Spiritual Far-Sightedness Commended.
—The Unjust Steward showed, even
in his dishonesty, a far-sightedness of
prudence which it were well if Christ-
ian people, while eschewing the dis-
honesty, could always exercise in
reference to their own higher aims and
nobler interests. The conduct of this
unscrupulous agent is made to furnish
a lesson, not of imitation certainly,
but yet not wholly of avoidance, to
the disciples of Jesus Christ.—Jbid.


The Qualities Exhibited by The
Steward.—The steward exhibits various
valuable qualities of character well
worthy of imitation—decision, self-
collectedness, energy, promptitude, and
tact.— Bruce.


“‘ Commended.” —“ Men will praise
thee when thou doest well to thyself”
(Ps. xlix. 18).


“ Wisely.”—This quality of wisdom
Christ had already commended to His
disciples, in the words, “‘ be ye therefore
wise as serpents ” (Matt. x. 16).


We May Learn from His History—

I. That dismissal, death, will cer-
tainly come to us.

II. That some provision should be
made for what is beyond.


The Word Reminds Us—
I. How intricately mixed up with


446


each other are virtues and vices, good
and evil, in this human world.—In the
character of this steward the virtue of
prudence lay intimately associated with
gross and deliberate fraud.

II. Of the high religious value of
prudence. The need and function of
prudence in relation to the life and
future of the soul.


Points in which Worldly Men often
Surpass Christians. — Worldly men
prosecute their schemes (1) with more
ingenuity of contrivance; (2) with
more singleness of aim; (3) with
greater earnestness; (4) with greater
perseverance ;—than “the children of
light” often display.


Vers. 9,10. Stewardship for the Lord.
—These sentences require careful pon-
dering, in themselves and in their con-
nection.

I. We hold all we have as the
redeemed subjects and servants of
Christ.—The steward has nothing of
his own. Weare not our own. Christ,
as Mediator, makes us His own pro-
perty. This is the secret of Christian
stewardship. You, and all you have,
are restored to yourself; but you hold
all for Christ henceforth. Your
absolute all is His. Your possessions
come under the same law. You must
give all for all. He will have no
divided stewardship.

II. What are the tokens of good
stewardship ?—1. That the entrusted
property be improved to the utmost.
2. That it be administered strictly
according to the owner’s will. 3. That
where His will is not certainly known,
wisdom or prudence does the very best.
Our Lord says, Be wise for Me as the
steward in the parable was for himself.
This is of the very essence of our trust,
that the Master leaves much to our own
tact. He gives us the main outlines of
His will, and leaves us to fill up details.
In nothing is Christian wisdom more
needed than in the right employment
of our wealth, be it greater or less.
Let the steward feeling be well
educated and keen, and there will be


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,


CHAP. XVI.





no error—at least, no error against
Christ.

III. He who habitually remembers
his stewardship will be saved from the
deadly evil which besets the posses-
sion of property, the making it into a
god.—Christ makes mammon_ the
possible rival of the Supreme. Undue
love of this world’s goods is inconsistent
with the single-minded fidelity of the
steward sentiment. Of the love of
wealth, pre-eminently, it may be said
that it cannot co-exist with the worship
of God. The only safeguard is the
habitual remembrance that what we
have is not ourown. Faithful steward
service will alone protect us from be-
coming idolaters of this world’s good.
He who serves not God with His
money makes money itself His only
god. This warning is not addressed to
the rich alone, though specially need-
ful for them. But the warning is to
all. Every one has some property,
and therefore some stewardship.

IV. To all stewards there is ap-
proaching the day of reckoning.—The
day of judgment throws its shadow over
every life. Weare all hasting to the
one last audit. Our salvation, indeed,
will depend on the presence or absence
of our faith in Christ, but the kind of
salvation, the measure of it, and the
degree of future reward assigned here-
after, will be regulated by the faithful-
ness of the life in all its boundless
variety of works. If we have proved
unjust to our Master in this life, He
will not trust us in the next.—Pope.


Ver. 9. Christ’s Teaching on Wealth.

I. Riches are not necessarily to be
repudiated.—Our Lord teaches that,
rightly used, they may add intensity to
the joy of our future condition. Out of
the mammon, whose characteristic is
injustice and untruth, we may form
friendships which will not terminate
with life. ‘I say unto you”—not
repudiate your riches, but ‘‘make to
yourselves friends out of them.”

II. These friends do not purchase
or gain for us an entrance.—They
simply receive us when we enter. Our


names must be graven, not on the
hearts of the poor saints, but on the
hands of the Redeemer with the very
nails of the crucifixion, ‘“ Friends.”
With money alone you can buy slaves,
tools, flatterers. But with money alone
we cannot buy a friend. Only he who
has « heart can wina heart. Only a
heart-winner can be a friend-winner.
Riches rightly used may therefore be
profitable for our higher interests.—
Alexander.


“ Make to yourselves friends.” —No
thought can be better fitted than that
of this parable, on the one hand to
overthrow the idea of any kind of
merit attached to almsgiving (for what
merit can there be in giving of that
which is another’s?), and on the other
to encourage us to the practice of that
excellence which assures us of friends
and protectors for so grave a crisis as
that of our entrance into the world to
come.


“ Receive you.”—In the journey of
life, as in other journeys, it is a pleas-
ing reflection that we have friends
who are thinking of us and who will
receive us with joy when our journey
is at an end.


Vers. 10-12. How the Little may be
Used to Get the Great.

I. The strange new standard of
value which is set up here —Outward
good and inward riches are compared
(1) as to their intrinsic magnitude;
(2) as to their quality ; (3) as to their
ownership.

II. The broad principle here laid
down as to the highest use of the
lower good.

III. The faithfulness which utilises
the lowest as a means of possessing
more fully the highest.—Earthly posses-
sions administered according to the
principle (1) of stewardship ; (2) of self-
sacrifice; (3) of brotherhood.—Mac-
laren


Ver. 10, “ He that is faithful.”—
Which is as much as if He had said:


447


CHAP. XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





7

The use which men make of the goods
of this present world, which are com-
paratively of small value, shows the
use they would make of such as are far
greater, were the same committed to
them, and which belong to the children
of God in heaven. If they have used
these aright, so would they use those ;
and if they have abused these, they
would abuse those likewise. Faithful-
ness and injustice are properly applied
to the use and abuse of things not our
own, but committed to us for the
honour and purposes of the owner.
For to apply them to our own uses and
purposes, and not His, would be a
breach of trust, and therefore unfaith-
ful and unjust in a very high d-gree,’
—Palmer.


“Teast . . . much.”

I. This verse suggests that we are
in this world merely on, trial, and serv-
ing our apprenticeship.

II. That it is our fidelity to the
interests entrusted to us that is tried,
and not so much whether we have done
little or great things.


Faithful in Little, Faithful in Much.

I. True faithfulness knows no dis-
tinction between great and small
duties.

II. Faithfulness in small duties is
even greater than faithfulness in
great.

III. Faithfulness in that which is
least is the preparation for, and
secures our having, a wider sphere in
which to obey God.— Maclaren.


Faithfulness—Put to the mind alone,
as if that were all there is of us, the
mind might ask doubtfully how it can
be true, It looks as if one might be
upright in large transactions, and yet
careless in trifles; tell the truth com-
monly, but not always ; keep the law of
the school under the teacher’s eye, but
break it out of sight ; meet emergencies
handsomely, but in the commonplaces
of every-day affairs come short. We
have seen such lives. What, then, does
Christ mean? He says that faithful


448


men and faithful women are faithful:
everywhere, under all conditions, in all
places alike. “ Faithful,” full of faith.
This chosen word is the key to the
sentence. Faithfulness is not a single
virtue, or a separate trait. It runs
through the whole character, as blood
through the body. The root of it is
faith in God, and itself is the root of
all excellencies and all moralities.
Faithfulness is not a thing of more or
less, of seasons or opportunities, of
ornament or convenience. Principles
never are, and faithfulness is a prin-
ciple. Duty is universal because God
is universal. Duty is unchangeable
because God is unchangeable. The
“least things” in which each of us is
faithful or faithless, are not only the
beginnings of what seems great in the
eyes of men, they are great already
by what they come out of; they are
discharges of a life within us; they
signify a principle in the working and
springs of character; they uncover
and they prove the inward frame and
habit of soul on which eternal life
depends.— Huntington.


Vers. 11, 12. Stewardship for Self.
—In this whole section there is a quiet
undertone of reference to the true
wisdom of life in extracting as much
good as possible from all the elements
of this world’s evil, especially from
what we call its possessions.

I. Extracting it for self, and not
only for our Master.—There is, indeed,
a sense in which self may be entirely
suppressed, self as a final end, self as
the director of life. But, on the other
hand, it is the will of God that the
benefit of self shall, as subordinate,
never be lost sight of. There is a
Christian care for self which is at
once the supremest wisdom and the
supremest unselfishness. We must
think and act in the midst of the
dangers of time, and the snares of
earthly wealth, for the interests of our
immortal souis when time and the
wealth of time are ended and gone.

II. For this is the true secret, that
we have no self apart from our


_% ae


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


Master.—We never reach the height
of our Lord’s teaching, nor rise to the
grandeur of our relation to Him, until
we so identify ourselves with Him and
His universal cause on earth that we
know no difference between His and
ours. This is the true evangelical
glorification of the steward principle.
The more we have of earthly goods the
more are our graces tested, and, if we
are wise enough to sustain the test, the
more confirmed becomes our renun-
ciation of this world, and our prefer-
ence of heaven. The wisdom of a
man who has the dangerous trust of
possessions is not only to keep himself
from the special peril that besets him,
but to turn the danger to good account.
That is the lesson of the chapter, and
of our whole life.

III. After all, we must go beyond
this world for the Saviour’s most im-
pressive illustration of His meaning.
—wWe cannot disconnect the steward-
ship of time from the issues of eternity.
All that we possess is ours for a season,
that through our prudent use of it we
may advance our own interests for
ever. In two ways the Divine Teacher
impresses this upon us: 1, We may
make to ourselves friends by the
mammon of unrighteousness, who shall
welcome us to everlasting habitations.
2. By fidelity below in that which is
least we may prepare ourselves for
larger trusts, and for a jurisdiction
hereafter for which the stewardship
of time furnishes but a slight analogy.
Christ’s emphatic preface, ‘I say unto
you,” introduces the lesson that we
must in our better and holier cunning
create for ourselves friends by the
charitable use of our substance. What
the poor worldling in the parable did
for the poor self of this generation, you
must do for the higher and nobler self
of the world to come. But that is not
all. Our Lord teaches that our
stewardship here may be so adminis-
tered as to prepare us for larger trust
hereafter. The Unjust Steward does
not teach us this, save by contrast. He
so failed that he could never be trusted
again. Weare to be trusted hereafter


GG


CHAP. XVI,








according to the measure of our capacity
for trust acquired here. There will be
stewardships in the other world, with-
out probation, and without fear of
failure, proportioned and accommo-
dated to the character we have ac-
quired here. The general principle of
fidelity is to be trained in this life, and
this prepares for independence in the
coming life.— Pope.


Ver. 11. “The unrighteous mam-
mon.” —Unrighteous because (1) it is
so often used and enjoyed without any
thought of God; (2) because it is so
often acquired in unlawful ways;
(3) because it is the source of manifold
temptations (1 Tim. vi. 9, 10), which
make it difficult for a rich man to
enter into the kingdom of God (chap.
xviii, 24, 25).


Ver. 12. “ Another man’s.”—Wealth
is here described as belonging to
another, because it is not absolutely
our own, but may at any moment be
recalled, and must at the hour of death
be resigned. . In opposition: to it are
those spiritual benefits which are truly
“our own,” because, once obtained
through faith, they constitute an in-
alienable property.


God's Faithful Steward—tThe last
inference from the most difficult of all
Christ’s parables. It is a retrospect
from the other side of death, when the
earthly life lies all behind, shrunk to a
single poiit and act. “ Ifin that which
was another’s ye were not faithful, who
shall give you—I appeal to yourselves,
to your common-sense, to your first
principles of reason and equity—who
shall give you that which shall be your
own ?”

I. “That which is another’s” is the
whole of this life’s possession.— Even
while we have it, it is another’s. Not
only a trust, a stewardship. No idea
of personal ownership can for a
moment enter into it. It is so pre-
carious in its tenure that we cannot
reckon on it for a day; we brought it
not into the world, and we cannot
take it with us when we leave the


449


CHAP. XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





world. Itis not part of us—it is an
adjunct, an accessory, an accident ; it
may go any day—it must go one day.
It is another’s, even while we have it.
Il. “That which is your own.”—
The sound is pleasant to the ear. The
lust of possessing is an instinct of
nature. It waits not for the developed
covetings of manhood. Even our own
souls are not yet our own. They are
“ our own ” only at last, as the prize of
the lifelong conflict, the stake of the
game in which the man and the man’s
enemy are at play. This makes life so
serious, so momentous. The risk of
not “ gaining” as “our own,” our own
souls! The soul itself is not yet our
own; it depends on the life, the life
earthward and heavenward, the life
towards man, and the life towards
God. To the good steward, when all
fails him, and the stewardship of the
long past must be accounted for, he
shall find himself for the first time as
an owner, the soul, the self, the re-
deemed and sanctified nature, being at
last given him for his own. This is the
gospel for which we can never be too
thankful, of the new ideal of life as
Jesus Christ taught, exemplified, and
inspires it in His people. Life a
trust ; all that life has for us, another’s ;
we ourselves stewards, not owners, re-
quired, aroused, and enabled to be
faithful! Our Lord appeals to this
very lust of possessing. We must
wish to possess. Only the fool and the
mammon-worshipper can be indifferent
to the question, ‘“ Who will give you
mat which is your own?”—Vaughan.


“ That which is another man’s . . . that
which is your own.”—The parable of
the Unjust Steward is admittedly hard
to be understood. No other of our
Lord’s parables has called forth so
many and such a variety of comments
as this. The words of ver. 12 supply
the key to the mystery of this parable ;
they are the solution of its difficulties.
What are the difficulties of interpre-
tation which the parable presents?
How very harsh and unusual appcar
such words as “ And the lord com.


450


mended the unjust steward.” What
sort of a lord could he have been, to da
thus? It relieves us to find that it
was not ow Lord, but the lord of the
steward, who commended him for
acting wisely, though dishonestly. The
fact that he did so simply proves that
the master was as bad as the man.
They are “children of this world,”
governed by the same principles, actu-
atel by the same motives. The lord
had suffered by the roguery of his
servant, but could not withhold a
tribute of admiration at the display of
the same qualities which he himself
possessed. This explanation removes
some of the difficulties, but not all.
Our Lord holds up something here as
an example for us. What is there
shown us in this picture which we may
imitate? Not the principles govern-
ing the conduct of the Unjust Steward.
They were wholly detestable. But the
transaction itself is to be imitated,
having respect to the relationship
between our Master and His stewards.
Here we have a man entrusted with
the goods of another so using them as
to obtain an advantage for himself.
Are there any conceivable circum-
stances in which we might. use goods
entrusted to us by another for per-
sonal profit? Only under one con-
dition, and that condition exists here.
If that other person entrusted us with
his property, with the express purpose,
intent, command, so to use it as to get
increase for ourselves, then, and only
then, would this be right. While
there are similarities between the
relations of the lord and the stewardin
the parable and our Lord and His
stewards, there are also differences ; for
the parable teaches by dissimilarities
as well as by similarities. The lord
entrusted his goods to the steward that
he might trade with them for the
maste:’s benefit, and the steward’s
fidelity would consist in so doing.
The relation between our Lord and
His stewards is the reverse of this.
He entrusts us with His goods to te
us d, not in enriching Him; that is


impossible,—no conceivable traflicking


\


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


STEEN eee


of ours can increase His wealth,—but
the use is to be for our own profit.
“TJ say unto you”—I who am the
Lord of all you possess—‘“ make to
yourselves friends of the mammon
of unrighteousness, that when ye fail
they may receive you into everlasting
habitations.” Faithfulness in that
which is least will secure for us that
which is much.

I. The further exposition, therefore,
of this saying of our Lord’s depends
on the interpretation put upon two of
its phrases: “That which is another
man’s,” and “ That which is your own.”
What are we to understand by these?
No sooner do we begin to think about
them than we find a great confusion of
ideas. Thereisa very general reversal
of the order of truth in the interpre-
tation of these two phrases. What is
“your own”? Most people, when they
contemplate their own, fasten at once
upon worldly possessions — houses,
lands, businesses, accumulations, in-
vestments, worldly position, honours
in society, dignities achieved. ‘These
are my own,” say they, and in this
territory they walk, imagining that
here they are supreme. But these are
the very things which are not your
own, ‘“ Where,” say you, ‘is the
man who can successfully question the
validity of my title-deeds? Who is he
that will challenge my right to these
things? They were bequeathed by
my ancestors, or they have been gotten
by my own industry, or accumulated
by my thrift. Surely these are my
own!” And yet it isof precisely such
things as these that Christ speaks
when He uses the phrase ‘“ that which
is another man’s.” But whose are
they? Where is the other who can
claim proprietorship in them? There
is One whose presence filis eternity, in
whose hands our breath is, and whose
are all our ways. The Lord of Life
and Being has endowed us with being
and with all we possess. We ourselves
are His. ‘The silver and the gold are
His, and the cattle upon a thousand
hills.” If I tell the truth as to all the
things I “own,” I shall say, “The


CHAP. XVI.





Lord Jehovah, all are His.” But you
will say, ‘Oh yes, wa admit all that.
That is Theology.” Yet there are
very few who are influenced by the
considerations arising out of this ad-
mitted truth. But there are other
men in question. It is not possible to
acquire any earthly things of which
we can say that we have the absolute
proprietorship. Other men have
claims and rights in them. We are
but trustees for the common good.
Worldly possessions are not “ our own.”
Surely to-day men are learning that
property has its responsibilities as well
as its rights, its obligations as well as
its privileges. No man has the right
to say, ‘This is for myself, and my-
self only.” He holds for his brethren
in general. The solution of the social
problems which perplex society lies in
the recegnition of this great Christian
doctrine of trusteeship. Because these
things are not our own is no reason for
seeking, by an equal division of prop-
erty, to adjust the rival claims of
different classes in society. Nothing
could be more absurd or unfaithful.
Not in absolute prcprietorship, nor by
arbitrary divisions, nor by attempted
communism, but by the doctrine that
all we have we hold as trustees for the
gocd of those by whom we are sur-
rounded, shall we fulfil the Divine
purpose in committing to our keeping
“that which is another man’s.” I
almost hear you say again, “ Yes, we
admit all this.” But how much un-
faithful trusteeship there is, neverthe-
less! To bring the truth home to us
we must reflect upon the fact that, in
the most literal and absolute sense,
these worldly things are not our own—
they are “another man’s.” How soon
the day will come to all of us when,
willingly or reluctantly, we shall be
compelled to part with earthly goods !
In prospect of that hour we may
already ask ourselves, in the words of
the prophet, ‘“ Where will ye leave
your glory?” It must be left.
Where can it be left that we shall ever
find it again? Then, when we are
confronted with the death-summons,


451


CHAP. XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





whose shall these things be which we
have fondly imagined were “our
own”? What wonderful ingenuity
men display in their testamentary
arrangements, in order to declare
whose those things shall be. Alas!
how futile their endeavours. Not for
long in any case—often not even for
a short period—can they say whose
those things shall be, but into the
hands of another, or of others, all
must be surrendered. That inevit-
able “other man”; how he dogs our
footsteps in life, ever following on our
track !—a few short days or years and
he will overtake us. Most certainly
these things are noé “ our own.” They
are “another man’s.” Ere long that
other man will be examining our
papers, operating upon our balance at
the bank, and dividing our property—
perhaps in the manner we should least
desire. What, then, 7s our own? Is
there in this changeful world anything
we can so appropriate that it shall
become in very deed our own? God,
in His infinite goodness and mercy
through Jesus Christ our Saviour, has
made it possible for us to become
possessed of true riches which shall be
our heavenly portion, our eternal in-
heritance. Nothing external is really
our own. But-the moral qualities we
possess, as the result of dealing with
earthly things—these are our own:
love of justice, mercifulness, truthful-
ness, humility, benevolence—these
are the patrimony of man, made after
the image of God, and in His like-
ness. Inwoven daily into the very
texture of our spiritual being are
qualities which become a part of our-
selves. God sees, not only what we are,
but what we may become. He sees the
loftiest ideal for every human being,
what we might be if the utmost possi-
bilities were reached. This He has
willed shall be our own, and has
bidden us reach out to and obtain as
much of these highest possibilities as
we choose. In the formation of cha-
racter we are acquiring that which
shall be ours for ever. Unhappily,
many make their own what God


452


never intended should be theirs. The
contrary qualities to those I have
mentioned—the carnal, the sensual,
even the devilish—may become ours.
It is possible for men to become un-
truthful, unjust, unmerciful.

II. If we thus clearly understand
what is “ another man’s” and what is
“our own,” then the teaching of the
text becomes at once apparent. Only’
by faithfulness in the use of another’s
can we become possessed of that which
God intended should be ours. By our
use of the things of earth we are
obtaining the higher things that ap-
pertain to our character and destiny.
Possessions in themselves base and
carnal may be so employed that out of
them we shall secure the spiritual and
the heavenly. From the “ unrighteous
mammon ” we may extract the “true
riches”—from that which is least,
that which is much; from the fleeting
treasures of this life, the enduring
wealth of eternity ; from that which is
“another man’s,” that which is ‘“ our
own.” All the relations of our life
here become thus invested with a vast
importance. We cannot afford to
despise the earthly: we cannot neglect
its proper use, or fail in righteous
dealing with it, but we beggar our
real selves. Many scarcely reflect that
their daily trafficking with worldly
matters—their business, their gains,
their losses, their ambitions, and their
plans—are leaving indelible traces on
their spiritual being. The material
things they handle will perish in the
using, but the noble qualities—the
generosity, the unselfishness, the truth-
fulness, the mercifulness, the God-like-
ness—they have acquired in the sphere
of worldly duty will abide with them
for ever. The great truth thus incul-
cated has many applications. It is true
of every temporal possession, of every
earthly relationship, and of all talents,
of whatsoever kind, with which we are
entrusted. Its immediate and obvious
application is to the use of money—
and this was the application primarily
intended by our Lord. It may be
supposed that such a use of this great


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XVI.


aa a EE a SE


lesson will at once lead us to a dis-
cussion of the duty of Christian giving.
We may come to this ultimately, but
there are several other aspects of our
dealing with that which is “ another
man’s” to be first considered. The
mischief to some men’s characters is
done before they come to the claims
of charity ; it is done in the process
of getting and accumulating. They
have already acquired a nature so
sordid that they are “ past feeling.”
They cannot give because they have
so much, or because they have got
it by means dishonourable or de-
structive of their nobler nature.
Years ago, when they were poorer
and purer, if they had been told of
some of the things they now do and
say, they would have been ready to
cry, ‘‘Is thy servant a dog, that he
should do this thing?” Nothing more
surely corrodes and destroys the lofty
nature that God intends should be our
own than ill-gotten gain and the love
of hoarding for its own sake. It can-
not be too urgently impressed upon us
that in our modes of getting money,
and plans and purposes in accumulat-
ing it, we are moulding our characters.
Men who would secure ‘their own”
must sometimes be content to stand by
with hands off when other people are
eagerly gathering—they must allow
some things to go past them, for the
price of taking them is the sacrifice of
their highest, truest manhood. The
truth holds good, not merely in re-
lation to great wealth and large trans-
actions in business; it finds its illus-
tration in all spheres—even the
lowliest. The merchant or trader who
leaves his counting-house or his shop
when the day’s work is done leaves
behind that which is ‘‘ another man’s.”
He leaves the interests, the claims, the
rights of others which have been with-
in his power, but inevitably he carries
away something vastly more important
to himself: insensibly, but continu-
ously, he has been acquiring “his
own,” and he goes from the manu-
factory or the warehouse morally a
better or baser man. During every


hour of the day he has been silently
appropriating “ his own” whilst hand-
ling that which is “another man’s.”
And even so the workman, in his
common tasks, is fashioning his own
character and moulding his inner life.
He builds into the unseen parts
of an edifice with honesty, with truth
and fidelity, and these qualities are
at the same time strengthened and
built up in his own being. Let
there be base and false work at the
forge and the loom, and he who has
done it may suppose the transaction is
ended when the fraud has passed un-
detected. Not so; the falseness he
has perpetrated has become part of
himself—he has made that “ his own”
which he supposed he had inflicted on
“another man.” Nor is it merely in
the modes of getting money, but in the
purposes for which it is retained and
used, that men mould their characters
and destiny. For there are circum-
stances in which it is right, and indeed
our duty, to retain wealth, that it may
be wisely used as a fund for the good
of others. God has given some men,
not only large capital, but ability and
opportunity so to lay it out that they
may provide work and wages for
others. In such cases the first duty of
a capitalist is to take care of his
capital. It is not “his own”; it
belongs to others, and is entrusted to
him that he may employ it for the
common weal. We are all of us
familiar with the spectacle of the
miserable millionaire who has treated
the great fund entrusted to him as if
it were “his own.” He has employed
it in great gambling speculations, that
he might have the unhallowed excite-
ments that have ended in a moral and,
perhaps, mental and bodily paralysis.
Instead of light and love and truth,
he has for his own a great curse, ex-
tracted from his great capital. There
is the opposite picture sometimes to be
looked upon—the man who has so
wisely and generously used his means
that he has blessed thousands, and has
himself grown more and more unsel-
fish, He has cultivated the best


453


CHAP. XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





things in his own spirit and character,
whilst he has worked in the use of
wealth for the good of others. But it
is not given to all of us to find “ our
own” or lose “our own” in these
larger spheres of duty. It is, how-
ever, certain that all of us are deter-
mining ‘‘our own” by the use we make
of “another man’s” in the matter
of Christian giving. Whether we
have less or more of this world’s goods,
in our response to the calls of charity
we affect for good or evil our dispo-
sitions and our characters. And as to
financial arrangements, let us look at
our support of missionary and kindred
institutions in the light of our Lord’s
teaching in this parable.
money to carry on Christ’s work in
distant fields is one of the tests—and
one of the best tests—of our wisdom
and fidelity in the use of “that which
is another man’s.” In no other way
can we more surely exchange the
carnal things of earth into the cur-
-rency of the heavenly world. Pounds,
shillings, and pence will have no cur-
rency there—they will have lost their
purchasing and commanding power ;
but ere we pass hence the treasures of
earth may be exchanged for the true
riches, the fleeting things of this world
for the enduring wealth of eternity.


The call for.


The mammon of unrighteousness ce
be so used that at length they sha
receive us to the everlasting habitations.
Let us learn habitually to deal with
the things of earth in the light of
eternity.— Pope.


Ver. 13. “No servant.”—In this
verse Christ states what the fidelity is,
which in this stewardship is required ;
it is a choosing of God instead of
mammon for our lord. For in this
world we are in the condition of
servants from whom two masters are
claiming allegiance. Oneis God, man’s
rightful lord; the other is the un-
righteous mammon, which was given to
be our servant, to be wielded by us in
God’s interests, and itself to be con-
sidered by us as something slight,
transient, and another’s—but which
has, in a sinful world, erected itself
into a lord, and now demands allegiance
from us, which if we yield, we can be
no longer faithful servants and stewards
of God. Therefore, these two lords
have characters so opposite, it will be.
impossible to reconcile their service
(James iv. 4): one must be despised
if the other is held to; the only faith-
fulness to the one is to break with the
other, “ Ye cannot serve God and mam-
mon.” —T'rench.


MAIN HOMILETICS ON THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 14—31.


Abused Wealth the Rich Man’s Ruin.—The parable of the Unjust Steward
teaches the right use of worldly wealth;-and the central point of the mis-
cellaneous sayings in vers, 14-18 is the permanence of the Law and the Prophets.
Both points reappear in this parable.

I. The earthly contrast of the two lives.—There is a double contrast—the
sharp and shocking diversity between the prodigal abundance of the Rich Man’s
dress and fare and the squalid misery of the diseased beggar, and the contrast
between the end of their lives. With regard to the first it is to be clearly
understood that Jesus Christ is not running a-tilt against rich men, as if wealth
was wickedness, or a beggar necessarily a saint. But it should be as clearly
noted that He is declaring the essential wickedness and inhumanity which dog
the possession of wealth, as a constant danger; namely, the use of it for selfish
purposes, so as to preserve in all its sharpness the contrast between its possessor
and the poor. The Rich Man’s duty to Lazarus was not discharged by letting
him have the leavings of his feasts, as he seems to have done. Rich men may
do small charities and yet be guilty of such use of their wealth as will sink them
to ruin. The name Lazarus (Eleazar, “God is help”) suggests the thought of


454


=_


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE CHAP. XVI.





the poor man’s devoutness, though in the parable the fact. of his piety is not
dwelt upon. Not because Lazarus was pious, but because he was poor and
leprous, was it the Rich Man’s business to help him. Christ’s teaching about
wealth is not communistic or socialistic. He recognises fully the right of individual
possession, but He emphatically asserts that possession is stewardship, and that


_ we hold money, as we do everything, in trust for those who lack and need it.


Lazarus dies first, worn out by privation and disease. Perhaps, if he had been
carried indoors from the gate, he would have lasted longer. What a change for
him! The one moment lying in the fierce sunshine, so motionless and helpless
that the dogs came about him as if he were dead, and he had no strength to
drive them away ; and then he is carried by angels into Abraham’s bosom. He
has no funeral, as the other has. The Rich Man dies, and, of course, has a
splendid interment, with all the proper pomp and circumstance. His wealth can
get him a fine funeral, of which he knows nothing ; and that is all that it can do.

If. The contrast of the two lives in Hades.—Our Lord paints that unseen
state in colours taken from the ordinary Jewish conceptions. “ Abraham’s
bosom,” the bearing of the soul by angels, the dialogues between the dead, were
all familiar rabbinical ideas ; so that it is difficult to say how far we have here
representations of fact. The main idea seems to be that of the reversal, in
Hades, of the earthly condition. Lazarus is now in the place of joy and abund-
ance; the Rich Man is now the beggar lying at the gate. He who would give


nothing of his abund ance, but was deaf to the groans and blind to the misery at


his gate, has now to feel the pangs of need and to crave a drop of water to cool
his tongue. The solemn answer put into the lips of Abraham expresses the
impossibility, from the very nature of that state, of granting the desired allevia-
tion. It is a state cf retribution, the outgrowth and necessary issue of the
earthly life, and so cannot be otherwise than it is. ‘“ Remember.” The past
will stand clear befor e the selfish man and be a toiment—he is tortured by the
very desires he has nourished and by the stings of conscience and memory.
“Thy good things.” He who makes the world his good is necessarily wretched
when he is swept out of it by the whirlwind of death, and sees, when too late,
what a blunder his estimate of its good was. On the other hand, the pious
beggar received things that were “evil” in reality, but yet were not the things
which he regarded as truly evil; and because he, on his part, placed his good
higher than the world, therefore evil wrought for good to him. The lesson of this
parable is the converse of that of the Unjust Steward; namely, that the selfish
use of wealth is fatal, and brings bitter retribution in another life. The second
ground for the refusal of the request is the existence of the “ great gulf” which
forbids passage from either side. Doctrinal statements can scarcely be founded
on the parable, yet we see that there is no hint of repentance in the Rich’s Man’s
ery, and that the implication of the whole is that his character was set. True,
the state of Hades is not a final state; but it is also true that the narrative
gives no reason for holding that the character of its inhabitants is anything but
permanent.

III. The sufficient warnings by Law and Prophets.—The rich man’s second
petition has often been treated as a sign that his selfishness was melting, and
that so he was on the road toa better mind. But the natural instinct of family is
not in itself more than selfishness in another form ; and his request implies that
he thinks the fault of his being where he is, lies not at his door, but is due to
imperfect warnings. That does not sound like repentance. “If I had hada
message from the grave, I would have repented.” So many of us think that it
is God’s fault, not ours, that we yield to temptation. But the real ground of our
sinful, godless lives is not a deficiency of light and warning, but inward aversion.
Every man has far more knowledge of good than he uses. It is not for lack


455


CHAP. XVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


either of warning or conviction that men are lost. They do not need enlighten-
ment, but, as Christ significantly puts it here, “persuasion.” The Pharisees,
whom Christ is pointing at here, were giving signal proof of the power of
neglecting miraculous evidence, even while, like the Rich Man, they were calling
out for it from Jesus. This latter portion of the parable is directed against them,
and completes the reference of the whole to the preceding part of the chapter.
The first part echoes the lesson of the Unjust Steward: this repeats the assertion
of the permanent validity of Law and Prophets. But though directed presumably
agaiust the Pharisees, both have their lesson for us. We have knowledge and
motive enough to walk in the paths of godliness. If we do not give heed to
what we have, it would be vain to send even messengers from the dead to us.
What is lacking in us, if we do not yield to the light, is not more light, but eyes
to see, and a heart to love it.—WMaclaren.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 14—31.


Ver. 14. “ Derided Him.”—The II. Our Lord regards that mission


Pharisees listened to these counsels
concerning wealth with a scorn and
contempt which expressed themselves
openly. The Saviour and most of His
followers were poor, and rich men
are very apt to despise what they
consider the cheap Quixotism of the
views of pious men concerning the best
use of riches, when those men are
themselves poor.

No doubt the Pharisees found con-
firmation of their belief that the love
of riches was compatible with the love
of God in the fact that the Law spoke
of riches as a mark of the Divine
blessing.


Ver. 15. The Judgment of Men and
the Judgment of God.

I. Men see but the outside, and are
easily deceived : God sees the heart,
and cannot be deceived.

II. Man judges by one standard,
God by another.—Rank, wealth,
ability, learning, attract the admira-
tion of men, while only moral and
spiritual elevation of character wins
the approval of God.


Ver. 16. Until John and Since.

I. The ministry of the Baptist, short
as it was in its duration, slight appa-
rently in its consequences, is made the
turning point of the dispensations.
The spiritual history of the world was
cleft in twain by that brief mission.


456


as already part of the past—almost of
the far past. Time moves quietly
when God is making history ; one day
is sometimes as a thousand years, no
less truly than the converse.

III. There is a strength in the
expression “ presseth” which makes
it less the staiement of a fact than the
utterance of a triumphant anticipa-
tion.—This is that tone of prophetic
jubilation which breaks in so often
upon sadder themes of discourse as the
Saviour marches toward Jerusalem and
Calvary.— Vaughan.


The Virtue of Violence.—“ Presseth
violently.” Violence is here for once
made a virtue. In the life of the
kingdom there are some characteristics
fitly expressed by these strong words.

I. The life of the kingdom is, in
part, a life of renunciations.—It has
to make sacrifices, to make war on sins,
vehemently to determine not to miss
the heaven where only righteousness
dwells with God.

Il. The life of the kingdom is not
an easy one, in what it demands of
the reason. Not that Christ would
commend haste or rashness in belief,
or expect any man to believe first and
then inquire. But even in believing
there is a timidity which is not
prudence, and ‘a vehemence which is
not presumption. The gospel is a life,
the entrance upon a new idea and plan


" ae


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAI. XVI,


——_—---—————— eee


of existence; and, this being 60, it is
folly to make the question of faith or
no faith a matter of caprice or acci-
dent. Therefore the man is to be
commended who will brook no delay
and no diversion in the settlement of
the question of questions: how, in what
allegiance, he is to live.

III. The life of the kingdom is a
life of two chief activities —Godward
and manward. Devotion and work.
Vehemence in prayer is not an in-
congruous term to apply to devotion.
Force, zeal, earnestness too, are neces-
sary to the perfection of the Christian
character. Positive activity manward.
For lack of this most men swim with
the stream, and their spiritual life tends
to decay. How much nobler the life
of the man who “ presses” into the
kingdom !—Jbid.


Vers. 16-18. The New Hra.-—1. There
is a change in the Divine method: the
Law and the Prophets prepared men for
the kingdom of God, but now the
kingdom has come; the mercy of God
to the sinful is revealed, and all are
summoned to take advantage of it.
2. There is a general movement in
human society ; multitudes of the out-
cast and despised are pressing into the
kingdom. 3. Yet the holiness of God
which the Law proclaims remains for
ever the same; the glad tidings of
forgiveness do not imply a diminution
of the Divine requirements. 4. On
the contrary, under the gospel a severer
and more spiritual standard of morality
is set up: the sanctity of the marriage-
tie, for example, is greater under Christ-
ianity than it had been in Jewish
society.


Ver. 19-31. Contrasted Destinies.

I. A series of solemn dramatic con-
trasts to startle the Pharisees out of
their complacent selfishness.—1. The
contrast between Dives and Lazarus
in life. 2. The contrast is resumed
_ beyond the grave. 3. A contrast of
character underlies the picture.

II. Passage from the dramatic to
the didactic stage of the parable.


—l. The destinies of a lost soul are
appealed in vain to the court of natural
affection. 2. The contrasts of the
hereafter are maintained by the in-
exorable necessities of the Divine
government. 38. The permanence of
the contrasted destinies beyond the
grave is certified by the permanence
of human character. 4. These final
contrasts hereafter rest upon a common
probation in this life.—Selby.


Dives and Lazarus.

I. Dives was lacking in the neces-
sary grace of holy charity.—His
ignorance of Lazarus was culpable. A
man ought to know the sorrows of
those who are in his path.

II. The other world-picture reverses
their positions.—Two great principles
prevent Dives’ misery from being miti-
gated. 1. God’s compensating justice.
2. God’s sovereign arrangement that
in another world there should be the
exact contrast of this.

III. Good desires may spring up too
late in the heart.

IV. Every living man has provided
for him, within his present grasp, all
that is necessary for his own salva-
tion.

Vv. The manner in which the
Bible is to be savingly used.—
Vaughan.


An Unfaithful Stewards Doom.—
The Pharisees scoffed at our Lord’s
“ visionary” account of property: this
parable is His reply. The intense and
natural curiosity of men about the
future life has led them to pass over
the tremendous moral and _ practical
lessons of the parable, in their en-
deavour to discover what it reveals
concerning the fate of the impenitent.
But what is it that our Lord meant
the parable to teach? The Rich Man
thought that his wealth was his own,
to do with as he liked. It never
occurred to him that it all belonged to
God. How did he incur such a terrible
doom in the spirit-world? An awful
and hopeless doom! By his flagrant
breach of trust in not using lis wealth


457


CHAP. XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


ee EEEnEEnEEEnennetenmecimme td


for the relief of those whose sufferings
touched the Divine heart, and to whom
he should have been the minister of
Divine pity. To God this was intoler-
able. The “flame” is the ficry dis-
pleasure which God feels at his selfish-
ness.— Dale.


A Warning to the Selfish.

I. The ecovetous rich.—Condemned
by Christ. 1. By direct reproof.
2. By illustrative parable.

II. The covetous rich and the godly
poor.—1. Contrasted in worldly con-
dition. 2. Contrasted in the hour of
death. 3. Contrasted in the unseen
world.

III. Lessons of the story.—1l. Cer-
tain destruction awaits the worldly.
2. Peace and joy await those whose
treasure is in heaven. 3. Repentance
must be in this life: there is none
beyond.—Taylor.


Here and IHereafter.—The story of
two men.

I. In this world.—1. The Rich Man.
2. The poor man.

II. In the next world.—l. In
Abraham’s bosom. 2. In hell.—Wat-
son.


Outline of the Parable.

I. The earthly condition of the two
men (vers. 19-22). 1. The Rich Man’s
mode of life (ver. 19). 2. The poor
man’s mode of life (vers. 20, 21).
3. The death of the former (ver. 22a).
4, That of the latter.

II. The condition of both in the
world beyond the grave (vers. 23-31).
1. The torment of the Rich Man, and
his request (vers. 23, 24). 2. The
reply of Abraham (ver. 25, 26).
3. The Rich Man’s second request
(vers. 27, 28). 4, Abraham’s second
reply (ver. 29-31).


The parable teaches—l: The un-
certainty and transitoriness of earthly
blessings. 2. The responsibility of rich
men, not only for what they do, but
for what they do not do with their
wealth. 3. The supremacy of the law


458


of God as a guide to eternal lif.—
Speaker's Commentary.


Selfishness and Its Doom.—1. Ths
Rich Man’s selfishness. 2. His in-
difference to the misery of his fellows,
8. His dreadful doom.


Two Scenes.

I. The earthly scene.—The con-
dition and manner of life of the twe
men ; their characters and dispositions,
as yet unrevealed.

II. The Rich Man’s selfishness
implied by his neglect of his poor
neighbour.

III. The scene beyond the grave.—
The altered circumstances of the two;
the permanent character of the new
conditions ; relief of present misery,
and a warning to those still on earth
refused.


This World and The Next.

J. For mankind, after this life is
done, another world remains, con-
sisting of two opposite spheres or
conditions—one of holiness and happi-
ness, the other of sin and misery.

If. There is a way from this present
life to the place of future misery, and
also a way to the place of future
blessedness.

III. There is no way over from
one of these future states to the
other.

IV. Our Lord would constrain us to
make the needful transition now.—
Arnot.


The parable emphasises the facts—
(1) that one may enjoy a high stand-
ing in the sight of men and be
reprobate before God; (2) that an
unloving temper is essentially base;
and (3) that a terrible penalty is
inflicted on those who misuse the
world’s goods,


A Trilogy.—The parable of Lazarus
and the Rich Man is the sublimest
delineation of this side and of that sids
of the grave in its astounding antitheses
What is the trilogy of a Dante, in


——


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





which He sings of hell, purgatory, and
heaven, compared with the trilogy of
this parable, which places with few
but significant strokes the great whole
of Earth, Gehenna, and Paradise, at
once before our eyes.— Van Oosterzee.


Ver. 19. “A certain rich man.”—
Jesus said not, a calumniator; He said
not, an oppressor of the poor ; He said
not, a 10bber of other men’s goods, nor
a receiver of such, nor a false accuser ;
He said not, a spoiler of orphans, a
persecutor of widows ;—none of these.
But what did he say? ‘‘ There was a
certain rich man.” And what was his
crime? A lazar lying at his gate, and
lying unrelieved.— A ugustine.


Abuse of Riches—Riches may be
abused (1) not only by positive misuse,
but also (2) by the careless and thought-
less use of them. These two lessons
are taught respectively by the pre-
ceding and by the present parable.


Ver. 20. “ Named Lazarus.” Seems
he not to you to have been reading
from that book where He found the
name of the poor man written, but
found not the name of the rich; for
that book is the book of life.—
Augustine.


Ver. 21. ‘The dogs came.”—The
kindness of the brute brings out in
deep relief the inhumanity of man.

The nakedness and hunger of Lazarus
are contrasted with the rich clothing
and sumptuous banquets of the Rich
Man.


Ver. 22. “The beggar died.”—The
beggar died first, being taken from his
sufferings ; the other was given longer
space for repentance.


“Oarried by angels.” —Here is one
who in his life had not a single friend ;
and now suddenly not one, but many
angels wait upon him.—Luther.

The


Beggar's LEscort—I. Angelic


CHAP. XVI.


ministry.—Surplusage of angelic ser-
vice. Not one angel, but two or more,
an indication of the glad and bright
willingness with which the humble
task of duty was done. <A gracious
and honouring superfluity of helpful-
ness.

II. The differentiation of Divine and
human estimates.—The angels were
doing God’s bidding. The plurality of
this deputed bodyguard means, not only
service, but honour. A message to us
not to stand on our dignity and self-
respect, but to honour Christ’s lowly
ones. The scornful rabbis would have
declined to accompany a_ beggar’s
funeral. The angels gladly escort his
liberated spirit to the abodes of the
blessed, for he was a true “son of
Abraham.” Would yow feel honoured
if asked to attend a pauper’s funeral,
or to help to lay the deal-encased body
in the grave? Or would you judge
only by the outwaid appearance, and
show yourself at the rich man’s burial?
The angels “‘see not as man seeth,”
and count it an honour to be the
bodyguard of a beggar, and the mini-
strants of his spirit.—G@rosart.


“ Abraham’s bosom.” —To correct the
notion that wealth, as such, excludes
from happiness hereafter; or that
poverty, as such, ensures fruition of
that happiness, it is sufficient to ob-
serve that the beggar Lazarus is carried
by angels into the bosom of the rich
man Abraham, who made a right use
of the riches of this world.


A Sudden Change for The Better —
In an instant Lazarus finds in the
heavenly world the sympathy and
help which had been denied him on
earth.


“And was buried.”—There is a
sublime irony, a stain upon all earthly
glory, in this mention of his burial,
connected as it is with what is imme-
diately to follow. The world, loving its
own, follows him, no doubt, with its
pomp and pride, till it could not follow
any farther. There was not wanting


459


CHAP. XVI.


“HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,





the long procession of the funeral
solemnities through the streets of
Jerusalem, the crowd of bired mourners,
the spices and ointment, very precious,
wrapping the body; nor yet the costly
sepulchre, on which the genial virtues
of the departed were recorded. This
splendid carrying of the forsaken tene-
ment of clay to the grave is for him
what the carrying into Abraham’s
bosom was for Lazarus; it is his
equivalent, which, however, profits him
little where he now is. For death has
been for him an awakening from his
flattering dream of ease and self-enjoy-
ment upon the stern and terrible reali-
ties of eternity. He has sought to save
his life, and has lost it. The play in
which he acted therich man is ended,
and, as he went off the stage, he
was stripped of all the trappings with
which he had been furnished that he
might sustain his part. There remains
only the fact that he has played it
badly, and will therefore have no praise,
but uttermost rebuke, from Him who
allotted to him this character to sustain.
—Trench.


Ver. 23. “ In hell.”—The Rich Man
is thus represented as awakening from
the momentary unconsciousness of
death to full consciousness; and the
first object he discerns is Lazarus,
whom he had seen lying in wretched-
ness at his gate, reposing in the seat of
honour beside Abraham.


Ver. 24. “ Father Abraham.”—This
is the only example in Scripture of
the invocation of saints, and does not
afford much encouragement for the
practice.


Vers, 25, 26. The Request Denied.—
The request is denied for two weighty
reasons: 1. It is unreasonable. 2. It
is impossible to grant it.


Ver. 25. Memory in Another World.
—I. Memory will be so widened as to
take in the whole life.

II. Memory in a future state will


460


probably be so rapid as to embrace all
the past life at once.

Ill. It will be a constant remem-
brance.

IV. Memory will be associated with
a perfectly accurate knowledge, and a
perfectly sensitive conscience as to
the criminality of the past.—Maclaren.


Different Modes of Divine Procedure.
—God deals with men in different ways:
on some He seeks to awaken gratitude
by bestowing upon them many gifts;
others He leads through suffering
to humility and pious resignation in
spirit. And in accordance with the
results produced is the retribution in
the future world: the ungrateful find
themselves in poverty and misery ; the
meek are healed of their wounds, and
exalted to felicity.


Ver. 26. “ Beside all this.” Not only
would there be a moral impropriety in
granting the request, but the decree of
God had made it impossible to grant it.
An unfathomable gulf which could not
be spanned separated between the Rich
Man and the company of the blessed.


Vers. 27, 28. “Send him to my
father’s house.”—The request of the
Rich Man is incompatible with theinter-
pretation of the parable, which regards
it as condemning riches, and not merely
the abuse of riches. The five brethren
are in danger of coming to the place of
torment because of their unbelief and |
impenitence, and not because of their
being wealthy.


Ver. 28. “ Lest they also.” —We can-
not escape the conclusion that in the
Rich Man’s words there is .a certain
reproach against God and the Old-
Testament economy, for his not having
received sufficient warning. The re-
proach is rolled back by Abraham’s
reply : “ They are sufficiently warned:
the fault is theirs if they, too, go to
the place of torment.”


The Five Brethren.—The effect which
might possibly have been produced


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XVI.





upon the five brethren of Dives, by
Lazarus “ going to them from the dead ”
has been described as follows: “He
stands and knocks at the door of their
mansion, and at length enters in. his
grave-shroud. His glazed eyeballs and
hollow cheeks declare him a tenant of
the narrow house. In deep, sepulchral
tones he says, “I have come from the
night of the grave, and I know of
death, and of hell, and of heaven, and
it’s all true.” But the eldest brother
is a Pharisee. He is a self-righteous
man. He fasts and he prays. He
pays tithes of all he possesses. He is
not as other men are—the message
cannot be for him. The second brother
is a Sadducee. He believes neither in
angel nor in spirit. He is the type
of the sceptic of the present day—
when death comes, it is utter annihila-
tion. He explains away the appear-
ance of Lazarus as an optical illusion.
The third is a merchant—buying, and
selling, and getting gain. He is an
avaricious man; but his brother left
_ him no legacy in his will, and he cannot
now believe that he cares for his soul
in eternity, when he cared so little for
his body on earth. The fourth is a
fashionable man, a man of esthetic
taste and culture; he loses himself in
the beauties of nature, of art, of litera-
ture. The sight of Lazarus in his
mansion was an offence to him. What
had this beggar got to do here.
The message could not be for him.
The fifth was a delicate, pale-faced
youth; the least thing put his poor
heart in a flutter. He could bear no
excitement, and, as he beheld the form


of Lazarus in his grave-clothes, ho
swooned away ; and when he recovered,
the apparition was gone.—Robertson.


Ver. 29. “ Hear them.”—There are
two kinds of hearing.

I. That which is confined to out-
ward acquaintance with the Law and
the Prophets, and acceptance of their
teaching Divine truth.

Il. That which is manifested in
obedience to the will of God revealed
in His Word. The Scriptures were
read in the synagogues, and were care-
fully studied by the Rabbis, so that no
Jew could fail to “hear” in the one
sense of the word. There needed to
be added to intellectual knowledge a
love of holiness, and practice of it in
daily life.


Ver. 30. “ Vay, .. . but if one went.”
—As the works of the blessed dead
follow them, so follow this man his
ignorance of the way of salvation, his
neglect and practical contempt of the
extant Word, his self-will and self-
vindication, his pertinacious demand
of signs and wonders from the mighty
hand of God.—Stier.


Ver. 31. “If they hear not,” etce.—
I. The ordinary means of salvation
which we enjoy are amply sufficient.

II. If the ordinary means of grace
fail to convert us, no extraordinary—
that is, miraculous—means are to be
expected.

III. When the ordinary means fail
to convert men, miracles, though they
were wrought, would fail also.—/oote


461


cHAP. xvu. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.
oe ee


CHAPTER XVII.
CRITICAL NOTES.


Vur. 1. Then said he.—Rather, “ And he said” (R.V.). The previous discourse had been
addressed to the Pharisees; we have now detached sayings addressed, probably on various
occasions, to the disciples. This section is more fully given in Matt. xviii. 6-35. It is
impossible, etc.—*“ So long as the world lasts, sins and occasions of sin will exist; but this
fact does not destroy the personal responsibility of each individual for his own sin (Speaker's
Commentary). Offences.—Rather, “ occasions of stumbling”’ (R.V.). The recent behaviour
of the Pharisees (xvi. 14), to whom so many looked up with respect, was an instance of
stumbling-blocks being cast in the way of those weak in the faith (“little ones,” ver. 2).

Ver 2. It were better.—Or “It were well” (R.V.). Lit. “It were gain for him.” Offend, —
As before, “cause to stumble” (R.V.). Little ones.—Not necessarily children, though it
applies to them; perhaps here the reference is specially to the publicans and sinners.

Ver. 3. Take heed.— This is to warn them not to be too readily dismayed at ‘ offences,’ nor
to meet them in a brother with an unforgiving spirit” (Adford). Against thee—Omit these
words (omitted in R.V.); probably taken from Matt. xviii. 15, or from the following verse.
Rebuke.— Perhaps one of the reasons why “offences” abound is the neglect of this duty—
that of rebuking them in a proper spirit.

Ver. 4. Seven times.—A general expression, not to be taken literally. Some of the Rabbis
fixed three times as the limit of forgiveness.

Ver. 5. Increase our faith.—Rather, ‘‘Give us more faith.” This request was doubtless
' prompted by a sense of weakness in overcoming “ offences” and in exercising so large a
measure of forgiveness.

Ver, 6. If ye had.—Rather, “If ye have” (R.V.). A grain of mustard seed.—A proverbial
expression for a very small amount. The phrase implies that the apostles had some, but not
sufficient, faith. Sycamine tree.—The words were evidently spoken in the open air. The
sycamine is the mulberry tree; it is different from the sycamore or Egyptian fig-tree of
xix. 4. Planted in the sea.—There to grow; a stronger expression than in the parallel
passage in St, Matthew. ‘The whole passage may be thus paraphrased: You think the duties
T enjoin too hard for your faith, but this shows you have as yet no faith of the high order you
ought to have, for the smallest measure of such faith would enable you to do what seems
altogether impossible in the natural world ; and so much the more in spiritual things, since
real faith is pre-eminently spiritual power” (Popular Commentary).

Ver. 7, A servant.—T.c., a slave. Feeding cattle.—Rather, “keeping sheep” (R.V.). By
and by.—JTe., straightway, immediately. The phrase is to be connected with the words
spoken by the master, ‘‘Come straightway and sit down to meat.” There is no harshness
in the orders given.

Ver. 8. Till I have eaten, etc.—In xii. 37 a different assurance seems to be given. But
Christ is here speaking of what we have a 7ight to expect ; there He describes the favour He
will bestow on faithful servants.

Ver. 9. Doth he thank.—J.e., does he feel special gratitude because his orders are
obeyed? Certainly not,—even if he is in the custom of thanking his servant for acts of
obedience, the fact remains, upon which the parable is based, that he feels under no special
obligation to him for assiduous labours. I trow not.—These words are omitted in R.V., and
are not really needed to complete the passage, since they are implied in the question “ Doth
he thank?” etc. There is, however, an air of genuineness about them.

Ver. 10, Unprofitable.—J.e., not useless, but as doing nothing beyond bare duty. It is
implied that we are often much more “unprofitable” by reason of our so often failing in
duty. “Wretched is he whom the Lord calls an unprofitable servant (Matt. xxv. 30);
blessed is he who calls himself so” (Bengel).

Ver, 11. Samaria and Galilee —This mention of Samaria before Galilee is perplexing, being
the opposite direction to a journey to Jerusalem. Probably “through the midst” is to be
understood as meaning “along the frontiers of.” Probably the incident here recorded
occurred about the time and place referred to in ix. 56. ;

Ver. 12. Ten men.—If this miracle took place near a border village, we can understand
how a Samaritan and Jews should be in the same company—all outcasts from society
because of their leprosy, Afar off.—See Lev. xiii. 46; Numb. v. 2


462


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE, omar. xvu.





_ Ver. 13. And they.—The word is emphatic; their faith in Jesus led them to take the
initiative,

Ver, 14. Go, show yourselves.—According to the Law (Lev. xiv. 2-32), Jesus did not, as on
a former occasion, touch the lepers (ver. 13); His purpose seems to have been to test their
love for Him as Healer. Faith they had; love leading to gratitude was only found in one of
them. As they went.—Evidently they had not gone far.

Ver. 16. A Samaritan.—Probably he was on his way to the priests in his own temple at
Mount Gerizim,

Ver. 17. Were there not ten cleansed ?—Rather, “ Were not the ten cleansed?” (R.V.)
Ie., did not the cure operate on all alike? A sadness of tone is perceptible in this question,
The ingratitude of his own countrymen was revealed in this want of love for benefit received
by the nine lepers.

Ver. 18. Give glory to God.—Not mere personal ingratitude to Jesus, but insensibility to
the compassion of God manifested through Him. This stranger.—Rather, “alien.” The
Samaritans were Gentiles, and nota mixed race. Their religion was a mixture of Judaism
and idolatry. See 2 Kings xvii. 24-41.

Ver. 19. Made thee whole.—Rather, “ Hath saved thee” (R.V. margin). “In a higher sense

than the mere cleansing of his leprosy. Theirs was merely the beholding of the brazen
serpent with the outward eyes, but his, with the eye of inward faith; and this faith saved
- him—not only healed his body, but his soul” (Afford).
: Ver. 20. Demanded of the Pharisees.—We can scarcely think that they had any good end
in view in asking this question; it is probable they expected to get some answer which might
be used against Jesus. Their idea of “the kingdom of God” was that it would be an
outward manifestation of God’s sovereignty in the world, in which a splendid position of
supremacy would be assigned to the Jewish nation. With observation.—J.e., in such a
manner as to be observed with the outward eye.

Ver. 21. Within you.—Or “In the midst of you” (R.V. margin). The latter rendering is
certainly to be preferred. The kingdom of God was certainly not in the hearts of the
Pharisees, though it, as a visible society, was among them in the community of believers in
Christ. All through the remainder of the chapter it is a visible coming of Jesus that is
referred to. The rendering “ within you” would yield a perfectly valid sense, but one not at
all in harmony with the eschatological character of this discourse.

Ver. 22. One of the days.—J.¢., even a single day. Perhaps one of the days which He had
passed with them on earth; but more probably, as regret for the past was superseded by hope
for the future, one of the days which would follow His return,

Ver. 23. See here.—F alse reports of His return. His return would be sudden, and not of a
local character. Cf. Matt. xxiv. 23-27.

Ver. 24. For as the lightning.—“ The lightning, lighting both ends of heaven at once, seen
of all beneath it, can only find its full similitude in His personal coming, whom every eye
shall see (Rev. i. 7)” (Alford).

Ver. 25. But first.—The Son of man must be taken away before He can return (vers. 26-30).
The security and carelessness of the world before the Flood, and of the inhabitants of Sodom
before its destruction by fire, are referred to as illustrating the condition in which the world
will be before the second coming of Christ.

Ver. 31. Upon the house-top.—A place of cool and quiet resort. Not come down.—Z.e., not
re-enter his house, but escape away by the flight of steps outside. Not return back.—As in
the case of Lot’s wife, who turned back in heart to Sodom.

Ver. 33. Shall seek.—Perhaps rather, “ Shall have sought ”—.¢., in his preceding life, shall
lose his life then. Preserve it.—Rather, “ Make it alive,” or bring it forth to life. The figure
is that of parturition—an emblem of the birth of soul and body to life and glory ever-
lasting.

Ver. 34. In that night.—Time of peace and security: the Son of man cometh “as a thief
in the night.” The one shall be taken.—J.c., by the angels (cf. Matt. xxiv. 31): he who is
left is rejected, for his unworthiness.

Ver. 35. Two women.—Grinding at a mill, as is still common in the Kast.

Ver. 36. Two men.—This verse is omitted in all the best MSS. and versions ; omitted in
R.V. ; it is evidently derived from the parallel passage in St. Matthew.

Ver. 37. Where, Lord ?—This is a question put by the disciples. Where, i.e., should this
manifestation take place? They have not taken in what Christ has said about His manifestation
instantaneously to the whole world, and about the folly of listening to the cry “See here!
see there!” (ver. 23). The answer is a re-affirmation of the universality of the Lord’s ap-
pearance and of God’s judgment. Eagles.—Rather, “vultures,” as eagles do not prey on
carrion. ‘As the vultures are found wherever there is a carcase to prey upon, so the
judgment of Christ will come wherever there are sinners to be judged—i.e., over the whole
world ” (Speaker's Commentary).


463


al
t 7


cHap.xvu. MOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—6.


Counsels to Disciples.—Various attempts have been made, but without success,
to connect together the utterances of Christ on this occasion, and to trace the line
of thought which links the one to the other. It seems probable that St. Luke
here groups together fragments of teaching, without any attempt at arranging
them in order, and without giving any note of the circumstances that gave rise to
them. Perhaps he found them just as he here gives them, in some record of the
life of Christ such as he alludes to in the opening verses of his gospel. Three
distinct topics are treated of in these verses.

I. Concerning offences (vers. 1, 2).—He speaks to His disciples, and espe-
cially to those who were strong in the faith, and warns them against setting
stumbling-blocks in the way of the weak. Many were drawing near to Him and
attaching themselves to Him whom the disciples were in danger of despising and
affronting, unless they took especial care to avoid doing so; such were publicans
and outcast classes of the population, Samaritans and strangers from the heathen
world, and also persons who had faith in Christ and did good work in His name
without formally connecting themselves with the company of believers. It was only
too easy for prejudices of race, class, and office, to prompt a harsh treatment of
such “little ones.” Then, too, it was no doubt the case that among the first
generation of disciples, as in later times, there were some who were loud in their
professions of faith, but lax in their moral conduct, and who could not fail to
bring discredit upon the Master’s cause, and to hinder some from embracing it.
Scandals of this kind are far graver and more pernicious than those which arise
from mere prejudice and want of consideration for the feelings of others.
Hence probably it was this class of scandals which our Saviour had here in view,
and which excited His indignation so strongly. His words reveal both His
tender sympathy for the “little ones” whose hearts are troubled and whose sal-
vation is imperilled by the misconduct of others, and His righteous anger that those
who do such deadly mischief should bear His name and be ranked among His
followers. Scarcely stronger terms could be chosen to express the terrible punish-
ment which such conduct deserves, and will receive. The infinite value of the
human soul, the especial pity which He has for the weak and timid, and His in-
dignation against wilful offenders, are most clearly brought to light in this saying
of His.

II. Concerning forgiveness (vers. 3, 4).—Our Saviour has in view here the —
sins of which a man may be guilty in ordinary intercourse with his brethren.
They may excite feelings of anger or irritation, but are not serious or heinous
enough to be brought before a judicial tribunal. And for dealing with them
Christ advises a mild, brotherly admonition, in order to bring the offender to a
sense of the wrong he has done, and prescribes forgiveness to be extended to him
on his repenting and confessing his error. However often offence may be given,
forgiveness is to. be exercised whenever asked for by the offending party. Both
indignation against sin and compassion towards a sinner find a place in the course
of procedure here laid down. In ordinary society, men are accustomed to pass
over many such offences good-naturedly, and to omit the friendly admonition ; so
that neither is the offender brought to a sense of his wrong-doing, nor is the love
that prompts to forgiveness brought into play. The forgiveness which Christ
prescribes for His disciples is to be inexhaustible, like that which He Himself
exercises towards penitent sinners. He chooses a symbolical number to describe
the extent to which it is to be carried, and therefore the rule He here lays down
is practically equivalent to that which He gave on another occasion, when, instead
of seven times He spoke of seventy times seven.


464


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.  cuap. xvit


III. Of faith (vers. 5, 6).—The request which the apostles offered to Christ was
probably suggested by seeing somes extraordinary manifestation of the Saviour’s
power, which they desired to imitate—such, for example, as the withering of the
barren fig-tree (Matt. xxi. 20); or by experiencing some failure in work which they
had attempted to do—as when, for example, they attempted to hcal the epileptic
boy (chap. ix. 40). The reply of Christ taught them that it was not a matter of
little and more. Let them have real faith in any degree and they would be able
to accomplish the greatest marvels. Faith establishes a connection between the
human and the Divine, and all the power and resources of omnipotence are
brought to supplement and aid our weakness. Yet, just as Christ Himself did
not use His supernatural power for purposes of display or for His own personal
benefit, so the fulfilment of this promise is only to be seen in the history of what
His disciples have done for the extension of His kingdom. The triumphs of the
gospel, in overthrowing deeply rooted systems of idolatry and in defeating the
malice of its enemies, are as wonderful as thc miracles in the physical sphere


which Christ here and elsewhere gives as examples of the power of faith.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON


Vers. 1-10. The Spirit of Eatra
Service—Even in the highest place,
and doing the highest and heartiest
service—

I. There is need of a lowly spirit.—
Our Lord gives very express teaching
on this point. Our highest service
may sometimes be in the spirit with
which we regard a brother who has
offended us, in pushing past us, perhaps,
or trying to take our place. Roots of
bitterness, however strong, may easily
be uprooted, even by a weak faith, and
acts of love planted, as it seems,,in the
very sea.

II. Such service may be very
suddenly required of us.—It may not
seem part of our proper work, far less
direct service. to our Lord. Our
ploughing or pasturing may seem so to
fill up our time and to wear out our
strength that we may feel excused from
such calls to extra service or sacrifice
as the ambition or thc rudeness of a
brother may render needful. So our
Lord gives the parable of a servant
thus ordinarily occupied during the day.
But is he to hold himself discharged
from personal service in the house if
his Master should require it? Would
he not willingly postpone any gratifica-
tion, as of rest and refreshment for
himself, if called to wait while his
Master was refreshed, and to minister
to His pleasure? And this is the way


HH


VERSES 1—6.


in which our Lord represents some of
those extra services, hard and trying
in one sense, but full of joy when
rightly viewed.— McColl.


Vers. 1-4. I. Obstacles cast mali-
ciously in the way of the weak.—
Which demand severe punishment.

II. The sins of brethren.—Which
eall for gentle reproof and continued
forgiveness.


Vers. 1,2. I. Weshould beware of
occasioning offences.

II. We should beware of being
overthrown by such offences.


Ver. 1. “ Jinpossible.”—T.e., morally
impossible in a world so largely under
the influence of sin. Yet the responsi-
bility of those who cause “ offences” is
not thereby removed or diminished.


“ Offences.” —I.e., things which the
sincere disciple may with reasonstumble
at, because they are dishonouring to
his Lord and hurtful to the Church.

These may be (1) acts of persecution ;
(2) sophistry or false reasoning ;


(3) heretical and extravagant opinions ;


or (4) immoral and inconsistent con-
duct on the part of those who make a
religious profession.

We must distinguish between offences
tuken and offences given: it is against


465


cHAP. Xvi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





the latter that this woe is directed.
Offence may be taken on very frivolous
grounds.


Ver. 2. “Jt were better for him.”—
There is a profound difference between
the sentiment expressed in this verse
and that current in worldly society,
concerning there being worse things
than death. ‘ Death rather than dis-
honour,” “rather than disgrace brought
upon one’s family,” are supposed to be
heroic expressions. But here it is
“death rather than wrong-doing,
rather than casting a stumbling-block
in the way of the weak.” Pride
animates the worldly sentiment,
whereas the Christian is interpenetrated
by a deep sense of the heinousness of sin.


Vers. 3-5. Faith Getting in and Giv-
ing Out. Love’s labour consists of two
parts, doing and bearing. These two
are different but inseparable. They
may be compared to the right and left
hands of a living man. The Christian
life is sometimes mainly a laborious
activity, sometimes mainly a patient
enduring, and sometimes both at the
same time and in equal measure. I
could not venture to decide which is
the greater Christian, the man who
bears injuries patiently, in a forgiving
spirit, or the man who labours hero-
ically in some department of active
duty The “doers” are better known
in the Church and the world than the
“bearers.” The results of active love
bulk more largely in history than those
of passive love. But perhaps in the
inherent merits of the case, and in the
judgment of the Omniscient, faith has
éorne as much and as precious fruit in
enduring evil as in doing good. The
meek, Christ-like bearer of evil is as
much needed, and as much used in the
work of the kingdom, as the actual
Christ-like doer of good. In the present
case it was on the side of bearing
injury that the heavy demand was
made. Assuredly those early disciples
of the Lord found the duty as difficult
as any positive work in which they had
ever engaged. In trying to fulfil it,


466


they speedily reached the end of their
own resources; and, finding that
they possessed not the sufficient supply
for meeting and satisfying this new
demand, they said to the Lord, ‘ In-
crease our faith.” —Arnot.


Ver. 3. “ Take heed.”-—These words
are to be connected with vers. 1, 2.
‘“Take heed”: 1. Because it is so easy
to cause others to stumble. 2. Be
cause of the terrible penalty attaching
to the sin of overthrowing another’s
faith ; the lost soul is like a weight
fastened to him who has ruined it, and
drags him, in his turn, down into the
abyss.


Ver. 3. “If thy brother,” ete.—The
disciple is to be animated by (1) holi-
ness in reproving sin, and (2) by love
in forgiving it. Holiness becomes cen-
soriousness when it is divorced from
love; love degenerates and loses its
Divine character when it is divorced
from holiness.


“ Forgive him.”—Forgiveness, to be
adequate, should be (1) instant, (2)
frank, (3) complete.


Motives for Forgiveness.—I. From a
regard to our own peace of mind.

II. From a regard to the happiness
of the world at large.

III. From a regard to the express
injunctions of Scripture.

IV. From a regard to our own need
of Divine forgiveness.


Ver. 4. Forgiveness. — Repentance
seems to be required here before for-
giveness is granted by us; and conse-
quently it would seem to be implied
that we may refuse to pardon obstinate
offenders. We need, however, to keep
in mind that there are two kinds of
forgiveness. 1. We may lay aside
every idea of revenging an injury, and
suppress feelings of hatred, and show
kindness to the offender, without modi-
fying the unfavourable opinion we
have formed of his conduct; and (2)
we may be able to receive the offender


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XVII.





again into favour, and to be fully
persuaded that all hindrances to in-
timate fellowship with him are fully
withdrawn.


Ver. 5. ‘And the Apostles said.”—
They who were so often divided among
themselves, and animated by a spirit of
petty rivalry, now unite in humble
supplication for the supply of their
spiritual necessity.


“Increase our faith.”"—I. Some
measure of true faith is needed for
safety and holiness.

Il. True faith is of a progressive
nature.

“Certainly they did never have any
grace who did not complain to have
too little” (Hal).

“JT have no grace till I would have
more” (Donne).


Prayer and Faith.—* For faith they
ask; and, by asking, show their faith.
Thus prayer ever increases faith,
and faith ever inclines to prayer.’—
Williams.


The Disciples’ Prayer.—In this short
prayer the disciples assumed—

I. That they already believed, ask-
ing for an addition to the faith they
already possessed.

II. That it is more faith that will
produce more obedience.

III. That the faith which worketh
by love ‘s not of themselves, but is the
gift of God through His Son.—In these
assumptions, having been secretly
taught of the Spirit, the apostles were
deeply intelligent and completely cor-
rect. And our Lord, in His reply,
acknowledges that their inferences are
correct.— Arnot.


Ver. 6. “If ye had faith.”—Some
faith they had, yet not such great faith
as to give the command specified and
be obeyed. The illustration of the
power of faith here given is intelligible
only on the principle that spiritual
miracles are greater than those wrought
in the material world.


“As a grain of mustard seed.’—
Small, yet living and capable of rapid


increase,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 7—10.


The Dutiful Servant.—This parable is comparatively unfamiliar to most readers
of the New Testament, and that probably for two reasons. It has no setting, no
significant and illustrative framework of circumstance, and it has a sterner, a
severer, tone than we commonly hear in the parables of our Lord. The view of
human life and duty which it presents is not a welcome one. We are compared
to a slave—to a slave who has been hard at work all day in his master’s fields,
first driving the plough and then tending the cattle. When he returns to the
house at sundown, new duties, new toils, await him. Instead of being permitted
to rest, or invited to recruit himself after the fatigues of the day, he has to
prepare his master’s supper, to gird himself and wait on him. Even when he
has discharged these new duties, he gets no thanks for his pains. He has but
done his duty. He is only an unprofitable servant. At first the parable seems
hard and ungracious, but the more carefully we consider it, the more true to the
actual facts of human life do we find it, and the more sorry, therefore, we should
be to miss this saying of Christ’s. Has not nature itself its sterner, as well as
its more gentle and benignant, aspects—its severity as well as its beneficence,
its storms as well as its calms? And human life—is that always smooth and
easy? Is it invariably and unbrokenly gracious? Is it a sacred and welcome
possession always, and to all men? Are there not myriads to whom it appears
a mere succession of ill-rewarded toils, a mere dull round of labour, cheered by no
thanks, by no approval, by no applause? And if the Great Teacher were to
depict human life fairly, if He was to be a fair and full representative of the


467


td alll


cuar. xvi.  HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





God whom we find in nature and in human nature, was it not inevitable that He
should portray all the facts and aspects of our life—inevitable, therefore, that He —
should utter some such words as these? Nay, more; isit not well for us that at —
times we should dwell on these severer, as well as on the more tender and
benignant, aspects of human life and duty? If we are men, and not babes in
Christ, the word duty will hardly be less dear to us than the word love. If we
are brave we shall hold the title “dutiful servant” to be hardly less honourable
than that of “ loving and obedient child ”—we shall rejoice that the path to heaven
is steep and hard to climb, since only by a severe and bracing discipline can we
rise to our full stature, and come to our full strength. We need to be roused
and stirred by the clarion call of duty, as well as soothed and comforted by the
tender breathings of love. And here the call comes to us loud and clear, waxing
ever louder as we listen and reflect. “Do your duty, and when you have done
it, however laborious and painful it may be, remember that you have only done
your duty. If you are tempted to a dainty and effeminate self-pity for the hard-
ships you have borne, or toa dangerous and degrading self-admiration for the
achievements you have wrought, let this be your safeguard, that you have done
no more than your duty.” ‘The very moment we grow complacent over our work,
our work spoils in our hands. Our energies relax. We begin to think of
ourselves instead of our work, of the wonders we have achieved instead of the
toils which yet lie before us, and of how we may best discharge them. So soon
as we begin to complain of our lot and task, to murmur as though our burden
were too heavy, or as though we were called to bear it in our own strength, we
unfit ourselves for it ; our nerves and courage give way ; our task looks even more
formidable than it is, and we become incapable even of the little which, but for
‘our repugnance and fears, we should be quite competent to do, And then, how
bracing is the sense of duty discharged, if only we may indulge in it. And we
may indulge in it. Does not Christ Himself teach us to say, “‘ We have done
that which it was our duty to do”? He does not account of our duty as we
sometimes account of it. All that He demands of us is, that, with such capacities
and opportunities as we have, we shall do our best, or at lowest try to do it.
Honesty of intention, purity and sincerity of motive, the diligence and cheerful-
ness with which we address ourselves to His service, count for more with Him
than the mere amount of work we get through. He would have us account, as
He Himself accounts, that we have done our duty when we have sincerely and
earnestly endeavoured to do it. The thin and hard theology which denies all
merit to man, is alien to the spirit of Christ. True, He bids us to add to the
statement “we have done our duty,” the confession “we are unprofitable
servants.” And no doubt the humility of that sentence is as wholesome for us as
the grateful and sustaining pride of the other. For what man of a really manly
and generous spirit does not feel, even when he has done his best, that he might
have done more? And even when he has done his most, as well as his best, what
man of a really Christian spirit does not both lament that he could not do more,
and gratefully acknowledge that he could not have done so much—that he could
have done nothing good—but for the grace and help of God? What does he
feel but that nothing is done till all be done? Finally, let us remember that the
whole truth cannot be packed into a single sentence, or even into a single parable.
Our Lord sometimes enforces one aspect of it, and sometimes another. It does
not follow because we very justly call ourselves “ unprofitable servants ”—i.¢.,
unworthy or unnecessary servants, of whom God stands in no need, and who can
do but little for Him—that He will call us unprofitable. On the contrary, if we
do that which it was our duty to do, if we but sincerely try to do it, we know
that He will call us “good and faithful servants.” And in this very parable
it is to be observed that Christ is simply saying how men do act, not how they


468


al Gees ee Bee a aie


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XVII.





ought to act ; what they do demand of their servants, not what they ought to
demand. Even if we suppose the man in the parable, who tuxes his servant
to the utmost, and takes all he does without thanks, to be a good master, it
by no means follows that God will not prove better and kinder than the best of
men. He may do, He certainly will do, far more than they do, far more even


than they ought to do.


The true supplement to this parable of the Dutiful


Servant is to be found in the parable of the Kind Master (chap. xii. 35-37).—


Cox.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 7T—10.


Vers. 7-10. The Parable of Extra
Service.—The watchword of Christian
ethics is not devoteetsm, but devotion ;
the kingdom first, everything else
second, and, when the interest of the
holy state demands it, military prompti-
tude in leaving all and repairing to the
standard. This idea is essentially the
key to the meaning of this difficult
parable, which we may call “the
parable of extra service.”

I. The service of the kingdom is
very exacting.— Involving not only hard
toil in the field during the day, but
extra duties in the evening, when the
tired Jabourer would gladly rest, having
no fixed hours of labour, eight, ten, or
twelve, but claiming the right to
summon to work at any hour of all
the twenty-four, as in the case of
soldiers in time of war, or of farm
labourers in time of harvest. And
the extra service, or overtime duty, is
not monkish asceticism, but extra-
ordinary demands in unusual emergen-
cies—calling men, weary from age or
from over-exertion, to still further
efforts and sacrifices.

II. So the right-minded servant
will perform these added tasks with-
out a murmur.—And without a
thought that anything great or
specially meritorious has been done by
him. The temper equal to this is
manifestly not that either of the slave,
who works as a drudge under com-
pulsion, or of the Pharisee, who sets a
high value on his performance. It is
the temper of devotion mellowed by
the grace of humility.—Bruce.


Humility and Endurance.—The con-
nexion is, “Ye are servants of your


Master, and therefore endurance is
required of you—faith and trust to
endure out your day’s work before
you enter into your rest. Your Master
will enter into His, but your time
has not yet come; and all the service
which you can meanwhile do Him
is but that which it is your bounden
duty to do, sceing that your body, soul,
and spirit, are His. ‘The lessons are
here taught: (1) of huwility, and (2)
of patient endurance in the service of
Christ. There is no denial of the fact
that privileges will be bestowed on
dutiful servants, but it is distinctly
taught that nothing can be expected
on the ground of merit.


“ Plowing, or feeding cattle.”—The
labour of the day is followed by work
within the house when the servant
returns home. He is his master’s
property, and there are no limits to
the service he may be called to return
but those which his master may choose
to set. In like manner the Christian
has no power or right to set any limit
to the service which is due from
him to God,—to mark off any depart-
ment of his life, or any portion of his
time, as belonging solely to himself,
within which he may act simply in
accordance with his own tastes and
wishes.


Ver. 8. “ Afterward.”—Rest and
refreshment are not denicd, but they
follow labour, and are all the sweeter
from the sense of having faithfully
performed every duty.


Ver. 9. ‘ Doth he thank ?”—He may
use the words of courteous acknowledg-


469


CHAP. XVII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





ment of service, but he is not conscious
of any extraordinary recompense being
merited. And so no human being can
accumulate merit in the sight of God
and impose upon Him the obligation
of rewarding it. But we must re-
member that higher than the sphere of
right is the sphere of dove, and that
service rendered in a joyous and filial
spirit has value before God.

The parable rebukes those who choose
the position of servants instead of
accepting that of sons—in other words,
those who obey God for the sake of
reward instead of from a spirit of filial
love.


Ver. 10. “ Unprofitable servants.”

I. God has given all, owns all, has
a right to all.

II. He ordinarily makes our work
easy.

III. There is no such thing as a
surplus of merit in man.—Even though
a man should perform all his duty, he


is destitute of merit before God.—
Arnot.


Our Failings render us Much More
Unprofitable.—The argument is an @
fortiort one: “ How much more when
ye have failed in so many respects.”
—Bengel.


“ Unprofitable.’-—The word does not
here mean “ useless.” Had the servant
done more than his duty, some merit on
that account might have been claimed
by him ; but when he has merely done
his duty, he can make no such claim.
He is free of blame, but has nothing to
boast of.


Eternal Life a Gift—In Rom. vi.
23, we have the true ground on which
we look for eternal life set before us
—viz., as the gift of God whose ser-
vants we are-—not the wages, as in
the case of sin, whose we are not.—


Alford.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 11—19.


The Lord’s treatment of this case is entirely different from that with which He
met the leper of an earlier narrative. When that first subject of His cleansing
power came kneeling to Him, Jesus put His hand on him, effected his cure on
the spot, and then sent him to the priest for confirmation. Here the procedure
is almost reversed. Without cleansing them, without so much as telling them
that they were to be cleansed, He bids them take the cure on trust, and proceed
to show themselves to the constituted authorities, as persons who were lepers no
more.

I. Thus was their faith tested—It was a strong test, but their perfect
confidence in Jesus was equal to it. They instantly set out. They had seen no
charm used, had heard no words of cleansing ; they felt, as yet, no change
wrought upon their diseased bodies; but they went, in the firm faith that the
thing would be done. They acted out their faith. Every step they took away
from the presence of Jesus was a proof that they trusted Him. And their
confidence was soon rewarded. The cure came: every man saw before his eyes
in his fcllows the wonderful transformation which he felt'in himself. “It came
to pass, that, as they went, they were cleansed.” Could there be a better
illustration of faith, from one point of view, than the conduct of these ten men 2
They took Jesus at His word, and they soon realised the blessedness of so doing.
This is faith. Constantly we stumble at the plainness and simplicity of this act
of faith—trusting the bare word of God. We so often say, “ If I could only feel
something, see some improvement, experience some joy, have evidence in myself,
then I would believe.” Such language, transferred to these patients of Jesus,
would run, “ Let us first see some signs cf the leprosy removing, feel some pulse
of recovered health, then we shall believe, and go to the priests for a certificate.”
Put thus, it would be recognised at once as the language of downright unbelief.


470


~


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE CHAP. XVII.


Yet how often we mock the message of salvation with just such treatment in
our hearts, if not in speech !

II. This treatment was further intended to test their love.—J.e, it was
intended to bring out whether their faith was fruitful trust in Him as God’s
representative to them, or whether it was a mere formal faith in His office as a
healer, so well-known that He could not be disbelieved. For these reasons He
did the cure only after they had left Him. He sent them away out of His
presence, and on the road to the priests, and then healed them. Thus an entirely
new situation arose. When diseased folks were healed instantly by Jesus, and
were still before Him, they could not withhold their acknowledgment. In a
case like this it might be very different ; and so it proved, for only one of the ten
stooc. the test. No doubt the nine had a confidence in Jesus’ power which carried
then through the test set them. They had that outside faith which sufficed to
trust His word for healing. But they had no regard either to the Divine glory
or the redeeming might of Jesus. They took His cleansing of them as a mere
common thing. At first the miracles of Christ had been fresh and startling.
But now, as His love repeated them, men did with Christ’s miracles as they do
with His Father’s bounties—see nothing Divine in them because they are so
common. This their unbelief, their seeing no glory of God in what Jesus did to
them, is proved by their unthankfulness. Jesus Himself, who knew what was in
man, was astonished at this instance of ingratitude and irreligion. Unbelief,
with its baneful blight, counterworks the works of God at every point. Times
and places there were when Jesus could do no miracle because of men’s unbelief.
Then, again, when He wrought them abundantly, there were men who saw His
miracles and did not believe. Now it has come even to this: there are men
experiencing the miracle in themselves, and yielding no homage to their Healer.
Thus unbelief brings forth its bitter fruit of ingratitude. Even in Christians it
makes melancholy havoc, blinding them to the Divine hand in their deliverances,
leading them to cheapen God’s marvellous grace, and coldly trace to second
causes the change that once they rejoiced over as life from the dead. Of men at
large unbelief and ingratitude make heathens, For it is pronounced to be the
very sin of the heathen that “when they knew God, they glorified Him not as
God, neither were thankful; but became vain in their imaginations, and their
foolish heart was darkened ” (Rom. i. 21).—Laidlaw.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 11—19.
Vers. 11-19. Gratitude and Ingrati- V. Sinful ingratitude.


tude. VI. Joyful praise.
I. The forlorn company and their

cry. One in Ten.
II. The command which is a promise. I. What these men were before see-
TII. The unthankful nine and the ing Jesus.

grateful one. TI. What the interview did for
IV. The wonder, pain,and patience them.


of Jesus.
V. The larger blessings given to
the thankful heart.— Maclaren.


A Remarkable Scene.
I. A gracious mission.
II. A loathsome sight.
Til. Merciful interposition. -
IV. Religious observance.


Til. What it failed to do with nine
of the ten.—Dingley.


Ver. 11. Samaria and Galilee——The
notice of the scene of this miracle ex-
plains the presence of a Samaritan in
the company of lepers. The same rule
for the exclusion of lepers from society
obtained in Samaria as in Israel and


471


PT al ‘ a
7


cHAP. xvi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





the common affliction drew these poor
outcasts together.


Ver. 12. “Zen lepers.” —Differences
among them of race and religion had
been overcome by their common misery.
A similar company is spoken of in
2 Kings vii. 3.


Ver. 13. “ Lifted up their voices.” —
They were less bold than the leper in
chap. v., who came to kneel at Jesus’
feet ; but as they saw Him entering the
village from which they were excluded,
they called upon Him for mercy and
healing.


“ Huve mercy.’—The incident illus-
trates the human side of the work of
salvation. There is (1) a sense of mercy
and helplessness ; (2) faith in Jesus ;
(3) an appeal to His compassion.


Ver. 14. “Go, shew yourselves.”—In
many different ways did the Great
Physician deal with the needs of those
He healed: sometimes He seemed to
resist a strong faith, that He might
make it stronger yet (Matt. xv. 23-26) ;
sometimes He met a weak faith, lest
it might prove too weak in the trial
(Mark v. 36); in one case He forgave
first and healed after (Matt. ix. 2, 6),
in another case He healed first and
only then forgave (John vy. 8, 14).
Some adequate reason moved Him,
doubtless, to adopt His present course
of procedure.


Ver. 15. “ Turned back.” —This man
is sent with the rest to the priests. He
well knew this duty was a branch of
the law of ceremonies, which he meant
not to neglect ; but his heart told him
there was a moral duty of professing
thankfulness to his Benefactor, which
called for his first attendance. First,
therefore, he turns back, ere he will
stir forward. Reason taught this
Samaritan, and us in him, that cere-
mony must yield to substance, and
that main points of obedience must
take place of all ritual complements.—
Hall.


472


“ With a loud voice.” He had been
loud in prayer (ver. 13), so now he is
loud in praise. His impurity had kept
him at a distance from Christ, but now
that he is cleansed he falls at the
Saviour’s feet.


Ver. 16. “ Fell down.”—A token—
1. of love for the Saviour, and 2. of
willingness to submit entirely to Him.


“Giving Him thanks.” — Every
miracle has its lesson, and in that k sson
lies the reason why it has been recorded.
There were many lepers cleansed of
whose healing no record is given: but
the story of these ten is told because
one of them came back. ‘Giving Him
thanks” —in these words the lesson
lies.

I. It is the beautiful story of the
gratitude of a “stranger.”—The story
is made more beautiful by the contrast
with the ingratitude of ‘‘ His own.” It
recalls the parable of the Good
Samaritan: the two narratives are
parallel in more respects than one.

Ii. And both illustrate in a remark-
able way the great lesson of the
previous series of discourses.—It was
the despised Samaritan who returned:
the privileged Jews held on their legal
and selfish way. Legal way ; for observe
that the nine had ample excuse. Christ
had ordered it, and the Law demanded
it. But the letter killeth. Love over-
rules Acts of Parliament. The nine
held by the Law, but the one got the

ace.

III. By grace he was saved through
faith. Thy faith hath saved thee.”
Physically, he was made whole already ;
so were His companions. But now he
gets the nobler and only noble blessing.
This the others lost, through their
ingratitude.— Hastings.


Christ's Bearing in Relation to In
gratitude.—Toungrateful treatment the
Saviour was no stranger. Neither can
we hope to be. The sting of ingratitude
may be felt by all. But how do we
comport ourselves under it?


I. This will test characte. —In


ald


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XVII.





Christ’s example there is both reproof
and inspiration. He was not in-
sensible to ingratitude. Nay, He was
more sensitive than we. His feelings
were keener. He never became less
sensitive to sin in any form by contact
with it. Wedo. To Him it never
became more endurable. To usit may.
Sin within responds to sin without,
We carry with us the body of sin. By
this relation we are less sensitive to it
than Jesus. But Christ remained ever
keenly sensitive. How, then, would
He feel ingratitude! One of those
polar currents is sweeping over Hin
now.

TI. His conduct in the face of in-
gratitude challenges admiration and
imitation—He is not made sour,
misanthropical, self-contained. There
is no recoil to the opposite extreme of
indifference and hate. What a halo of
unsullied glory is about the Christ of
God! Delicate sensibility on the one
hand; base ingratitude on the other.
Yet the streams of good-will and bless-
ing kept flowing perennially with un-
diminished volumes. The “milk of
human kindness” never soured in Him.
He never contracted a tinge of morose-
ness. He never grew weary in well-
doing. Only with His life did such
ministry cease. From the cross we hear
“Father, forgive them.”—Campbell.


“ Where are the nine?” —The question
is the turning-point of the story. The
nine received the gift of healing and
forgot the Giver. There was only one
grateful patient.

I. In the Saviour’s question we may
perceive much of the mind that is in
Christ Jesus toward sinful men.—
He went about doing good. His whole
life was beneficent. No human being
did he ever hurt. Even fruitless human
lives He spared. But while men cared
only for the curing of bodily ailments,
the Great Physician looked to both the
disease of the body and the sin of the
soul; and mainly to the iatter.

Il. He tries the lepers by sending
them out of His sight to be healed He
desired that they should return to


Himself with thanks. He loves a
cheerful comer as well as a cheerful
giver. All were glad; only one was
grateful.

III. How wistfully Jesus looks after
the nine as they go away !—They took
greedily the temporal benefit; they
despised the more precious gift which
the Lord was waiting to bestow. They
snatched, the lesser, and missed the
greater. What would He have said to
them if they had returned?

IV. We know what He said to
the one who did return.—He had
another faith and obtained another
cure. He believed to the saving of his
soul. In him the Redeemer sees of the
travail of His soul, and is satisfied. In
the others He sees no fruit, and there-
fore complains. He expects healed and
delivered men to come back to Him
with praise. Is He to be disappointed ?
—Arnot.





One of Ten.—I. Lesson from the
ten.— All need cleansing.

II. Lesson from the nine.—The sin
of unthankfulness,

ITI. Lesson from the one.—The duty
and beauty of gratitude.—W. Taylor.


I. Why men are unthankful.
II. Why we ought to be thankful.
III. How we ought to show our
thankfulness.— Watson.


Unthankfulness.

I. In many cases the reason is that
we do not see our Benefactor.—Just
as these lepers were at a distance from
Christ when healing took place.

II. A second cause is an imperfect
appreciation of God’s gifts.—Health is
coveted by the sick, but lightly valued
when they gain it.

IL]. A third reason is the utilitarian
one.—Men do 1.0t see the good of it

Three results of gratitude: 1. It
stimulates powerfully to active well-
doing. 2. It makes worship—especially
public worship—real and sincere.
3. Thankfulness here on earth is the
best possible preparation for the spirit
and life of heaven.—JLiddon.


473


CHAP, XVII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





Why the Nine Acted as They Did.—
1. They may have thought that they
had done nothing to deserve their
horrible fate, and that, therefore, it
was only just that they should be
restored to health. 2. They may have
thought that they would at least make
sure of their restoration to health,
before they gave thanks to Him who
had healed them. 3. They may have
put obedience before love. 4. It
may be that the nine Jews would not
go back just because the Samaritan
did: misery had broken down enmity,
but when the pressure of misery is
removed, the Jews take one road, the
Samaritan another. 5. They may
have said within themselves that they
could be just as thankful to the kind
Master in their hearts without saying
so to Him.—Coz.


Ver. 18. “There are not found.”—
The nine others were already healed
and hastening to the priest, that they
might be restored to the society of
men and their life in the world; but
the first thoughts of the Samaritan
are turned to his Deliverer. He had


forgotten all in the sense of God’s
mercy and of His own unworthiness.—
Williams.


“This stranger.”—The gratitude of
the Samaritan overcame the prejudices
which his race cherished against that
to which the Saviour belonged; while
his companions were wanting in grati-
tude to their countryman who ha&«
healed them.


Ver. 19. “Thy faith.”—The true
nature of faith is here very clearly
displayed as consisting principally in
moral qualities of obedience and love.
Confidence in the Saviour’s power had
led to the healing of the ten; but
“this stranger” manifested a faith
which secured for him higher blessings
than that of bodily healing.


“ Saved thee.”—The Samaritan was
saved by his faith, not because he was
cured of his leprosy (for this was like-
wise obtained by the rest), but because
he was admitted into the number of
the children of God, and received from
His hand a pledge of fatherly kindness,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 20—37.


The Coming of the Kingdom.—tThe whole of Jewish society were at this time
in anxious expectation of the establishment on earth of the Messianic kingdom ;
and, as we learn from Acts i. 6, the apostles themselves, even after the resur-
rection of Jesus, partook to a very large extent of the conceptions concerning
that kingdom which were current at that time. On one occasion (John vi. 15)
the multitude were about to attempt to force Jesus to establish a kingdom of a
kind they wished to see—an attempt which He defeated by withdrawing from
their midst. Here He is asked to state definitely His opinion concerning the
manifestation of Messianic power. In His reply we note that He first addresses
Himself to the Pharisees who put the question, and then to His disciples; and
that to the one class He speaks of the spirituality of the kingdom of God, and
to the other of its outward manifestation.

I. The spirituality of the kingdom (vers. 20, 21).—The question put to Christ
revealed the carnal and erroneous conception of the Divine kingdom which filled
the minds of the Pharisees. They thought of the coming of that kingdom as a
sudden and outward change in human society, in which the nation to which they
belonged would attain to the highest degree of earthly prosperity, and enjoy
supremacy over all the other peoples of the earth. They knew that at the time
when they put the question to Jesus the condition of matters after which they.
longed was still in the future, but they anticipated the coming of a time when
they would be able to say, ‘ Here it is! The kingdom of God is among us.” The
reply of Jesus was that the kingdom had come, though they failed to recognise


£74


ae


——


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. cmap. xvi





it. It was present in the person of Him as its Founder, and of those who had
accepted Him as the Christ, and was a spiritual condition rather than an altered
state of outward circumstances. They wished to see the kingdom, but they
needed to have the spiritual sense by which to recognise it; as He said to
Nicodemus, “ Except a man be born again He cannot see the kingdom of God.”

II. The outward manifestation of the kingdom (vers. 22-37).—To the
Pharisees, who were blinded by religious prejudice, Jesus spoke of the spirituality
of the kingdom, but to His own disciples, who were qualified by their faith in
Him to receive further instruction in the truth, He spoke of the outward mani-
festation of His kingdom as associated with His return to earth. First of all—
1, He told of the time and manner of His return (vers. 22-25). He did not,
indeed, give any indication of the precise time of His return, but He implied that
it would not be soon, The patience of His disciples would be tried; they would
long for His re-appearing, and think regretfully of the days when He dwelt on
earth, and their eager expectation would predispose them to listen to false
announcements of His return. Yet they would be left in no doubt of the fact
when He actually did return. All dwelling on the earth would behold His glory
and the brightness of His coming. Yet before He entered upon that glory,
which all then would see, He must suffer shameful rejection. 2. The state of the
world at the time of His return (vers. 26-30). It would be like the time before
the great catastrophes of the Flood and the destruction of the Cities of the Plain.
Men would be plunged in a carnal security. All the ordinary occupations of
secular life would be in regular process; but religious faith and religious feeling
would have disappeared from the hearts of the great majority of men. The
return of the Saviour would overwhelm the secure, and involve them in ruin.
3. How safety is to be secured at the moment of His return (vers, 31-33). Those
who have their hearts set upon Him, and not upon earthly things, will be pre-
pared to join Him when He appears. Those who are suddenly surprised, as they
either rest or labour, at the time of His appearing will need to leave every-
thing behind them and to separate themselves in thought and desire from all
their earthly possessions. The great lesson, therefore, is suggested to all of us
that if we are to find safety at that supreme crisis, we must live in a spirit of
detachment from things of earth—‘“be in the world and yet not of it.”
4, Human society sifted when Christ returns (vers. 34-37). In the present
condition of the world no outward marks distinguish the true from the spurious
disciples of Christ—those who will be ready to ascend to meet Him in the air
when He returns (1 Thess. iv. 17) from those who will then be found unprepared.
But His appearing will bring to light the true characters and dispositions of men.
A separation will be made between the good and evil, and all ties will be
dissolved but that between the Saviour and His true-hearted followers. Yet the
Divine judgment upon the worldly and ungodly will not be altogether postponed
until the return of Christ. Wheresoever society becomes thoroughly careless and
corrupt, judgment overtakes it, as swiftly and as surely as the vultures fall upon
a carcase,


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 20—37.


Vers. 20, 21. “ When the kingdom of
God shall come.”—The worldly feelings
and selfish ignorance of the Pharisees
were displayed in the question they put
to Jesus; they were fully confident of
their place in the kingdom of God, and
were merely anxious to he informed


when that kingdom would appear.
Jesus, in His reply (1), annihilates
their expectations of its glorious mani-
festation ; (2) withdraws the kingdom
from the visible world as it exists
in space; and (3) transfers it to the
inner spiritual world,


475


OHAP. XVII.





We may Learn from This Statement—
J. A lesson of charity.
II. We may find in it ground of


encouragement.
III. It administers a necessary
caution.


Ver. 20. “ Not with observation.” —
In another place, indeed, we are told
that both comings of the kingdom, the
first and the last, are with observation,
and may be known by the signs of the
times ; but it is here meant that it was
not with such signs as the Pharisees
intended, of which the bodily eye and
ear could be witness, but with such in-
dications as faith alone could perceive.
— Williams.


Ver. 21. “ The kingdom of God is
within you.”—The words do not simply
mean that the kingdom of God is an
internal spiritual matter, for Christ
goes on to speak of it as an external
phenomenon. Humanity must be pre-
pared for the new external and Divine
state of things by a spiritual work
wrought in the ‘depths of the heart;
and it is this internal advent which
Jesus thinks good to put first in relief
before such interlocutors.—CGodet.


Vers. 22-25. I. The dark hour that
precedes the manifestation of the
kingdom in its external form.

II. The dangers of deception and
of self-delusion to which His disciples
would be exposed.

IIl. The revelation of Divine things
in their glory by the Son of Man.—
Now He is despised and rejected of
men, but the day is coming in which
all will see and recognise His heavenly
majesty.


Ver. 22. “ One of the days of the Son
of Man.” —Kither one of the past days
of communion with Christ upon earth
or one of the days of His future
triumphant reign. Regret is only
another form of desire. When the
apostles or their successors shall have
passed a long time upon the earth in
the absence of their Lord, and have


476


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.








reached the end of their preaching and
apologetic demonstrations, and around
them scepticism, materialism, pan-
theism, and deism, gain ground more
and more, there will spring up in their
souls an ardent longing after that Lord
who remains silent and concealed ; they
will desire some Divine manifestation,
“a day” like the days of old, as a
prelude of final deliverance, to sustain
their hearts and to strengthen the
faltering Church. Yet it shall not be
given them; to the end it will be
necessary to walk by faith and not by
sight. —Godet.


Days Desired and Not Seen.—There
was no fault in the disciples’ regretful
desire for the “days of the Son of
Man.” It would be bitter for them to
feel that they could not return. But
they could see Him no more in this
life. He was gone from the earth.
Can we apply the text, without blame,
to any limited experience in our own
lives.

I. To our Lord’s days.—How full of
opportunities of spiritual improvement!
In continental travel, who has not
felt the want of a Sunday? But this
was only a voluntary and brief sus-
pension of privilege. Professional life
in distant lands means to many the
loss of public worship and of all
outward aids to keeping the day holy.
How often will one long, in these ex-
periences, for the bygone experiences of
English Sundays. Use them, then,
diligently now. Do not spend them in
trifling and idleness. The days will
come when you will be sorry for all
this. Lose not, then, for want of a
little early diligence, advantages which,
in their highest form, you can never
afterwards get back.

II. In their worst sense the words
of the text were never fulfilled to any
of their first hearers but one.—Judas
found them true; the rest found them
fulfilled in a higher form. If they are
ever to be fulfilled in us, it will be in
their worst sense. We are all living
in the ‘days of the Son of Man.” All
of us have an offered Saviour. Live


- hut well remembered !


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XVIL


(res


as if there were none. Trifle away
these days of grace. Will we not live
bitterly to regret such folly? Still,
indeed, may such see “one of the days
of the Son of Man,” and pass through
an agony of penitence into peace.
But let the neglect be continued into
or beyond middle age, and the desire
for one of these days not be awakened.
How soon will the text be fulfilled in
such a case? Sooner or later there
-will come a time—many times, if one
be not sufficient—when everything in
this world will be felt to be a blank,
and nothing satisfying but that which
is heavenly and eternal. “Too late!”


will be the bitter, disappointing
thought. “I must reap as I have
sowed,” In the old age, the death-bed


of the sinner, neglectful, unrepentant,
in the judgment and eternity of the
impenitent in the world beyond, see
awfully fulfilled the solemn prediction
of the text. Oh! anticipate and pre-
vent such a dread experience. ‘“ Now”
is ‘‘one of the days of the Son of
Man.” Escape betimes from the
_ misery of all miseries, the desire to see
- one of these days, and not to see it.
Truth seen too late, opportunities lost,
Who can fitly
speak of the soul-agonies of a final
rejection 1— Vaughan.


Ver. 23. “Go not after them.”—It
is taken for granted that there will
be a visible manifestation of the
kingdom of Christ, and the disciples
are warned against false announce-
ments of its appearance. At first this
idea seems contrary to the statement
in ver. 21. Yet in that verse it is the
spiritual kingdom, the advent of which
cannot be observed or proclaimed ; here
it is a question of the visible kingdom.


Ver. 24. “As the lightning.” —The
coming of the Lord will be universal
and instantaneous. He will be His
own witness, and His appearing will be
manifest to all.


Ver. 25. “ First must He suffer.” -—
The rupture already begun between


Israel and its Messiah will be con-
summated, and the rejection of the
Messiah by His people will have as its
consequence the removal of His person,
and the invisibility of His rule for a
whole epoch of history—an epoch which,
according to xiii. 35, will only
conclude with the conversion of Israel.
And Jesus announces that this epoch,
during which the world will see Him
no longer, will end in an _ utterly
materialistic state of matters, which
will be terminated only by His coming
(vers. 26-30).—G@o:det.


Vers. 26-30. Historical Parallels.—
The final manifestation of things
Divine will bring salvation and blessing
to the pious, and will overwhelm in
destruction those who are in a state of
carnal security. As it was with the
unbelievers in the antediluvian world
and with the guilty inhabitants of
Sodom, so will it be with the ungodly
“in the day when the Son of Man is
revealed.” 1. The dawning of that
day will be sudden and unexpected.
2. It will be hailed by some with joy,
while to .others it will be a day of
destruction and terror.


Vers. 26-29. “ The days of Noah...
of Lot.”—One thing is remarkable
throughout the whole of this repre-
sentation—that the contemporaries of
Noah and Lot are not, by any means,
described as wicked and vicious, but
merely as absorbed in things of this
world. That the vicious will go into
perdition is easily understood ; but the
man who, without any glaring evil
deeds, wastes his life upon external
things, fancies himself secure, in this
very negativeness, from the judgment
of God—he little thinks that his whole
being is sinful because it is worldly and
alienated from God (James iv. 4). The
discourse of the Lord is directed against
this carnal security, and not against
vice, which is condemned by the Law.
—Olshausen.


Ver. 26. “ As zt was in the days of
Noah.” —I.e., during the hundred and


477


CHAP. XVII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





twenty years while the work was being
prepared. While believers long with
increasing fervour for the return of
the Lord, the carnal security of the
world about them becomes deeper and
deeper.


Ver. 27. “They did eat,” ete.—
Rather, “they were eating; they were
drinking.” This was their life.


Ver. 28. “They bought, they sold,”
etc.—The enumeration of the various
occupations of the inhabitants of Sodom
implies a more complex and advanced
state of civilisation than was known by
the antediluvians.


Ver. 29. “Jé rained  fire.”—The
destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah
is not attributed in Scripture to the
agency of water (i.¢., to the waters of
the sea of Sodom) drowning them, but
of fire (Gen. xix. 23-28). But the soil
itself was also convulsed, and the waters
of the Jordan, which before flowed
through that region, were pent up in
the Lacus Asphaltites or Dead Sea,—
a striking emblem of the Lake of Fire.
—Wordsworth.


Ver. 30. “ Hven thus shall tt be,.”-—
What is here said of the end of the
world is fulfilled and multiplied in little
images in the life of each; in every
case these are, by Divine appointment,
preceding judgments which warn of
the suddenness and surprise with which
eternity overtakes each man. And for
the same reason that from each the
day of his death is hidden, in order
that he may be always living in ex-
pectation of it, so it is also with the
end of the world, that by every gener-
ation it may be expected. “ Behold”
(says Chrysostom), ‘‘ we know the signs
of old age, but we not the day of death ;
so we know not the end of the world,
though we know the signs of its
approaching.” — Williams.


Vers. 31-36. I. The preparation
needed for the day of the Son of Man
—1. Freedom from all dependence on


478


earthly things (vers. 31, 32). 2. Self-
denial (ver. 33).

II. Human society sifted (vers.
34-36). By those who are prepared for
the coming of Christ being caught up
to meet Him (cf. 1 Thess, iv. 17).


Vers. 31-36. Entanglement in Earthly
A ffairs.—Jesus describes the disposition
of soul which, in that supreme crisis,
will be the condition of safety. The
Lord passes with His heavenly train.
The change in human society is effected
in the twinkling of an eye. He takes
to Himself all those inhabitants of the
earth who, by their detachment from
earthly possessions, are prepared in
spirit to follow Him, and who mount
up towards Him with free and joyous
flight. The others, who are entangled
in earthly affairs and possessions, remain
behind. ‘Their fate is like that of Lot’s
wife, who perished with the goods from
which she could not tear herself away.
—Crodet.


Ver. 31. “ On the house-top. . . in
the field.”—The contemplative and the
active life—that of those occupied in
meditation and prayer, and that of those
busy in the ordinary work of the world ;
let neither hesitate to follow the Lord
when He appears, and to abandon all
possessions, if they would avoid the
tate of the wife of Lot.


Ver. 32. “ Remember Lot's wife.”’—
1. Her hopeful beginning in abandoning
Sodom. 2. Her failure in the decisive
hour of trial. 3. Her punishment.

The case of Lot’s wife warns us ‘to
forget the things that are behind”
(Phil. iii. 13) ; her looking back implied
regret at leaving the place where she
had dwelt so long in comfort, and
doubt as to whether there were good
reasons for leaving the city.


Ver. 33. ‘ Whosoever shall seek,” ete.
—St. Luke adds this that the desire
of an earthly life may not prevent
believers from passing rapidly through
the midst of death to the salvation
laid up for them in heaven. And


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


©


Christ employs a strong expression to
denote the frailty of the present life,
when He says that souls are “preserved”
(literally, “ begotten into life”), when
they are “lost.” His meaning is the
same as if He had declared that men
do not live in the world, because the
beginning of that life which is real,
and which is worthy of the name, is,
to leave the world.—Calvin.


Ver. 34. “ Two men im one bed.”—
Not our circumstances, but our hearts,
will determine our future condition.
Those prepared will be taken, whether
they are asleep or at work, when the
Lord comes. The reference may
possibly be to husband and wife, as
the word ‘‘ men ” is not in the original,
and the translation ‘‘ persons” would
do equally well.


Ver. 35. “ Two women,” etc.—Those
most closely related by earthly ties will,
in the twinkling of an eye, be separated
for ever.


Ver. 37. “ Wheresoever the body is.” —
All history is a comment on these
words. Wherever there is a Church or
a people abandoned by the Spirit of
Life, and so a carcase, tainting the
atmosphere of God’s moral world,
around it assemble the ministers and
messengers of Divine justice— the
eagles (or vultures, more strictly;
because the true eagle does not feed on
aught but what itself has slain)—the


CHAP. XVIL


scavengers of God’s moral world,
scenting out, by a mysterious ‘instinct,
the prey from afar, and charged to
remove presently the offence out of the
way.—Trench.


The Carrion and the Vulturess—
“Where?” Tepid and idle curiosity is ex-
pressed. The Lord’ssolemn warnings did
not stir the disciples deeply. Our Lord
refers to a universal future judgment,
But the words are not exhausted in
reference to that event. The same
principles have often been embodied in
lesser “comings of the Lord,” as will
be displayed in world wide splendour
and awfulness at the last.

I. These words are to us a revela-
tion of a law which operates with
unerring certainty through all the
course of the world’s history.—Z.7.,
the destruction of the Canaanites, the
fall of Jerusalem, the French Revolu-
tion, the American War concerning
slavery.

II. This law will have a far more
tremendous accomplishment in the
future.—Christ is Judge as well as
Saviour. By Him the whole world is
to be judged in righteousness.

III. This law need never touch us,
nor need we know anything about it
but by the hearing of the ear.—It
is told us that we may escape it.
“ Repent ” and you shall not become
food for the vultures of Divine judg-
ment. Take Christ as your Saviour,
and in that dread hour you will be
safe.— Maclaren.





479


cuar. xvi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





CHAPTER XVIII.
CRITICAL NOTES.


Ver 1 And He spake a parable—This parable is closely connected with the preceding
discourse about the second coming of Christ. The widow is the Church ; the judge is God,
who long forbears to avenge her wrongs. The parable is of a somewhat paradoxical nature,
like that of the Unjust Steward, and like that of the Selfish Neighbour (chap. xi. 5), ‘The
argument is: If such be the power of earnest entreaty that it can win right even from a man
sunk in selfishness and fearing neither God nor man, how much more will the right be done
by the just and holy God, in answer to the continued prayers of His elect!” (A/ford). Always
to pray.—It is rather wrgent prayer that is here commended than a prevailing state of mind,
as in 1"Thess. v.17. To faint—A military metaphor: to abandon anything from cowardice,
sloth, or despondency.

Ver. 2. Which feared not God, etc. A common form of expression to describe an unprin-
cipled and reckless character. Probably the second clause of the description—“ neither
regarded man ”—brings into stronger light his recklessness, and consequently the apparent
hopelessness of the widow’s case; regard for the good opinion of others being, with many, a
stronger motive than fear of God. |

Ver. 3, A widow.—One of a class more exposed to injustice and wrong in Hastern society —
than among us. Avenge me.—Probably too strong an expression; rather “do me justice”
(so in vers. 5, 7,8); “consider my case, and free me from the evil practices of my oppressor.”

Ver. 4, Though I fear not, etc._This intensifies the situation, as it brings into clearer light
the shamelessness of the judge. He deliberately admits to himself the villainy of his own
character, so that no conscientious scruples are seen to affect him from beginning to end.

Ver. 5. Her continual coming.— Lit., “her coming to the end ”—‘“‘ her coming for ever.”
Weary me.—‘“ Wear me out” (R.V.). This rendering seems rather weak, as there does not
seem much difference of degree between “trouble” and “ weary,” or “wear me out.” The
word is a pugilistic term, and means literally “to give any one a black eye.” May there not
be a half-humorous fear expressed, lest the widow should lose patience and strike him?
There is no example of the word being used figuratively to mean “ weary,” though the
corresponding Latin word (obtundere) is often so used.

Ver. 7. Shall not God? etc.—Over against “the Unjust Judge” is set God, the righteous
judge, and over against “the widow” His elect. Though He bear long with them.—If “ bear
long” is here an allusion to God’s long-suffering or compassion, the rendering in the A.V.
yields no sense. In the R.V, the passage runs: ‘“ And He is long-suffering over them.” The
word, however, which means “ slow-minded,” may denote “to be slow in avenging or assisting
them,” So that, literally rendered, the passage would be: “Though He be long-suffering
[towards their enemies] in their behalf.” On the whole, the latter interpretation seems
preferable.

Ver. 8. Speedily.—TZ.e., soon, though the time seems long. Cf. 2 Pet. iii. 8,9. Faith—
Ze., this kind of faith which continues in prayer without fainting. It implies that, in con-
sequence of the delay, importunate prayer for His coming will be the exception rather than
the rule. There is no prophecy in the words that the number of believers will then be few.

Ver. 9. Unto certain.—This parable is not addressed to Pharisees, but to some of His own
followers who were Pharisaical at heart. Despised.—Or “set at nought” (R.V.). Others.—
Rather, “all others” (R.V.); lit. “the rest.”

Ver. 10. Went up.—The Temple standing on an elevation. Probably some of Christ’s
hearers were now on their way to worship there.

Ver. 11. The Pharisee stood.—Took up a position apart from others, as the word seems to
indicate. With himself—Secret prayer, or the personal devotions offered apart from those
statedly conducted by the priests for the people at large. God.—Rather, “O God.” There
seems no reason why the phrase should be abbreviated in our English versions. As other
men.—Rather, “as the rest of men” (R.V.); all but himself. Extortioners.—Those who
injure others by force. Unjust.—Those who overreach others by fraud.

Ver. 12. I fast, etc.—His works of supererogation. The Law prescribed only one day of
fasting—the great day of Atonement (Lev. xvi. 29). The Oral Law prescribed fasts on ~
Monday and Thursday of each week, in commemoration of Moses’ ascending and descending —
Mout oo That I possess.—Rather, “ that I get ”—7.e., one-tenth of his income, not of his
property.

Ver. 13, Afar off—Perhaps this means from the altar or from the Holy Place. It may


480


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. cmap. xvuut,


(a ee ee ee ee SS ee eee


however, mean from the Pharisee, as though he felt his unworthiness to be near those
whom he regarded, and who regarded themselves, as holy. Smote upon his breast,—A
yesture of sorrow (cf. chap. xxiii. 48). Me a sinner.—Perhaps it may be rendered “to me
the sinner ”—i.e., beyond all others (R.V. margin). It seems, however, to detract from the
‘implicity of the prayer to think of the publican as comparing himself, even unfavourably
witu others. ;

Ver. 14. Exalteth himself—As did the Pharisee. Shall be abased.—Ratler “ humbled ”
(8.V.)—i.¢., in his failure to obtain justification from God. “The sense is, one returned
home in the sight of God with his prayer answered, and that prayer had grasped the true
object of prayer—the forgiveness of sins ; the other prayed not for it, and obtained it not.
Therefore he who would seek justification before God must seek it by humility, and not by
self-righteousness ” (Alford).

Ver. 15. Also infants——Rather, “their babes” (R.V.). In Matthew and Mark we read
£8 ya children.” Touch them.—Matthew has “that He should put His hands on them
and pray.”

Ver 16. Jesus called them.—T.e., the babes, The call could only, of course, be obeyed by
their parents. The incident supplies a strong argument in favour of the practice of infant
baptism. These children were not old enough to be taught or to express faith in Jesus; they
are presented by their parents, and are welcomed by the Lord.

Ver. 17. Verily I say unto you.—‘ Not only may the little infants be brought to Him,
but, in order for us who are mature to come to Him, we must cast away all that
wherein our maturity has caused us to differ from tuem, and we must become like them.
Not only is infant baptism justified, but it is the normal pattern of all baptism: none can
enter God’s kingdom except as an infant. In adult baptism we strive to secure that state
of simplicity and childlikeness which in the infant we have ready and undoubted to our
hands” (Alford).

Ver. 18. A certain ruler.—VZe., ruler of a synagogue. St. Matthew describes him as a
young man ; and the sequel of the story shows that he was wealthy. He seems to have been
ingenuous and lovable, and therefore to have been remarkably different from the majority
of others ofehis class. Master.—Te., teacher. He evidently regarded Jesus as one of
exceptional virtue and wisdom; but our Lord did not accept this as adequate recognition of
His nature and claims. What shall I do?—It is dving rather than being that is in his
thoughts (cf. Rom. ix. 32). :

Ver. 19. None is good save one.—J.e., from the ruler’s point of view the epithet of “ good”
was not applicable to Jesus, The dilemma in which Socinians are placed with regard to
Jesus, Stier puts as follows: “Hither ‘There is none good but God; Christ is good;
therefore Christ is God’; 07 ‘There is none good but God; Christ is not God; therefore
Christ is not good.’” .

Ver. 20. Thou knowest the commandments.—Those quoted by Christ are from the second
table of the Law, which concern our duties towards our fellow-men.

Ver. 21. All these have I kept.—In this reply his self-righteous spirit is brought to view,
though in him this self-righteousness is not allied with hypocrisy.

Ver. 22. Yet lackest thou.—Christ does not attempt to show him that he had fallen far
short of the requirements of these plain rules of duty; He takes him at his own estimate.
“Supposing this statement to be true, one thing is needed to complete the character—
obedience to the requirements of the first table of the Law, fulfilment of duties towards God,”
Sell all.—This was a special commandment, suited to the case of the ruler. He wished to be
a disciple of Christ, but was unprepared for the self-sacrifice involved in becoming a disciple.
He had to choose between riches and obedience to Christ—i.e., to the voice of God speaking
to him through Christ. His acceptance of Christ as an authoritative Teacher in matters of
religion pledged him to receive the statement as to his special duty without demur, In
refusing to do that duty he could, therefore, not conceal from himself that he was transgress-
ing against God.

Ver. 24._The R.V. is much briefer : “ And Jesus, seeing him, said.” How hardly !—J.e.,
with what difficulty ; not impossible (ver. 27), but only to be accomplished by great effort.
Riches always bring temptation (see 1 Tim. vi. 9, 10).

Ver. 25. Camel.—Some have sought to modify the apparent harshness of this saying by
supposing that a word meaning “a rope,” and not the animal, was used. No such word,
however, as kamilon, for “a rope,” is to be found, except in a conjectural interpretation of
this very passage. Others have supposed “the needle’s eye ” to be a small city gate through
which a camel could not pass without being unladed. In either case conjecture would only
succeed in producing an impossibility quite as great as that of the text. It is something
impossible with men that is spoken of. In Matt. xxiii. 24 a camel is similarly spoken of
proverbially as equivalent to something very lazge.

Ver. 26. Who, then, can be saved !—Not only do all try to become rich, but a temporal
kingdom in which all would be well off and prosperous was expected by these disciples.


rt 481


CHAP. xvi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





Ver 27. Possible with God.—Divine grace, and nothing but it, can touch the hearts of men
who trust in riches.

Ver. 28: We have left all—J.e., Have done what this ruler had refused to do. “ Treasure in
heaven” was promised to him in exchange for earthly possessions. What, then, should be
the pre-eminent reward or those who obeyed Christ’s command? The question is implied
here ; it is expressed plainly in the parallel passage in St. Matthew’s Gospel.

Ver. 30. Receive manifold more.—/.¢., even in this present life enjoy a happiness far
exceeding any temporal discomfort undergone in consequence of giving anything up for the
sake of Christ, and receive the highest spiritual reward in a life to come.

Ver. 31. Then took He unto Him.—JZ.e., took the twelve apart. The parallel passage in
St. Matthew’s Gospel says that this disclosure was made on the last journey up to Jerusalem.
Between ver. 30 and ver. 31 should probably come the journey from Bethany in Perza to
Bethany in Judea, the raising of Lazarus, and Christ’s retirement to Ephraim (John xi. 54).
From this retreat He now comes to keep His last Passover in Jerusalem. On more than one
former occasion Christ had foretold His rejection and sufferings (see Matt, xvi. 21, xvii. 22, 23).
Each prediction is more full of details than the last. All things, etc_—The passage is a
peculiar one, and is thus given in the R.V: “All the things that are written by the prophets
shall be accomplished unto the Son of Man.”

Ver. 32. Unto the Gentiles.—This circumstance had not yet been foretold. It implies His
crucifixion, that being a Roman and not a Jewish form of capital punishment. All the
details of His passion here foretold found fulfilment.

Ver. 34, And they understood none, etc.—Peculiar to St. Luke, though the other two
Synoptists record the request proffered by James and John and their mother, which indicated
a state of mind like that described here. The prophecy ran so completely counter to the
fixed ideas of the disciples concerning the nature of Christ’s kingdom that they could not
understand it in the least.

Ver. 35. As he drew nigh to Jericho.—St. Matthew speaks of two blind men cured as Jesus
departed from Jericho (xx. 29 ff.); St. Mark of one blind man named Bartimzus
(evidently the man here mentioned) healed as Jesus went out of Jericho. So far as the
numbers are concerned, no special difficulty need be felt. The second and third evangelists
simply record one case of healing in which there were details of exceptional interest. But,
so far as the place of healing is concerned, there is a discrepancy which no harmonist can
solve. If, however, we knew all the circumstances of the case, the discrepancy might dis-
appear. It might turn out that there was an old and a new town at Jericho, and that
departing from the one corresponded to entering the other. This conjecture is highly im-
probable, but is possible. Meantime the discrepancy exists, and is a testimony to the fact
that the narratives of the evangelists are independent of each other.

Ver. 39. Rebuked him.—Not because he addressed Jesus as “ Son of David,” but because
they thought his cries would be wearisome and annoying to our Lord.

Ver. 41, What wilt thou ?—The question seems a strange one. What else could the blind
man wish for in preference to the gift of sight? We need to remember that with sight
would come the call to work for his liveliood—a prospect which did not, however, deter
Bartimzus from asking the boon.

Ver. 43. Gave praise to God.—St. Luke frequently concludes narratives of miracles in
this way (cf. chaps. xiii. 17, ix. 43, v. 26). “He, of the three evangelists, takes most
(life > the glory given to God on account of the miraculous acts of the Lord Jesus”

07rd).


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—8.


Persevering Prayer.—The difference between this parable and that of the
Selfish Neighbour (ch. xi.) should be kept in view. That taught the general
lesson of perseverance in prayer: this deals with perseverance in prayer for a
particular thing—namely, the coming of the Son of Man for judgment, which
has been the theme of the preceding chapter (vers. 20-37), and is recurred to in
Christ’s question at the end of ver. 8.

I. The story—The judge is one of those, too common always in the East,
who poison the fountain of justice at its source, and are “ companions of thieves.”
His character is painted in dark colours, and the darker they are, the more do
they serve to bring out the contrast between him and the Judge to whom
Christians have to pray. That contrast is the very point of the parable. So


482


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.  omap. xvi.





far gone in selfish wresting of his office is this man that he is fully conscious
of his own baseness, and does not even attempt the farce of varnishing it, but,
with cynical frankness, acknowledges his motives to himself. His delay in
granting the widow's petition, and his final yielding, come from the same motive
—his own convenience. It was troublesome to do as she wished, but when it
became more troublesome not to do it, he did it. ‘The judge is meant to be as
much unlike our Judge as can be conceived. The widow is meant to be like the
true disciple. She is the figure of God’s “own elect, which cry day and night
unto Him”; and that not only in her persistence, but in her desolation.
Whether we bring into connection the frequent Scriptural emblem of the bride,
and think of the state of the Church during her Lord’s absence as widowhood,
as we should probably do, or content ourselves with the vaguer interpretation,
which regards her simply as afflicted, and the prey of oppressors, she represents
the state of the Church in the absence of her Lord. The Eastern widow has
no protectors, and, therefore, many oppressors ; and if she can find no redress
from the law, she is desolate indeed. Her prayer does not breathe so fierce a
spirit as “‘ avenge” suggests. What she asks is deliverance for herself, rather
than vengeance on her foe. The deliverance cannot, indeed, be accomplished
without retribution on the oppressor, but that is not the primary burden of
her prayer.

II. Our Lord’s comment.—The argument is a “much more.” Every point in
the description of the Unjust Judge is to be reversed, and then we shall have the
picture of our Judge, He does not delay for His own ease ; He is not careless
to our sorrows, nor deaf to our prayer. If His judgment seems to slumber, the
delay is the tarrying of love, and is for the good of the Church. When the
intervention comes, it will not be wrung from an indifferent hand by fear of
being troubled, but be the loving gift of Him who knows when, as well as how,
to grant deliverance. The whole teaches—1. That the Church will have to pass
through a period of desolation and oppression, which will only end with Christ’s
coming. 2. That its true attitude during that time should be earnest desire and
prayer for that coming. 3. That there will be long delay. 4. That this delay
is not the result of carelessness towards the Church’s need and cry, and so that no
delay should deaden faith or silence entreaty. Jesus adds further an assurance
and a sad question. The assurance is that whensoever deliverance comes, the
thing will be done suddenly. The law of God’s judgments is that they travel
slowly, but come suddenly at last, and are “a short work.” The final question
is really a sad prediction. “ But”—notwithstanding the certainty, and My
assurance of it— the faith” in His coming (not merely “faith” in the wider
sense of the word) will have waxed dim. This closing word at once shows the
correctness of the interpretation, which gives a special direction to the persevering
prayer enjoined, and enforces the exhortation by the consideration of the danger
to which the waiting servants are exposed.” —Maclaren.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 1—14.


Vers. 1-14. Lessons on Prayer.

I. A lesson on prayer.

II. A lesson from a widow’s urgency
(vers. 2-5),—1. An unjust judge will
listen to an urgent suitor. How much
more will a holy, righteous, and merci-
ful God! 2. A friendless widow, by
perseverance, gained her cause. How


much more will God’s “own elect,”
His own children, get a speedy answer
when they cry to Him !

III. Lessons from a Pharisee and a
Publican.—Contrast the attitude, the
prayer, the failure, of the one, with the
attitude, the prayer, the success, of the
other.—W. Taylor.


483


es


iM _
tf
i


CHAP. Xvi HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


A Parable on Prayer.—Luke’s second
parable on prayer (see xi. 5-14),
peculiar to his gospel. Summing up
the whole widowed life of the Church
in her life of prayer. How to pray
(1-9). How not to pray (12-14). An
impressive instance of Luke’s method
of balance by contrast.—Alexander.


Vers. 1-8. Perseverance in Prayer.—
From the lessons Jesus taught His
disciples on perseverance in prayer, it
appears how well aware He was that
God shows Himself so little lke a
Father that those who trust in Him
are tempted to think Him rather like
a man of selfish spirit, or like an
unjust judge, who is indifferent to
right. The relevancy of this parable
requires that this character should be
regarded as representing God, not as
He is indeed, but as He seems to tried
faith. The didactic drift of the parable
is: You will have to wait on God,
possibly till hope deferred make the
heart sick; but it is worth your while
to wait.— Bruce.


“ Always to pray.”—The story and
the lesson in this parable are not as
parallel rods, but the one is laid across
the other, and they touch only at one
point. That one point is “always to
pray, and not to faint.” Thus, “ the
key of this parable is hung up on the
door.” This parable teaches how to
pray for ourselves. Put all your soul
and strength into your prayers; keep
on praying under God’s delays.

I. The helpless.—In the East widows

are the most helpless of beings. Your
soul is even as this widow. It is in
great need. There is no help for you
in yourself.
_ JI. The helper.—God has boundless
store, and is not troubled by your
coming to Him. Turn to the Mighty
for help.

III. The appeal.—Let it be definite,
earnest, for things good and right.
God’s delays are not denials. So we
must pers»vere in prayer,

IV. Encouragements.—God loves to
-be pressed. The lesson is taught by


484


contrast and unlikencss. Would you
make God worse than a godless judge ?
— Wells.


“ Continue in prayer.”

Many get discouraged in praying
because the answer does not come at
once.—It should be settled in the
mind—

I. That God always hears the true
prayer, and that He will always send
an answer, though it may not always
be the answer we desire. God’s plans
reach out widely, and work slowly.

Ii. The reason of God’s delay may
be to increase our earnestness.—The
story of the Syro-Phenician woman
illustrates this.

Ill. Many prayers are never
answered because men faint at God’s
delay.—A little longer patient perse-
verance would have brought you a
great reward. Many lose heart just
when the answer is about to be
granted.— Miller.


A Strong Argument.—The argument,
as in the case of the Unjust Steward,
is @ fortiort: “If such be the power of
earnest entreaty that it can win right,
even from a man sunk in selfishness,
and fearing neither God nor man, how
much more, will the right be done by
the just and holy God, in answer to
the continual prayer of His elect !”—
even though, when this very right is
asserted in the world by the coming of
the Son of Man, He may hardly find
among His people the power to believe
it; though few of them will have shown
this unweariedness of entreaty which
the poor widow showed.—A/ford.


Ver. 1. “ Men ought.’—-1. Prayer
a duty. 2. Binding on all. 3. Always
to be maintained. 4. To be offered
fervently.


“To faint.”.—Said properly of a
coward in battle. Prayer is here
spoken of as a militia or warfare. The
arms of the Church are prayers. The
Church militant is the Church suppli-
cant. Her congregations for public
prayer are her armies of soldiers storm-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XVIII.





ing the gates of heaven with a siege of
prayers.— Wordsworth,


Discouragement.—The danger of dis-
couragement arises from the delay in
receiving an answer, while the adversary
continues to harass.


Ver. 3. “A widow.”—In its struggles
with the world, and with sin within or
around it, while feeling abandoned by
God (of which condition we have a
picture in the case of Job), and left
without earthly support or help, the
soul resembles a widow, who in vain
entreats the assistance of a wicked
judge. But perseverance in prayer
overcomes at last even the severity of
heaven.— Olshausen.


Loneliness and Helplessness.—Every
soul conscious of its loneliness, conscious
that it has no help, save in God only,
is a widow.—A ugustine.


Ver. 3. “ Avenge me of mine
adversary.” —Here we see the Church,
which in her nature and her destiny
is the bride of Christ, and waits for
His festal appearance, in the form of
a widow. Matters have the look as if
her betrothed spouse were dead at a
distance. Meanwhile, she lives in a
city where she is continually oppressed
by a grievous adversary, the prince of
this world. But since she continually
calls on God for help, it may, in a
weak hour, appear to her as if He had
become the Unjust Judge over her—as
if He were dealing entirely without
Divine righteousness and without love
to man. But she perseveres in prayer
for His coming to redeem her, and
although this is long delayed, because
God has a celestially broad mind
and view, and accordingly trains His
children for Himself to the great
spiritual life of eternity, yet it comes
at last with surprising quickness.—
Lange.


Ver. 4. “ Would not.” —The only way
in which to move such a@ man was


either (1) to bribe him, or (2) to in-
timidate him, or (3) to weary him into
attending to the petition. The widow’s
poverty and weakness left her with
only the third resource.


Ver. 5. “Weary me.” —The word
trwmidtw is well known to have been a
pugilistic term, corresponding to the
word “punish” in the slang of the
“ring,” but having special reference to
the eyes of an antagonist. St. Paul uses
the word in a sense less removed from
the primary in 1 Cor. ix. 27, “I punish
my body.” In our Lord’s parable the
word has departed still further from
its primary sense, and in the mouth of
the Unjust Judge is clearly “slang.”
It is the poor widow who is to “ bruise”
the lazy judge, not by blows nor by
unsparing treatment, but simply by
importunity. I know of no English
equivalent which at all preserves the
metaphor, except the slang word “bore,”
and that is founded, apparently, on a
different though not very dissimilar
analogy. I suppose that a man is
“bored” when the sharp pertinacity
of another threatens, as it were, to drill
a hole into him, as the ceaseless turning
of a metal point will bore the hardest
rock. The Greek equivalent is the
more expressive of the two. It is well
known that the constant repetition of
a very light stroke upon the body
will produce a painful bruise at last.
I do not know, however, how the sen-
tence can be better rendered in English
than, “lest by her continual coming
she bore me.” —&. Winterbotham.


Ver. 6. “ Hear what the unjust judge
swith.” —Cf. xvi. 8, where another
lesson is drawn from the conduct of
an unrighteous man. “Though the
language of the Unjust Judge be
revolting, yet take notice of it and
observe the lesson that may be drawn
from it.”


Ver. 7. “Shall not God ?”—Since
(1) He is not an unjust, but a righteous
judge, and (2) the supplicant is not a
stranger, but His own elect.


485


CHAP. XVIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


NN


“Ory day and night.”—The best
illustration of this text is to be derived
from the prayer of the souls of the
elect of God, under the altar (Rev. vi.
$, 10), which cry with a loud voice,
saying, “ How long, O Lord, holy and
true, dost Thou not judge and avenge
our blood on them that dwell on the
earth ”?—+.e., on the powers of this
world.


Conditions of Importunate Prayer.
I, Sense of need.
II. Desire to get.
III. Belief that God has in store
what we desire.
IV. Belief that, though He with-
holds awhile, He loves to be asked.
V. Belief that asking will obtain.—
Arnot.


“ Sneedily.” —The relief, which to
man’s impatience tarries long, indeed
arrives speedily ; it could not, according
to the far-seeing and loving counsels of
God, have arrived a moment earlier.
Not while Lazarus is merely sick—not
till he has been four days dead—does


Jesus obey the summons of the sisters
whom He loved so well (John xi. 6).
The disciples, labouring in vain against
a stormy sea, must have looked often to
that mountain where they had left
their Lord ; but not till the last watch—
not till they have toiled through a weary
night—does He bring the aid so long
desired (Matt. xiv. 24, 25).—Trench.


Ver. 8. “ Nevertheless.” —The fear is
not that the judge will delay granting
the succour needed, but that the sup-
plicants will ccase asking for it.


“ Shall He find faith?”—Our Lord
spoke these words to show that when
faith fails, prayer dies. In order to
pray, then, we must have faith; and
that our faith fail not, we must pray.
Faith pours forth prayer; and the
pouring forth of the heart in prayer
givessteadfastness to faith.—A ugustene.


“ Find faith.” —Cf. Matt. xxiv. 12:
“ Because iniquity shall abound, the
love of many shall wax cold.”


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 9—14.


Self-righteousness and Humility.—This is a parable which sets forth one of
the great laws of the kingdom of God, viewed as a kingdom of grace—that
enunciated in the closing verse: ‘“ Every one that exalteth himself shall be
abased ; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.” We shall best study the
parable by making our starting-point the judgment of Jesus on the two men
whose characters are so graphically depicted in it, and considering, in order, these
points: First, the import of the judgment; second, its grounds; third, its
uses,

I. It is declared that the publican went down to his house justified rather
than the Pharisee.—We must assume that it is not intended to call in question
the statements of fact made by the two parties. Neither is supposed to have
borne false witness for or against himself, waether in ignorance or with intent to
deceive. Even the self-laudatory statements of the Pharisee are allowed to pass
unquestioned. What is blamed is not his statement of facts, but the spirit in
which he makes that statement—the spirit of self-complacency. There is the less
reason to doubt this that the Pharisee is not represented as uttering his prayer
aloud, He took up his posture and prayed thus with himself. Had his prayer
been intended for the public ear, there would probably have been in it less
depreciation of others and also less praise of himself. But just on that account
there would have been less sincerity, less fidelity to the actual thoughts and
feelings of the man. And just because it is a heart-prayer it is a true prayer,
reflecting his real belief. It is his self-complacency alone, therefore, not its fact-
basis which is liable to question. The publican’s account of himself is also as-


486


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. cmap. xvuit.





sumed to be correct. Our Lord does not mean to say this publican was mistaken
in imagining himself to beso great a sinner. He is a sinner, as he says in words;
a great sinner, as he declares by significant gesture. The validity of the judg-
ment pronounced concerning him does not at all rest on the comparative smallness
of his guilt. These things being so, it is clear how the judgment must be understood.
It means, not that the publican is a just man, and the Pharisee an unjust, but
the publican is nearer the approval of God than the other who approves himself.
The approval or good-will of God is what both are seeking. Both address
God. The one says, “ God, I thank Thee”; the other, “God, be gracious unto
me.” The one expects God to endorse the good opinion he entertains of himself ;
the other begs God to be merciful to him, notwithstanding his sin.

II. The grounds of the judgment.—Only one reason is expressly referred to
by Christ ; but there is another reason implied. It is this: The publican’s seéf-
dissatisfaction had more truth or religious sincerity in it than the Pharisee’s
self-complacency, and God, as the Psalmist tells us, desires and is pleased with
truth in the inward parts. The statements he made did not, even if true,
warrant self-complacency. Each act of thanksgiving might have been followed
by an act of confession. “I have not been an extortioner, but I have often
coveted what was not my own. I have not been unjust, but I have been far
from generous. I have not been an adulterer, but my heart has harboured many
wicked thoughts.” For all the truly good are conscious that they have confessions
to make which exclude all boasting. Another index of the self-complacent
Pharisees’ want of truth in the deeper sense is that, while apparently unconscious
of any sins of his own, he is very much alive to the sins of others, With a
coarse, Sweeping indiscriminateness he pronounces all men but himself guilty, and
guilty of the grossest sins. He makes himself very good by the cheap method
of making all others very bad. Our Lord expressly states a reason in support of
His judgment concerning the two men. “ Every one that exalteth himself shal?
be abased, and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.” This statement is
valuable, as teaching that self-praise and self-condemnation produce the same
effects on the Divine mind as on our own minds. When a man praises himself
in our hearing, the act provokes in us the spirit of criticism; when, on the other
hand, we hear 4 man condemn himself, there arises in our bosom a feeling of
sympathy towards him. Just the same effects do the same acts, Christ gives us
to understand, produce on the mind of God. And with His teaching all Scripture
agrees. God forgives sins to such as acknowledge them, and imputes sins
to such as deny them, for this among other reasons, because it gives Him
pleasure to exalt those who humble themselves, and to humble those who
exalt themselves.

III. The uses of the judgment.—We learn from the verdict pronounced on the
two worshippers that it is necessary, in order to please God, to be sincere and to
be humble ; but we may not hence infer that we are saved by our sincerity or by
our humility. We are not saved by these virtues, any more than by boasting of
our goodness, but by the free grace of God. From the introductory words we
learn that the chief purpose of the parable was to rebuke and subdue the spirit
of self-righteousness ; another purpose, doubtless, was to revive the spirit of the
contrite and to embolden them to hope in God’s mercy. This is a service which
contrite souls greatly need to have rendered them, for they are slow to believe
that they can possibly be the objects of Divine complacency. Such, in all proba-
bility, was the publican’s state of mind, not only before but even after he prayed.
He went down to his house justified in God’s sight, but not, we think, in his own.
Think not, He would say to such as he, that God casts the poor, nervous, de-
sponding penitent out of His sympathies. Nay! the Lord is nigh unto them that
are of a broken heart. Who can tell how many repentant ones went down to


487


> Vi


cHaP. Xvi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


their houses cheered by the words which had fallen from the lips of the ‘sinner’s


Friend !


Let us use the parable for kindred purposes still; learning from it


ourselves to cherish hopeful views concerning such as are more persuaded of their
own sinfulness than of Divine mercy, and doing what we can to help such to
believe that verily there is forgiveness with God.— Bruce.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 9—14.


Vers. 9-14. Zwo Prayers.

I. The place of prayer.

II. The Pharisee’s prayer.—He
forgets the evil he had and the good
he had not. He did not see himself as
God saw him. He does not ask for
anything. He does not pray for the
publican. He only thanks God he is
not like him.

Tif. The publican’s prayer.—How
short it is! How earnest he is! He
feels his great need. He receives the
blessing. What a load is lifted off his
soul !— Watson.


Two Prayers.—Here we have two
- kinds of prayer set side by side for our
instruction.

I. The first is really no prayer at
all, but only a bit of self-felicitation in
the presence of God. It has no adora-
tion, no confession, no supplication.
This Pharisee has many followers.
Many there are whose whole stock of
piety consists in not being so bad as
some others are. But it is a poor kind
of virtue which has nothing better to
build on than such imperfect relative
goodness,

II. The other man’s prayer was
altogether different.—There was no
measuring of himself with other people.
There was no going over sins he had not
committed. There was no mention of
his neighbour's sins, but freedom in
speaking of his own. He was burdened
with the consciousness of personal
guilt, and cried to God for undeserved
mercy, to be granted wholly through
grace. This is true prayer. The
prayer of the penitent reaches heaven.
God wants this honesty and humility
in our supplications. The particular
sinner with whose sins each man ought
to be most concerned is himself.—
Miller.


488


Two Men at Prayer.

I. Tho proud man’s prayer.—l1. It
was full of boasting words. 2. It did
not speak about his sins. 3. It did
not ask God for anything. It was
therefore not a real prayer at all.

II. The humble man’s prayer.—
1. He calls himself a sinner. 2. He
begs for mercy. 3. His words are few,
but they come from the heart. His
prayer was answered. It was a true
prayer.—W. Taylor.


The Pharisee and the Publican.

I. The wrong religion.—His prayer
reveals the man. It is made up of
self-trust and scorn of others. Self-
praise is not comely. A proud prayer
is a prayerless prayer. This man
confesses only the sins of other men.
This Pharisaic spirit lurks in every
heart, and must be starved and killed.
Even in true Christians traces of the
Pharisee may often be found.

II. The right religion.—His prayer
shows a full belief. 1. Jn man’s great
misery. Like the pilgrim, he has one
burden, and pardon is his one need.
2. God’s greater mercy. The word he
uses means the mercy of propitiation
and reconciliation. This man learned
God’s mercy in learning his own misery.
Sin and salvation are the two founda-
tion-stones of the right religion.—
Wells.


Points of Resemblance and of Differ-

ence. :
I. Points of resemblance.—1. Both
sinful, though their sinfulness took
different forms. 2. Both worshippers
of God. 3. Both examine their own
lives and characters.

II. Points of difference—1. The
Pharisee plumes himself upon his
superiority to others; the Publican is
consumed by the thought of his own


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.  ofapP. xvit.





unworthiness. 2. The Pharisee finds
in his life a righteousness beyond even
the requirements of God’s law; the
Publican has no ground of hope but
in the compassion of God. 3. The
Pharisee has much to say ; the Publican
can only ejaculate one sentence.
4, The Publican is accepted with God ;
the Pharisee is not.


Ver. 9. “ Trusted in themselves.” —
Probably these were not Pharisees,
for in that case the figure of a Pharisee
would not have been held up to them
as a similitude. Some of Christ’s own
followers evidently had given indica-
tions of trust in their own righteous-
ness, or of contempt towards others.


Ver. 10. The Pharisee and the Pub-
lican.—Two extreme types of wor-
shippers. What a contrast !

1. The Pharisee —1l. His advan-
tages. 2. His drawbacks.

IJ. The Publican.—l. His draw-
backs. 2. His advantages.—Davies.


Ver. 11. The Pharisee.—In the
Pharisee and the Publican were repre-
sented the very poles of religious and
social respectability. We are now
concerned with the Pharisee.

I. The Pharisees, as the name im-
plies, were, before all things, men
who insisted on their separateness
from others.—Their duty was to avoid
all intercourse with or assimilation to
the Gentile world. They multiplied
all outward signs which could distin-
guish them from the heathen, or from
those of their countrymen who seemed
to have a fancy for heathen ways. In
many respects they contrasted favour-
ably with the latitudinarian Sadducees.

Il. The Pharisee, as representing
the religious world of Judza, seems to
have everything in his favour, as he
goes up to the Temple to pray.—What
is it in his prayer that our Lord con-
demns? It was that his religion
centred, not in God, but in himself, and
was, therefore, no religion at all. He
asks God for nothing—no pardon, no
mercy, no grace. He feels the need of
nothing.


III. The Pharisees have long dis-
appeared from history; but the spirit
of Pharisaism survives, and our Lord’s
sentence on it holds good for all
time. No one is safe from the infec-
tion of the Pharisaic spirit; no pre-
cautions, surely, will be thought un-
necessary which may help to keep it at
bay.—-Liddon.


Vers. 11, 12. The Phurisee’s Errors.
—l. He thought of God as satisfied
with external conduct and not as
requiring purity and humility of heart.
2. He failed to see his shortcomings,
and exaggerated his virtues. 3. He
despised others.


The Pharisee’s Ground of Confidence.
—1l. That he was not so bad as other
men. 2. That he was not guilty of
gross sins. 3. That he paid attention
to external precepts of religion.


The Pharisees Prayer.—1. He-shows
what hezs. 2. What he does. 3. What
he gives.


Ver. 11. “ Prayed thus.”—It was
less a prayer of thanksgiving to God
than a congratulatory address to him-
self. ‘True thanksgiving is always ac-
companied by and inspired by humility.


“T thank thee.’—Though in the
form of a prayer, the Pharisee boasts
of his superiority to others. It is
possible to thank God for what we do
and become more than others (1 Cor.
xv. 9, 10), but such a thanksgiving
springs out of the most profound
humility.


“As other men.”—Or rather, “as
the rest of men” (R.V.) He divides
mankind into two classes—the evil and
the good, and he finds himself standing
almost alone in the latter.


Ver. 12. “ This publican.”—His eye
alighting on the publican, of whom he
may have known nothing but that he
was a publican, he drags him into his
prayer, making him to furnish the
dark background on which the bright
colours of his own virtues shall more


489


cHAP. xvi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,


gloriously be displayed ; finding, it may
be, in the deep heart-earnestness with
which the contrite man beat his breast,
in the fixedness of his downcast eyes,
proofs in confirmation of the judgment
which he passes upon him. He, thank
God, has no need to beat his breast in
that fashion, nor to cast his eyes in
that shame upon the ground. —TZrench.


Ver. 13. “ Standing afar off.”—Ie.,
from the altar of burnt-offering, in
contrast with the Pharisee who took
up his place near it.


The Publican an Example. — The
Publican affords us an example worthy
of imitation. 1. In his profound sense
of the Divine holiness. 2. In his con-
trition for sin. 3. In his open and
free confession of unworthiness. 4. In
his cry for mercy.


The Publican Shows Humility—1. In
his posture. 2. By his action. 3. By
the matter and form of his prayer.


“ His eyes.” — Fear and shame cause
him to keep his eyes upon the ground.


“His breast.’—The seat of con-
science,


“A sinner.”—To the Pharisee all
are sinners, and he only is righteous;
to the Publican all are righteous, and
he only the sinner. — Westermeier.


“ Me a sinner.”—Or “the sinner”
(R.V.). As the Pharisee saw in him-
self nothing but righteousness, so the
Publican saw in himself nothing but sin.


Ver. 14, The Fate of the Two Prayers.
—The Publican’s prayer, like incense,
ascended into heaven, a sacrifice of
sweet savour, while the prayer of the


Pharisee was blown back like smoke
into his own eyes; for ‘God resisteth
the proud, and giveth grace to the
humble.” —Trench.


Something in Both to Be Avoided,
Something to Be Copied.tWe should
avoid the Pharisee’s pride, but not
neglect his performances; we should
forsake the Publican’s sins and retain
his humility.—Chrysostom.


“ Justified.”—Accepted by God as
righteous. The Pharisee had in form
attributed the excellencies he found in
his own character and life to the grace
of God, but the relish with which he
recounts his virtues shows plainly that
under the guise of humility pride was
lurking. His prayer contained no
request, and drew down no blessing.
But the Publican’s request, proffered
in humility, was granted.


Justification.—In all the passages
in St. Luke where the word is used
(chaps. vii. 29, 35, x. 29, xvi. 15), its
plain meaning is to declare righteous
and not to make righteous. The
Publican prays for mercy ; the Pharisee
trusts in his own righteousness. God
accepts the Publican as righteous, but
does not endorse the Pharisee’s judg-
ment on himself. This use of the word
“justify” is not peculiar to the Pauline
epistles ; we find it in the Old Testament
(Isa. 1. 8, lili. 11; Ps. cxliii. 2).


The Two Men.

Two went to pray; or rather say,

One went to brag, the other to pray;

One stands up close, and treads on

high,

Where th’ other dare not send his eye.

One nearer to the altar trod,

The other to the altar’s God.
Crashaw.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 15—30.
How to Enter the Kingdom.—All three evangelists bring together these two


incidents of the children in Christ’s arms and the young ruler.
were connected in time as well as in subject.


Probably they
Both set forth the conditions of


entering the kingdom, which the one declares to be lowliness and trust, and the


other to be self-renunciation.
490


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE, cmap. xvi.





I. The child-likeness of the subjects of the kingdom.—No doubt there was a
dash of superstition in the impulse that moved the parents to bring their children
to Jesus, but it was an eminently natural desire to win a good man’s blessing,
and one to which every parent’s heart will respond. It was not the superstition,
but the intrusive familiarity, that provoked the disciples’ rebuke. The tender
age of the children is to be noted. They were “ babes,” and had to be brought,
being too young to walk, and so having scarcely arrived at conscious voluntary
life. It is “of such” that the subjects of the kingdom are composed. What,
then, are the qualities which, by this comparison, Jesus requires? Certainly not
innocence, which would be to contradict all His teaching and to shut out the
prodigals and publicans. Besides, these scarcely conscious infants were not
“innocent,” for they had not come to the age of which either innocence or guilt
can be predicated. Perhaps Ps. exxxi. puts us best on the track of the answer.
It may have been in our Lord’s mind ; it certainly corresponds to His thought.
The infant’s lowliness is not yet humility, for it is instinct rather than virtue. It
makes no claims, thinks no lofty thoughts of self—in fact, has scarcely begun to
know that there is a self at all. On the other hand, clinging trust is the infant’s
life. It, too, is rudimentary and instinctive, but the impulse which makes the
babe nestle in its mother’s bosom may well stand for a picture of the conscious
trust which the children of the kingdom must have. The child’s instinct is the
man’s virtue. There is no place in the kingdom for those who trust in themselves.
We must rely wholly on God manifest in His Son.

II. Self-renunciation as the condition of entering the kingdom.—l. Jts
necessity. This is set forth in the conversation with the ruler. The ruler’s
question has much blended good and evil. It expresses a true earnestness, a
dissatisfaction with self, a consciousness of unattained bliss and a longing for it,
a felt readiness to take any pains to secure it, a confidence in Christ’s guidance—
in short, much of the child spirit. But it has also a too light estimate of what
goodness is, a mistaken notion that eternal life can be won by external deeds, which
implies fatal error as to its nature and his own power to do these deeds. This
superficial estimate of goodness, and this over-confidence in his ability to do good
acts, are the twin mistakes against which Christ’s treatment. of him is directed.
Jesus does not deny that He has a right to the title “ good,” but questions this
man’s right to giveit Him. He thought of Jesus only as a man, and, so thinking,
was too ready with his adjective. He who is so liberal with his ascriptions of
goodness needs to have his notions of what it is elevated. Jesus lays down the
great truth which this man, in his confidence that he, by his own power, could do
any good needed for eternal life, was perilously forgetting. God is the only good,
and therefore all human goodness must come from Him; and if the ruler is to
do “ good,” he must first be good by receiving goodness from God. Christ, having
tried to deepen his conceptions and awaken his consciousness of imperfection,
meets him on his own ground by referring him to the Law, which abundantly
answered his inquiry. The second half of the commandments are alone quoted
by Him, for they have especially to do with conduct, and the infractions of them
are more easily recognised than those of the first. The ruler protested that he
had done all these ever since he was a lad. No doubt he had, and his coming to
Jesus confessed that, though he had, the doing had not brought him eternal life.
What was lacking? The soul of goodness, without which these other things
were “dead works.” And what is that soul? Absolute self-renunciation and
following Christ. For this man the former took the shape of parting with his
wealth, but that external renunciation in itself was as “ dead” and impotent to
bring eternal life as all his other good acts had been. It was precious as a means
to an end—the entrance intothe number of Christ’s disciples—and as an expression
of that inward self-surrender which is essential for discipleship. The requirement


491


cHaP. xvul. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


-





pierced to the quick. The man loved the world more than eternal life, after all.
But though he went away, he went sorrowful, and that was, perhaps, the presage
that he would come back. 2. The difficulty of self-renwnciation (vers. 24-27).
The exclamation of Jesus is full of the charity which makes allowance for
temptation. It speaks a universal truth, never more needed than in our days.
How few of us believe that it gets harder for us to be disciples as we grow richer !
What a depth of vulgar admiration of the power of money is in the disciple’s
exclamation, “If rich men cannot get into the kingdom, who can gettin?” Or
it may mean, Who can fulfil such a difficult condition? The answer points us all
to the only power by which we can do good and overcome self—viz., by God’s
help. God is “ good,” and we can be good too if we look to Him. God will fill
our souls with such sweetness that earth will not be hard to part with. 3. The
reward of self-renunciation. It would have been better if Peter had not boasted
of their surrender, but yet it was true that they had given up all. Jesus does
not rebuke the almost innocent self-congratulation, but recognises in it an appeal
to His faithfulness. It was really a prayer, though it sounded like a vaunt, and
it is answered by renewed assurances. To part with outward things for Christ’s
sake, or for the kingdom’s sake—which is the same thing—is to win them again
with all their sweetness a hundredfold sweeter. Gifts given to Him come back
to the giver, enhanced by His touch and hallowed by lying on His altar. ‘The
present world yields its full riches only to the man who surrenders all to Jesus.
—Maclaren.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 15—30.


Vers. 15-17. The Children and Christ. little they knew Christ’s heart! Was


I. By whom were they brought to
Christ?—We infer that they were
brought by their own parents. Who
else were likely to’ be so interested in
them? Who were so likely to solicit
for them the Saviour’s benediction ?
Ought it not to be so still?

II. Of what age were they ?—Of
various ages, but all of tender years,
some being mere infants. Some step
by their parents’ sides, some are led
by the father’s hand, some are gently
borne in the maternal arms.

III. The purpose for which they
were brought to Jesus.—That He
might pray for them. In response to
this request He took them up in His
arms and blessed them. Good higher
than merely temporal welfare was
sought, health better than that of
the body. All through after-life their
faith would be helped and their hearts
cheered by remembrance of the fact.

IV. What reception was given to
them by the disciples?—They inter-
posed to prevent the parents’ nearer
approach with their children. The
prohibition was harsh and blind. How


492


there a father among them ?

V. What reception was given to
them by Jesus Himself?—He was
displeased at the disciples’ rebuke.
He called the little ones near. He
directly addressed and blessed them.
For His gracious words countless
parents all the world over and in
every age have blessed His gracious
name.—LHdmond.


Christ's Welcome to Children.
I. The bringing.
II. The hindrance.
TIT. The rebuke.
IV. The lessons.—W, Taylor.


Christ’s words imply—

I. That children, even mere babes,
may be regenerated and truly holy.

II. That infants may become mem-
bers of the visible Church.

III. That children are very early
capable of receiving benefit from
religious instruction.

IV. That the true Church on earth
actually consists, in a great measure,
of those who have been cailed in early


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XVIII.


———————— OO eee"


life, or at least have been very early
instructed in the way of salvation. _
V. That the kingdom of God above
consists, in a large degree, of those who
have died in infancy and childhood.


Ver. 15. “Also infants.” —The phrase
used by St. Luke, which might be
translated “even infants,” is meant
to indicate the reverential feelings of
those now about Jesus. Even their
children they desired to be touched and
blessed by Him.


Ver. 16. Children Examples to Us.—
Children are examples to us (1) in their
humility, and (2) in their trustfulness.
What they are naturally we should
strive to become.


Ver. 17. Humility of Children a
Pattern.—It is the humility of children
to which our Lord represents it as
necessary that men should be con-
verted, and this humility as exemplified
in the mode of receiving the kingdom.
There are three senses in which this
humility may be understood.

I. As opposed to the pride of in-
tellectual self-sufficiency. —In receiving
the doctrine of the kingdom in a spirit
of docility, without doubting or disputa-
tion; as when the child shall receive
his father’s word with implicit faith.

II. As opposed to the pride of self-
righteousness.—In receiving the dless-
ings of the kingdom without any con-
sciousness of desert ; as when the child
shall expect and take favours at his
father’s hand, without the faintest
sentiment of any merits of his own.

III. As opposed to ambitious pride.
—In receiving the kingdom in a spirit
of love for the brethren, without con-
tention for pre-eminence ; as when the
nobleman’s child shall, if permitted,
make a companion of the beggar’s, on


a footing of the most perfect equality. .


—Anderson.


Resemblance to Children.—Disciples
should resemble children (1) in teach-
ableness, and (2) in freedom from
worldly desires.


The disciples thought it was neces-
sary for the children to become like
them before the interest of the Saviour
in them would be excited, and are
taught that they themselves must be-
come like children before they could
enter into the kingdom of heaven.


Vers. 18-30. Entering the Kingdom.
—Dante calls this incident “the great
refusal.” It is one to arrest the atten-
tion of the most careless. But it should
be linked on with the previous incident
of the blessing of the children. This
ruler could not enter the kingdom,
because he would not receive it as a
little child. His spirit was far removed
from the obedient, trustful disposition
of the little child. Jesus deals very
gently, not harshly, with him. He
took him on his own ground, and led
him by a very simple test to realise
that he hardly knew what keeping the
commandments meant. Was not the
sum of the commandments, “Thou shalt
love thy neighbour as thyself”? Tried
by the lesser table of the Law he failed
utterly. He would not part with his
wealth for the poor. Christ did not
need to test him by the greater table
of the Law. Thus he was led to see
how it was impossible for him to inherit
eternal life by keeping the command-
ments. Even if he had stood the test,
there was still the summons, “ Come,
follow Me.” Not even by selling all
we have, but by following Jesus, is the
way to inherit eternal life.—Hastings.


Christ’s Word to the Wealthy Ruler.
J. The earnest question.
II. The willing answer.
TII. The simple but sufficient test.
IV. The sad failure.—W. T'aylor.


A Young Man Seeking Jesus.
I. His worthy aim. .
II. His consistent life.
III. His lack of self-knowledge.
IV. His darling sin.
V. His great refusal.—Jdid.


I. The conversation with the young
miler (vers. 18-23).
493


CHAP. XVIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





II. The conversation on the subject
of riches suggested by his conduct
(vers. 24-27).

III. The conversation with the dis-
ciples concerning their having obeyed
the summons which the young ruler
refused to obey.


Vers. 18-27. 4 Warning.—We have
here—l. Another warning against self-
righteousness and boasting, or thinking
highly of our own deeds. 2. Agaiust
the sin and danger of an undue attach-
ment to the things of this world.


Ver. 18. Favourable Circumstances.—
This man appears here in @ very favour-
able light.

I. Though young and wealthy, he
was of irreproachable moral charac-
ter.

II. He.had spiritual cravings which
he was anxious to satisfy.

III. Unlike many of his class, he
believed that Jesus could give him
authoritative direction as to the way
to attain eternal life.

IV. He came openly to proffer his
request.


Ver. 19. “ None is good, save One.” —
The declaration is the expression of
the. same humble subordination to
God, penetrated by which Jesus also,
although knowing Himself one with
the Father, yet designates the Father
as the One sending Him, teaching
Him, sanctifying Him, glorifying
Him—in one word, as the greater.
Ever, indeed, is the Father the original
source, as of all being, so of all good-
ness—the absolutely Good, in His
holiness ever the same, while in con-
trast with Him, even the Son, as man,
is one developing in goodness and
holiness, perfecting Himself through
prayers, conflicts, sorrows, and suffer-
ing, unto Divine glory.— Ullman.


Ver. 20. The Law and The Gospel.—
Jesus refers the self-righteous to the
Law, to convict them of sin; to the
humble He preaches the gospel.


494


Ver. 21. “ All these have I kept.” —
This reply testifies, no doubt, to great
moral ignorance on the part of the
speaker, but it is also proof of a noble
sincerity. He has never known the
spiritual significance of the command-
ments, and therefore believes that he
has fully kept them.”—Godet.


Ver. 22. “ One thing thou lackest.”—
1. A gracious acknowledgment of an
attractive character—one thing only
lacking. 2. An earnest warning, since
this one thing was the one thing
needful.


Ver. 23. “ Very sorrowful.”— The
Gospel of the Hebrews amplifies this
incident as follows: “Then the rich
man began to scratch his head, for he
was displeased by that saying; and
the Lord said to him, How, then, canst
thou say, I have accomplished the Law ;
since it is written in the Law, Thou
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself ;
and here are many of thy brethren,
children of Abraham, who live in
misery, and are perishing with hunger,
while thy table is loaded with good
things, and nothing goes from it to
them !”


Ver. 24. “ How hardly !” etc.—It is
not the mere fact of possessing wealth
which hinders the soul from rising to
spiritual things, but the sense of
security which wealth is liable to bring
with it. Hence, according to St. Mark,
Jesus explains this statement by
describing the persons alluded to as
those “‘ who trust in riches.”


Ver. 25. The Temptation of The Rich.
—In other words, a rich man is, so
far as his riches are concerned, in a
more difficult position for the attain:
ment of heavenly-mindedness, and.
therefore, for that humility of spirit
and disengagement from the cares and
snares of life, which are essential to
all who would enter God’s kingdom,
than a poor man is. Poverty also has
its own temptations, and Ged either
equalises the lots of men, or, at any


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XVIII.


Se ee ee a


rate, sends no severer temptation with-
out also sending “more grace” whereby
to resist it (James iv. 6). Along with
the temptation He provides also the
way of escape (1 Cor. x. 13). And,
since men have always loved and always
will love, riches, the Lord desired to
force upon us the conviction that if we
would increase our wealth we run a
terrible risk of also increasing our
worldliness. From this inordinate love
of riches, simply, we cannot be saved by
our own power. Left to ourselves we
should fail utterly in the attempt to
combine the love of God with the
deceitfulness of earthly mammon. But
we are not left to ourselves. The
salvation of the soul, in the midst of
eartuiy riches, requires a spiritual
miracie, a miracle of the grace of God.
But, so far from miracles being rare,
we live in the midst of them. With-
out them no man could be saved at all,
least of all any man who has so much
about him as the rich have to make
this world sweet and easy. Souls are
saved, men enter into the heavenly
kingdom, in spite of difficulties humanly
insuperable, and only because nothing
is impossible with God.—Farrar.


Ver. 26. “ Who, then, can be saved ?”
—I.e., because all are striving to be
rich. We must remember, too, that
the disciples yet looked for a temporal
kingdom, and therefore would naturally
be dismayed at hearing that it was so
difficult for any rich man to enter it.


Ver. 27. “ Possible with God.” —
Thus, in the twinkling of an eye, Jesus
raises the mind of His hearers from
human endeavours, of which alone the


young ruler was thinking, to that
Divine work of radical reformation
which proceeds from Him who only
is Good, and of which Jesus is tho
instrument. Cf. John iii. 2-5 for a
similar rapid change of idea.—G@odet.


Ver. 28. “ We have left all.”—They
had stood the test which had proved
too hard for the young ruler; to them,
as to him, the alternative had been
given of cleaving to the world or of
cleaving to Christ. What, then, should
be their reward ?


Vers. 29, 30. Two Aspects of Piety.

I. The gospel a present blessing.—
1. To the person. 2. To our associa-
tions. 3. To our circumstances.
4, To mankind at large.

II. The Gospel a future expectation.
—1l. Every present blessing is an
earnest of the future. 2. Every
present effort is a preparation for the
future. 3, Every present experience
creates a desire for endless life.


Ver. 29. “Left house or parents,”
etc.—The gain is a hundredfold the
sacrifice, and is received at once; it
comes “in the form of a re-construc-
tion of all human relationships and
affections, on a Christian basis and
amongst Christians, after they have
been sacrificed in their natural form
on the altar of love to Christ.”


Ver. 30. “ Manifold more.” — The
reward, disproportionate to the sacri-
fices made, (1) illustrates the gene-
rosity of the Master; (2) is humbling
to the disciple, for he still remains a
debtor to Divine grace.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 31—34.


The Third Announcement of The Passion.—Jesus and the twelve were now on
their way up to Jerusalem to be present at the celebration of the feast of the


Passover.


But though He was surrounded by disciples, and accompanied by


crowds of pilgrims, He was isolated in thought from all who journeyed with


Him.


The multitude anticipated the coming of the kingdom of God in connec-


tion with His arrival in the holy city (chap. xix. 11) ; the disciples were intent upon
ambitious schemes for securing places of honour in that kingdom (Matt. xx. 20-28) ;
while He mused upon the sufferings and death which were now so near Him.


495


CHAP. Xvi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





I. The prediction.—Special solemnity marked the manner in which Jesus
communicated His thoughts to the disciples. He took them apart, probably in
order to isolate them from the multitude, whose ignorant enthusiasm might have
been set on fire by the announcement of the dangers which threatened Him, and
to impress upon His disciples the deep significance of the communication He was
now making to them. The minuteness and accuracy of the prediction are very
remarkable. Vague forebodings of disaster are all that any mcre man, placed
in similar circumstances to those in which Jesus now was, would experience.
But Jesus has special knowledge of all that awaits Him. His enemies are the
chief priests and scribes and elders; but with them will be allied the Gentiles, as
the actual inflictors of death. He foresees the mocking, and scourging, and all
the brutal ill-treatment of which He will be the victim. And as plainly as the
details of His suffering are foreseen by Him is the certainty of His resurrection’
from the dead after three days present to His thoughts. No less remarkable is
the calmness with which He makes this announcement. He utters no lamenta-
tion or complaint, He manifests no reluctance, but, with unfaltering resolution,
journeys up to the city where sufferings and death awaited Him. He names
some of His enemies, but He is silent about His betrayer, who now, with the
other apostles, stood by His side and listened to His words.

IT. The purpose for which the prediction was given.—The primary object
Jesus had in view was, doubtless, to prepare His disciples for the events which
would so sorely try their faith in Him. Their belief in His Messiahship and
Divine commission would be subjected to a severe strain by seeing Him
apparently a helpless victim in the hands of His enemies. And when the time
of trial came, it should have strengthened the disciples to remember that he had
foreseen the sufferings which were inflicted upon Him, and had voluntarily
accepted them. But we can easily believe that He desired also to find some
relief for His own feelings by unburdening His mind to those who were His
dearest and most trusted friends. Svurrow is lightened by the sympathy of those
we love. And as Jesus afterwards, in the garden of Gethsemane, sought to have
the advantage of the presence and sympathy of the three apostles who were in
most intimate communion with Him, so now, doubtless, a similar feeling moved
Him to take the twelve into His confidence.

III. The effect of this communication.—So far as we know the only impression
the words of Christ made upon those that heard them was that of mere be-
wilderment. No words of sorrow or sympathy seem to have been spoken by
them in reply. Their minds were still possessed by expectations of earthly
sovereignty to be exercised by the Messiah, and the ainouncement of an
ignominious death perplexed and stupified them. The allusion to the resurrection —
from the dead fell upon deaf ears—it was unintelligible ; and any suggestion of
superhuman dignity and power which might be latent in it was overborne by
the disastrous character of the rest of His communication. No words could
convey more vividly the utter loneliness of Christ than those which describe the
effect upon the disciples of His sorrowful prediction ; those who were most firmly
attached to Him, and knew Him best, could not understand Him, and stood
silent and perplexed as they listened to His disclosure of the sufferings He was
so shortly to undergo.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 31—34,


Vers. 31-33.—Christ Strengthens the sufferings, and death; and (2) by
Faith of His Disciples (1) by prepar- assuring them of His victory over
ing them for His humiliation, and death.


496


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XVIII.





Two Grounds of Comfort :—

I. The sufferings of Christ belonged
to the Divine purpose in sending Him,
as indicated by the prophets.

II. His ignominious death would be
followed by a glorious resurrection.


Sufferings Willingly Met.

I. Our Lord clearly foresaw and
foretold all the sufferings which lay
before Him.

II. He willingly and eagerly went
forward to meet them.

III. Our hope for acceptance with
God should rest upon that obedience
unto death to which Christ was now
going forward.


Ver. 31. “ Written by: the prophets.”
—Z.e., their predictions of the sufferings
of the Christ (cf. Ps. xxii.; Isa. liii. ;
Zech. xi., xii. 10.


Ver. 32. “ Delivered unto the
Gentiles.”—The prophecy grows clearer
as the event approaches, At first it
had been, “ Destroy this temple, and in
three days I will raise it up” (John ii.


19); “The days will come when the
Bridegroom shall be taken” (Matt. ix.
15). These words of Christ have rather
the air of historic record than of pro-
phetic anticipation.


Ver. 33. “The third day.”—His
death and His rising show His two
natures, human and Divine—His
human nature and weakness in dying ;
His Divine nature and power, in
rising again. These show His two
offices—His priesthood and His king-
dom: His priesthood in the sacrifice of
His death ; His kingdom in the glory
of His resurrection. They set before
us His two main benefits—His death,
the death of death; His rising, the
reviving of life again: the one, what
He had ransomed us from; the other,
what He had purchased for us.—
Andrewes.


Ver. 34. “ Understood none.” —One
must know human things in order to
love them, but one must love Divine
things if he would rightly know
them.”—Pascal.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 35—43.


Bartimeus.—The blind man, Bartimeus (Mark), is seated by the wayside.
That is his usual place—begging his usual occupation. But another idea fills
his mind to-day. He has heard much of Jesus of Nazareth. The country is
filled with the rumour that He is on His way to Jerusalem to be crowned King
of the Jews. To the blind man it has, somehow, become clear that this is the
Christ promised to the Fathers. He is prepared to confess his faith in Him,
for he has a great boon to ask of Him. He has taken up his usual place since
early morn, and is watching anxiously for the first sign of Christ’s coming, when
he hears the sound of a multitude approaching. He asks the bystanders, or the
first comers, “‘ what it meant.” They answer and tell him, ‘Jesus of Nazareth
passeth by.” Now, then, his great opportunity has come. He lifts up his voice,
in the words of that most eloquent and simple prayer he has prepared, and
he repeats the prayer till the time of answer came: “ Jesus, Thou Son of David,
have mercy on me.” Note what obstacles this man’s faith overcame.

I. His circumstances.—He was but a poor blind man, a customary object of
charity. He who was passing by was a great Teacher, a Prophet of the people,
reputed to be the Messiah, and probably the future King of Israel. Moreover,
He was in the heart of a procession, engaged in teaching, and much engrossed
in this momentous crisis of His public life. But Bartimzus was not to be
hindered by any of these things. As to the difference in rank between himself
and Jesus, he made nothing of it, or rather he made an encouragement of it.
When He heard the name, Jesus of Nazareth! his heart leaped up within him.
“This is the very person I want to meet. Iam poor; He is the friend of the


FK 497


cHAP. xvi, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





poor. I am blind; He is the healer of the blind. I am a despised and forgotten
waif by the roadside; He is the King of Israel, the gatherer of outcasts—the
Healer of the broken-hearted, the One who remembers the forgotten.” If, then,
any one is hindered from coming to Christ by considerations of environment, be
this the answer of faith. The worse your circumstances, the more need you
have of Christ, the more evident is it that you are of those to whom He is
offered, and for whom He is intended. When He is nigh, let no argument
find place in your heart that the time is unsuitable, or that there may be a more
convenient season.

II. The desire of worldly advantage.—Here was a great procession coming.
In an ordinary case Bartimeus would, doubtless, have laid himself out to make
a harvest of the passing caravan. On this occasion he made up his mind to
forego that altogether. He weighed the two things, and he said to himself,
“ No, no alms to-day; I will direct my whole efforts to getting a cure from
Jesus of Nazareth.” He did not attempt both things, but deliberately sacrificed
the alms-getting for the eyesight. Doubtless he would have been a fool to do
otherwise. Yet that is the folly men are committing every day, and not the
thoughtless alone among men. ‘Those who have some glimpse of the priceless
value of spiritual light and peace, yet let year after year leave them as it found
them, because they are too busy in the world to seek salvation, or too much
afraid of losing present advantage to set aside its claims, even for a season,
and “count their cost” of their immortal nature. Jesus and his multitudes are
passing by while some of us are busy gathering pennies by the wayside. A
soul in earnest, a soul prepared for the Master’s grace, will hold it of such
urgent moment that everything must stand aside till this great question is settled.

III. The opposition of others.—We are not told what were the motives of
the crowd in trying to silence Bartimeus. Perhaps the vulgar notion that it
was improper for a common beggar like him to take up the time and attention of
Jesus; perhaps that, with all their popular enthusiasm for Jesus, they were not
pleased at the blind man for the boldness of his expression that Jesus was the
Christ. It is not easy to conceive any obstacle in the way of the spiritually
anxious more stumbling than this, when the professed, and sometimes even the
real followers of Christ, object to the ardour of their expressions, or the evident
feeling they show. “This is going too far. It is extravagance. It disturbs
the Church.” The real meaning is, it puts us about, it suggests an uncomfort-
able suspicion that we are not in earnest, when we see some spirit-stirred ones
counting all things loss to win Christ, and overturning the cold, formal decency
of the Church with their new-born fervour. As soon as the cry, with its unusual
title and its imploring tones, meets the Saviour’s ears, He comes to a standstill,
ana commands the blind man to be brought to Him. This is how Christ finds
those that inquire after Him. We know that He is found of those who seek
Him not, surprises those that look not for Him, singles out for search those that
had forgotten Him. How certainly then, as this story shows, is He the
Rewarder of them that diligently seek Him. It was a moment of rare triumph
for Jesus. He is attended by a joyful crowd. But He turns—how character-
istically !—from the happy throng to the one miserable man who needs His help.
The pertinacious vitality of faith had proved itself in this instance, and it met,
according to Christ’s method, ‘with an instant and abundant reward. It was
proved, not only by the blind man’s firm conviction of Jesus’ Messiahship, but by
his irrepressible expression of it, by his conquest of the obstacles put in his way,
by his joyous alacrity when Jesus called him, by his prompt application of
Christ’s offered grace to his most particular need. And now, as all the
Evangelists add, the proof was crowned by the first use he made of the new gift
of sight. “He followed Jesus in the way.” From this conduct the Lord


498


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XVIII.


received honour, both direct and indirect, for all the people, when they saw it,
swelled His praises. These two forms of service to Christ re-act upon each other.
If all who know about Him were to profess Him, there would be much increase


of spiritual life in the Church.


If all who profess Christ were to experience


what they profess, there would be much increas: of spiritual heat. If all who have
experienced Christ were to live up to their experience of His mercy, the Church
would be like a mass of molten metal in the midst of a cold world—the world,
indeed, would be set on fire, and the whole earth would be filled with His glory.


—Laidlaw.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 35 —43.


Ver. 35-43. Bartimeus.—The story
of Bartimeus shows us a man in
difficulties, and exhibits his conduct
when face to face with the three powers
of life: 1. Self. 2. The world. 3. God.
We shall see what the world did for
him, what he did for himself, and
what Divine love did for him.

I. The world.—The world gave him
pity and alms, but it could not give
him sight. He wanted power; it
could only give compassion. He wanted
eyes; it could only give a dole. _ Its
gifts made him feel his dependence
most keenly.

TI. What Bartimeus did for himself.
—He was self-reliant. He would not
be silenced. He is heedless of the
crowd. The more opposition, the more
endeavour. But he is also single-
minded. He must run no risk of
failure in reaching Christ. He throws
aside his long robe. It might impede
his progress. What was raiment, com-
pared with the dowry of eyesight ?

III. What Christ did for him.—The
best human efforts cannot achieve
everything. Man and the world are
not the only factors of life. Before
Christ the demeanour of Bartimeeus is
changed. He stands as one who waits.
What he needs must be waited for.
The man of independence is to learn


dependence. And Christ acts towards
him with love—love that shows
sensibility, decision, judgment, and
capability. He is quick to discern


need, decisive in His command, de-
liberate in His dealing, and powerful
in His gift.—Carpenter.


J. The situation (ver. 35-39).


II. The cure (vers. 40—42).
IIT. The effect produced (ver. 43).


A Wayside Miracle.
I. The beggar’s need.
II. The beggar’s cry.
III. The beggar’s urgency.
IV. Jesus’ response.—1. The same
cry can reach Him still. 2. He will
listen, and help us. —Watson.


A Confession of Faith.

Ver. 38. I. A confession of faith
in Jesus as able to give sight.
II. A confession of faith in Him as
Messiah, at whose coming the eyes of

the blind should be opened.


Ver. 39. “ Rebuked him.” —The blind
man saw Jesus with the eye of faith,
and prayed to Him as his Saviour ;
while the world, who could see His
person, saw Him not. And yet the
blind world, which did not see Jesus,
rebuked the blind man, who saw and
worshipped Him ; but he was nothing
daunted by the rebuke, but cried to
Him the more earnestly. Thus the
blind recovered sight, aud they who
saw were blind.


Ver. 41. Vague Prayers.—Poor
Bartimeus had no difficulty in answer-
ing Christ’s question. He could not
for an instant mistake or forget the
nature of his want. He cried to Jesus
for mercy, when he heard that He
was passing by, because he felt a
particular want, and believed that
Jesus only could supply it. He felt
that this was his only chance, and a
fastly fleeting one. And so, on Christ’s
approach and direct inquiry, he was

49Q


cHAP. Xvi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


ready with a direct and unhesitating
answer. Faith was supplemented here
by an accurate knowledge of the heart’s
plague and sorrow ; and He who waited
for this avowal said at once in reply,
“ Receive thy sight; thy faith hath
saved thee.” We often kneel in the
Divine Presence, as this man did, and
call to the Saviour for mercy. Were
He to cross-examine us as to the
meaning of our words, would our
answer be ready? Does each heart
know its own bitterness so well as to
be able at once to ask for the boon we
specially need? Or is there unreality,
is there vagueness in our language,
when we pray ?

I. In our confession of sin, do we
use vague and unreal words, not mean-
ing them? Let us practice ourselves
in meaning something by our con-
fessions of sin. This exercise, and its
accompaniment of seeking forgiveness,
are an indispensable part of all worship.
_ It has respect to time past, the

ineffaceable, irretrievable past.

II. But the other part of prayer
has respect rather to the future.—
“To obtain mercy ” that is one thing:
“to find grace to help intimeof need” —
that is the other. Even more in the


~


latter case is there the risk of vague-
ness and unreality in our prayers.
The petitions which we seem to bring
to the throne of grace may be
neutralised by our inability to answer
the searching inquiry of our Lord,
“What wilt thou that I shall do for
thee?” The very endeavour to bring
something definite, something real,
something learned by experience and
examination, whenever we profess to
approach God’s mercy-seat with words
of prayer on our lips, will help to give
point and meaning to our worship.
Then will the question of the text
sound in our ears with less of re-
proof than of encouragement. —
Vaughan.


Ver. 42. “ Thy faith.”—In replying
to the request of the blind man, Jesus
says, “Thy faith,” and not “My
power,” in order to impress upon him
the value of that moral act, and that
certainly in view of the still more
important spiritual miracle yet to be
wrought in him.


Ver. 43. “Followed Him.”—All
that he cared for was seeing; all that
he cared to see was Christ.





500


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, L UKE. CHAP. XIX.


TE


CHAPTER XIX.
CRITICAL NOTES.


Ver. 1. Jericho.—“ The city of palm-trees (Deut. xxxiv. 3; Judges i. 16) is about six miles
from the Jordan and fifteen from Jerusalem. When taken by Joshua the site had been
cursed (Joshua vi. 26), but in the reign of Ahab, Hiel of Bethel defied and underwent the
curse (1 Kings xvi. 34). In later times Jericho became a great and wealthy town, being
fertilised by its abundant springs (2 Kings ii. 21) and enriched by its palms and balsams”
(farrar). The trade in balsam was extensive, and Zaccheeus was evidently superintendent
of the tax-collectors who had the oversight of the revenue derived from that article.

Ver. 2. Zaccheus.—J.e., Hebrew “ Zaccai” (“pure”) (Ezra ii. 9; Neh. vii. 14). Chief
ee the publicans,—Or “‘a chief publican” (R.V.). The word so translated occurs here
only.

Ver. 3. The press.—‘‘ The crowd” (R.V.).

Ver. 4. Sycomore.—See xvii. 6: a tree with short trunk and wide lateral branches.

Ver. 5. A previous knowledge of the man is not precluded, His name, occupation, and
reputation, may have been known to Jesus, but the Saviour showed supernatural knowledge
of his mind and heart. I must.—A Divine plan, fixing every event in our Lord’s ministry.
Cf. iv. 43, xiii. 33. Abide.—Probably remain over the night.

Ver. 7. They all murmured—An indication of the strong national prejudice against the
occupation of such men as Zaccheus. To be guest.—Or, “to lodge ” (R.V.).

Ver. 8. Stood.—Took up his stand. The word expresses a formal and resolute undertaking
to be guided by the promptings of conscience, which had now been awakened by Christ’s
visit to him. I give.—d.e., not “Iam in the habit of giving,” but “I now propose to give."
If I have taken.—/.ec., ‘‘ whatever I have taken.” He does not deny the guilt of his past life.
Restore fourfold.— The restitution commanded by the Law in cases of theft (Exod. xxii. 1).

Ver. 9. This day.—Evidently the day Christ entered his house, and not the following
morning. Is salvation come,—“ Meaning by ‘salvation’ both Himself, and the conversion of
Zaccheeus, which His words had wrought” (Speaker’s Commentary). Is ason of Abraham.
—Te., is a Jew—one of ‘‘the lost sheep of the house of Israel,” not “has become a son of
Abraham by repentance.”

Ver. 10. For the Son of Man, etc.—The greater his guilt, the more need he has of a Saviour.

Ver. 11. He added.— This parable is thus distinctly connected with the words spoken in the
house of Zaccheus. It is, therefore, not to be confused with the parable of the Talents, from
which it differs in structure and incidents, and which was spoken in Jerusalem. ‘The main
differences between the two parables may be stated thus: 1. That of the Talents tells us the
simple story of the committal of certain sums of money to individuals, and of the use made
by each of the sum entrusted to him ; that of the Pounds is complicated with a distinct inci-
dent—viz., the opposition of the citizens, and the vengeance taken upon them. 2. In that of
the Talents the principal person is a householder; in that of the Pounds he is a nobleman
seeking a kingdom. 3. The Talents are given in various proportions ; the Pounds are
distributed equally. 4. There is an enormous difference between the sums entrusted in each
case (the ‘ pound’ being equal to about £3 of our money, the ‘talent’ being sixty times as
much), 5. In the parable of the Pounds the slothful servant only suffers loss; in that of the
Talents a positive punishment is inflicted besides” (Speaker's Commentary). Nigh to Jeru-
salem.—Jericho is about fifteen miles distant from it. They thought, etc.—J.e., the followers
of Jesus anticipated that this formal progress to Jerusalem, during which so many miracles
were wrought, would issue in the open manifestation of God’s kingdom.

Ver. 12. A certain nobleman.—In this Christ refers to His own dignity as ‘‘ born king of
the Jews” (Matt. ii, 2). It is interesting to notice the close correspondence between
incidents in the life of Archelaus and those which form the framework to this parable ; these
are, the journey to Rome to receive institution to a kingdom, the embassy of Jews sent to
protest against it, his instructions to servants to look after his pecuniary interests in his
absence, and his assignment of cities as a reward to faithful adherents. The fact that
Archelaus had a splendid palace at Jericho has, not unreasonably, been taken by some as
probably suggesting the allusions to him in the parable. As Archelaus was an unjust and
cruel prince, we have in this picture of spiritual things something of the same paradoxical
nature as in the parable of the Unjust Steward and the Unjust Judge,


501


CHAP. XIX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





Ver, 13. His ten servants.—Rather, “ten servants of his” (R.V.). Occupy.—Rather, “ trade
ye herewith” (R.V.). The word is one specially used of business investments.

Ver. 14. His citizens.—In the interpretation of the parable this is to be understood
of the Jews, as “the servants” are the disciples. This man.—The phrase implies
contempt.

Ver. 16. Thy pound hath gained.— He modestly attributes this to his lord’s money, and
not to his own work” (Grotius), Cf. 1 Cor. xv. 10.

Ver. 17. Faithful in a very little —This is the essence of the parable. It is the faithful-
ness of the service rendered to which the lord looks, and not to the amount gained. The
reward is proportioned to the faithfulness manifested.

Ver. 19. Be thou also.—Notice that no special words of commendation are bestowed on
this servant. He had not been as faithful as the other.

Ver. 20. Laid up in a napkin.—A common mode among the Jews of hoarding coin.

Ver. 21. Thou takest up, etc.—Proverbial expressions to describe a hard, grasping disposi-
tion.

Ver. 23. Into the bank.—Or, “into a bank.” That at my coming, etc.—Or, “I should have
gone and required,” etc. (R.V. margin). Usury.—J.e., interest.

Ver. 25. And they said.—Z.e., the bystanders in the parable. The lord proceeds without
taking any notice of the interruption.

Ver. 26. Even that he hath.—Cf. chap, viii. 18, ‘‘seemeth to have.”

Ver. 27. Slay them.—Our Lord here combines into one picture His figurative coming to
take vengeance upon the Jews who rejected Him, and His literal coming at the end of the
world.

Ver. 28. Went before.—JZ.c., at the head of the disciples. Cf. Mark x. 32. Ascending.—The
road from Jericho to Jerusalem is one long ascent.

Ver. 29. Bethphage.—A village apparently on the east of Bethany. The name means
“house of figs.” The place itself has not been identified. It is mentioned in the Talmud.
Bethany.—The home of Lazarus and his sisters. It lies on the eastern slope of the Mount of
Olives, fully a mile beyond the summit, and not very far from the point at which the road
to Jericho begins its more sudden descent towards the Jordan valley” (Smith, “ Dictionary
of the Bible”).

Ver. 30. A colt.—The more circumstantial account in St, Matthew speaks of a mother and
her colt. The Saviour rode upon the colt while the mother was led beside it, after the
manner of a sumpter. Never man sat,—And therefore sent fora sacred purpose. Cf. Numb.
xix. 2; Deut. xxi. 3; 1 Sam. vi. 7.

Ver. 35. Cast their garments.—As in honour of a king (cf. 2 Kings ix. 13).

Ver. 36. In the way.—As also leaves of trees and palm-branches.

Ver. 37. And when He was.—St. Luke alone indicates the point at which the popular
enthusiasm began to manifest itself. ‘ Bethany is hardly left in the rear before the long
procession must have swept up and over the ridge, where first begins ‘the descent of the
Mount of Olives’ towards Jerusalem, At this point the first view is caught of the south-
eastern corner of the city. The Temple and the more northern portions are hid by the slope
of Olivet on the right. It was at this precise point, ‘as He drew near, at the descent of the
Mount of Olives’—may it not have been from the sight thus opening upon them ?—that
the hymn of triumph burst forth from the multitude” (Stanley, “Sinai and Palestine”).
St. John speaks of a company going out from the city to meet the procession (xii. 18),
and oer ee that the enthusiasm was principally excited by the raising of Lazarus from
the dead.

Ver. 38, Peace in heaven.—Z.e., between God and man; and on this account “ glory [to
God] in the highest.”

Ver, 40. If these, etc.—Rather, “if these shall hold their peace, the stones will cry out”
(R.V.). The words are of a proverbial character; they recall, too, Hab. ii. 11.

Ver. 41. And when.—“ The road descends a slight declivity, and the glimpse of the city is
again withdrawn behind the intervening ridge of Olivet. A few moments, and the path
mounts again ; it climbs a rugged ascent, it reaches a ledge of smooth rock, and in an instant
the whole city bursts into view. Immediately below was the valley of the Kedron, here seen
in its greatest depth as it joins the Valley of Hinnom, and thus giving full effect to the great
peculiarity of Jerusalem seen only on its eastern side—its situation as of a city rising out of
a deep abyss. It is hardly possible to doubt that this rise and turn of the road, this rocky
ledge, was the exact point where the multitude paused again, and ‘ He, when He beheld the
ee RA over it’” (Stanley, “Sinai and Palestine”). Wept.—The word implies “ wept
aloud.”

(RV) 42. Even thou.—T.e., as well as the disciples. In this thy day.—Rather, “in this day”

Ver. 43. Cast a trench.—Rather, “cast up a bank” (R.V.) ; strictly speaking, “a palisade,”
It and a wall of masonry were afterwards used by Titus in investing the city,


502


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XIX








Ver. 44, Thy children.—Not merely infants, but the inhabitants generally. The city is
personified as a mother. Visitation —J.e.,season of grace. Cf. Gen. 1. 24; Exod. iv. 31, etc.

Ver. 45. Into the temple.—This is a second purification of the Temple, the first being
recorded in John ii. 13-17. Sold therein.—Z.e., doves, sheep, cattle, for use in sacrifice,

Ver, 46. It is written —Isa. lvi. 7. Den of thieves. —Rather, ‘den of robbers” (R.V.).

Ver, 48. Were very attentive.—Rather, “ the people all hung upon Hin, listening” (R.V.).


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—10.


Melted by Kindness.—This visit to Jericho was the last. It was but a few
days before Calvary, and the near approach of the end, as well as the tension
of concentrated purpose which marked our Lord in these last days, make the
delay and effort to win Zaccheus the more striking. He was the last convert,
so far as we know, before the cross. The penitent thief was the next.

I. The character and motives of Zaccheus.—A Jew who had taken service
with Rome could have little patriotism and less religion. His office showed that
he cared more for gain than for honour or duty. A Jew publican was classed
with thieves, and regarded as an agent of the enemy and hated accordingly—and
knew that he was so hated. The harsh judgment was no doubt generally deserved,
and as arule would produce the very vices which it attributed. Brand a class with
an evil fame and its members will become what the world says they are.
Bitterness breeds bitterness, and Zaccheeus would ropay contempt with interest.
All this is unpromising enough ; but buried below greed, and unscrupulousness,
and bitter animosity, was a little seed, the nature of which the man himself did
not apparently recognise. He said to himself that it was curiosity that drew
him. Probably he was doing himself injustice. There was something better
vaguely stirring in him, which he was afraid to acknowledge to himself. The
fame of Jesus as the friend of publicans had probably reached Zaccheus and
touched him. His determination may set us an example. He makes up his
mind that see Jesus he will. In all walks of life difficulties are sown thick, and
perhaps thickest on the road to Christ. But they can be overcome, and nothing
need keep the sight of Jesuc from a heart that is in earnest in wishing it.
Zaccheus had been long accustomed to ridicule, and did not mind a jeer or two
as he climbed the sycomore. We have often to drop dignity if we want to get
high enough above the mob to see the Lord; and a man afraid of being laughed
at will stand a poor chance.

II. Christ’s over-answer to Zaccheus’ desire.—Our Lord is not accustomed to
name people without having some deep significance in doing so. There is always
an emphasis of love, or warning, or authority, in His use of men’s names. Here
He would probably let Zacchzeus feel that he was completely known, and certainly
asserts mastership and demands a disciple’s allegiance. There is no other
instance of Christ’s volunteering His company; and His thus inviting Himself
to Zaccheeus’ house shows that He knew that He would be welcome, and that
the wish to ask Him was only held back by the sense of unworthiness. Christ never
goes where He is not wanted, any more than He stays away where He is wanted ;
but He often comes in more abundant self-communication and larger gifts than
we dare ask, however we may long for them. Sometimes, too, it is His answer
which first interprets to us our wishes. Observe, too, that “must.” Jesus often
speaks of a great “ must ” ruling His life, and here it determines a comparatively
small thing; for the small thing is a means of accomplishing the great end of
seeking and saving (ver. 10), and only he who is faithful to the law of the
Father's will in small things will keep it in great. The offer of visiting Zaccheus
expresses Christ’s kindly feelings and declares that He has no share in the
common aversion. That voluntary association with the outcast is a symbol of
Christ’s whole work. The same desire to save, and willingness to be identified

503





Xs ie, a


CHAP. XIX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





with the impure, which led His feet into the shunned house of Zacchzeus, led Him
from glory to earth and caused Him to “dwell among us.” Zaccheus comes
down as fast as he can, and is glad; for he has found a Saviour. Christ is glad,
for He has found a sinner whom He will make a saint. Both have found what
they sought.

III. The transforming cffect of Christ’s love.—The experience of Christ’s love
convinces of sin far more thoroughly than threats. The frowns of society only
make the wrong-doer more hard and merciless; but the touch of love melts him
as a warm hand laid on snow. The sight of Jesus reveals our unlikeness and
makes us long after some faint resemblance to Him. So Zaccheus did not need
Christ to bid him to make restitution, nor show him the blackness of his life ;
but he sees all the past in a new light, and is aware that there is something
sweeter than ill-gotten gains. If we love Jesus Christ as He deserves, we shall
not need to be told to give Him our all. The true spring of self-sacrifice is the
reception of Christ’s love. Note the calm dignity and self-assertion of Jesus,
identifying His coming into the house with the coming of salvation. Who else
would have dared to say that without being laughed or hissed down as unsuffer-
ably arrogant? Observe the reason for His coming—namely, that Zaccheeus
also is a “son of Abraham,” publican as he is. That cannot mean merely a born
Jew, but must refer to true spiritual descent and affinity.— Waclaren.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 1—10.


Vers. 1-10. ‘On the borders of the
kingdom.”

I. We cannot tell all Zaccheus’
motives.—Curiosity would seem to have
had a leadingshare. But this curiosity
may have had something substantial
at its root. He may have heard Jesus
spoken of as the friend of publicans
and sinners. His conscience may have
testified loudly that he stood greatly
in need of such a friend.

II. Christ was worthy of His title.
~~“ Friend of Sinners.” The very
summons must have thrilled Zaccheeus’
soul. He to be selected among all the
men of Jericho as the host of Jesus!
For him to come into such close
contact with the Lord of the kingdom
of heaven? What grace there was in
selecting Zaccheeus !

III. A great reformation in heart
and life—How much need of it!
The curiosity is changed into a far
higher feeling ; his climbing becomes
the symbol of a far greater elevation.
The change shows itself in the new
life he purposes to lead. The very
sight of the poor, simple, beneficent
and self-denying Christ makes his own
old life look black and hideous, and
makes him most sincere and cordial


504


in the new ways and habits he resolves
to follow.— Blaikie.

I. The meeting of Jesus and
Zaccheus (vers. 1-5).

IT. Jesus entertained in the house
of Zaccheeus (vers. 6 8).

III. The declaration of Jesus con-
cerning Zaccheus (vers. 9, 10).


I. The rich publican.
II. The inquirer.
III. The called.
IV. The saved.— Palmer.


Conversion of Zacchceus.

I. Difficulties attending it—1. The
stigma attaching to the office he held.
2. The temptation to retain a lucrative
employment. 3. His wealth.

IJ. His triumph over the difficulties.

III. Proofs of the genuineness of
his conversion.—1l. Active gratitude,
2. Charity. 3. Restitution.


Note here—

I. The simple, natural way in which
a soul is brought within the range of
Christ's supernatural, Divine power.—
The commonplace motive of curiosity
fully explains the action of Zacchzeus.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


II. The instantaneous nature of
conversion.

III. The evidence of conversion in
the correction of evil habits and
besetting sins.

IV. Religion sanctifies the life of
those who come under its influence.—
It cleanses the heart and passes from
it to the house. Those most in contact
with the true servant of Christ are
most convinced of the beneficial change
that has been wrought in the character.


Ver. 2. “And he was rich.” —Yet, as
the sequel shows, rich as he was, he
had not incurred the woe of those rich
who are full, and who have so received
their consolation here that all longings
for a higher consolation are extinct in
them (vi. 24).


Ver. 3. “ Sought to see Jesus.” —His
desire to see Jesus is not to be classed
with the curiosity of Herod, but is
rather akin to that longing after
salvation which animated those Greeks
who sought to see Jesus at the feast
(John xii. 21).


Spiritual Dwarfs.—Zaccheus is a
typical character, the type of many
who are wanting to see Christ, but who
are spiritually too short to see Him;
who are looking out for sycomores to
help them to see. What produces
spiritual smallness ?

I. Cold.—In the vegetable world,
cold is one of the secrets of dwarfed
stature. Sunshine means height.
Read Stuart Mill’s autobiography.
His home was an ice-house.

II. Pride.—A man ever looking at
himself, or his work, or his intellect
—never looking higher than self. He
thus fails to see One who is higher.

III. Speciality of training.—This
may be a hindrance to spiritual growth.
Ours is an age of specialists. Men
give themselves up to one pursuit, and
to see one order of facts. So, looking
for nothing else, they see nothing else.
A giant in materialism is often a
spiritual dwarf.—Lovell.


CHAP. XIX.


Ver. 4. “ Ran.” —God always re-
wards us if He sees us eager for good.
—Theophylact.


“ Climbed up.” —He overcomes that .
false pride, through which so many
precious opportunities, and oftentimes
in the highest things of all, are lost.


Ver. 5. “ Saw him and said.’—He
knows how to discover His own in
places the most unlikely. He finds a
Matthew at the receipt of custom, a
Nathanael under the fig-tree ; and so,
with sure and unerring glance, He
detects Zaccheus in the sycomore, and
at once lays bare his hiding-place.


“ Zaccheus.”—“ He calleth His own
sheep by name and leadeth them out”
(John x. 3). Christ (1) singles him
out by a glance ; then (2) addresses him
by name; and (3) calls him to minister
to Him.


* Must abide at thy house,”—Words
of an extraordinary grace, for while
the Lord accepted many invitations
into the houses of men, yet we do not
read that He honoured any but the
publican by thus offering Himself to
his hospitality. Adopting the royal
style, which was familiar to Him, and
which commends the loyalty of a
vassal in the most delicate manner, by
freely exacting his services, He informed
Zaccheus of His intention to visit him,
and signified His pleasure that a
banquet should be instantly prepared.
—FEcce Homo.


Christ's “ Musts.”—We have Christ
applying the greatest principle to the
smallest duty. Why must He abide in
Zaccheus’ house? Because Zaccheeus
was to be saved, and was worth saving.
What was the “must”? To stop for
an hour or two on His road to the
cross. So He teaches us that in a life
penetrated by the Divine will, which
we gladly obey, there are no things too
great, and none too trivial to be
brought under the dominion of that
law, and to be regulated by that Divine


505


CHAP. XIX.


necessity. Obedience is obedience,
whether in large things or in small.
There is no scale of magnitude appli-
cable to the distinction between God’s
_ will and that which is not God’s will.
Gravitation rules the motes that dance
in the sunshine as well as the mass of
Jupiter. God’s truth is not too great
torule the smallest duties. Bring your
doing, then, under that all-embracing
law of duty.—Maclaren.


Vers. 6-8. Hvidences of Conversion.
—l. Readiness in obeying the call of
Christ. 2. Joyfulness in receiving
Him. 3. Deeds of charity. 4. En-
deavours to remedy past faults.


Ver. 6. “He made haste.” —Zaccheeus
in the sycomore tree was as ripe fruit,
which dropped into the Saviour’s lap
at His first and lightest touch.—
Trench.


Ver. 7. “That is a sinner.” —Here
the fault-finders were in the wrong;
he had been a sinner, but now he is
a@ new creature.


Ver. 8. I. A public confession.
II. A public vow of restitution and
dedication to God.


“The half of my goods."—A man
might bestow “all his goods to feed
the poor” (1 Cor, xiii. 3), and yet his
generosity might be of no value in the
sight of God ; yet St. Luke here implies
‘hat the action was an indication of
mward repentance.


Ver. 9. “ This day is salvation.”—
Jesus says that salvation has come to


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


the house of the publican, not because
that house had received one of His
visits, but because its inhabitant really
showed himself another man from
what he appeared to be in the eyes of
the multitude. While they had even
just before named him as “a man that
is a sinner,” the Saviour now names him
“a son of Abraham ”—one who not
only was descended from Abraham,
but also was animated by the faith
for which Abraham was famous.


“ This day is salvation.” —Memorable
saying! Salvation has already come,
but it is not a day nor an hour old.
The werd “ to this house” was probably
designed to meet the taunt, “ He is
gone to lodge at a sinner’s house.”
The house, says Jesus, is no longer a
sinner’s house, polluted and polluting:
“Tis now a saved house, all meet for
the reception of Him who came to
save.” What a precious idea is salva-
tion to a house, expressing the new air
that would henccforth breathe in it,
and the new impulses from its head
which would reach its members. —
Brown.


Ver. 10. “ For the Son of Man,” etc.

I. What we have lost takes a
special dearness and value in our
thoughts; so is it with God.—He is
with us now and is now seeking that
He may save us.

Il. A man may be lost in more
senses than one.—Lost in sin, lost in
the crowd of men, lost in doubt and
fear, lost to his proper use and joy in
the world: and, in whatever sense we
may be lost, His purpose is to find and
save us.





Verses 11—27.


“Till He come.”—The object of the parable is not to state the Christian doctrine
of reward for faithfulness, which is only part of its contents, but to damp down
the expectation of the immediate burstirg in of the kingdom by displaying the
double series of events which must go before its appearance—namely, the pro-
tracted, faithful trading of His servants, and the antagonism of its foes, with
the issues of both these when the King does appear.

I. What precedes the appearance of the kingdom.—Three different lines of
activity are shadowed—the prince’s in the far-off land, the servants’, and the


506


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP, XIX,
eee eee es eee ee Ne ee


eyemies’ in the territory which is to be his kingdom. Jesus does not say that
He is the man of noble birth, but His hearers could not mistake his meaning.
He teaches here, as always, that His departure is the pre-requisite to His
investiture with the visible sovereignty of the world; that many long days must
pass before He comes again ; but that, while absent, He is not idle, but carrying
on that “asking” which from of old was declared to be the condition of His
recovering “the uttermost parts of the earth” for a possession. Till then His
servants trade with the small capital which He has left them, and His enemies
struggle against Hisrule. His gifts to His servants are absolutely the same in
amount in every case, and they are of very small value. What, then, is the
uniformly identical gift which all Christ’s servants receive? If we are to seek
for any one answer, we must either say the blessing of salvation or the word of
the gospel. “The common salvation ” belongs to all alike. The same gospel is
entrusted to all. Why is it represented as a small sum? Perhaps because the
Christian’s gift from his absent Lord is of little worth in the world’s eyes, or
more probably in order to contrast it with the greatness of the result of faithful-
ness. The small capital makes the faithfulness of service the more noticeable,
and suggests that the great purpose of life is to test and to train—that its trivial
business is only great when regarded as the means of obtaining what is infinitely
greater. Life is redeemed from insignificance by being looked at in connection
with the stupendous magnitudes beyond, which also makes it seem small. The
more closely we link it with eternity, the smaller it will seem in itself, the
greater in its issues.

IJ. The circumstances of the appearance of the kingdom.—tIt is to be very
unlike the sanguine, vulgar expectations of both disciples and crowd. The
servants are to be summoned to give in their accounts ; the enemies to be swiftly
slain in His presence. Thus a solemn diet of judgment is to inaugurate it. The
great principle of degrees in reward according to degrees in faithfulness is laid
down. The joy of the Lord is one for all servants, but the dominion in the future
is proportioned to faithfulness here. Note that the difference in results must be
supposed to depend, not on circumstances beyond the servants’ control, but on
their diligence. Observe, also, the omission of commendation to the second
servant, which implies a less degree of faithful effort in him. The first represents
Christians who excel ; the second Christians who are content with small attain-
ments and achievements. There is salvation in fulness, and also salvation ‘“ so
as by fire.” Observe, too, the humility with which the servants present their
gains. They say nothing about their own diligence. It is the Lord’s pound,
not their pains, which has made the profit. The pounds and the pains are both
due to Him who gives the treasure into our hands, and gives also the grace to
use it. The servants are not all rewarded, but we do not know how many of
the unnamed seven were faithful, and how many slothful. One idler is put
before us, and stands for the class. His excuse seems to himself to be sufficient,
and its very rudeness guarantees its sincerity. No man would speak so to his
judge. But Christ translates thoughts into words, in order to show their falsity,
and perhaps to suggest the solemn lesson that the inmost unavowed motives
shall one day be plain to us, and that we shall be compelled to speak them out,
however ugly and foolish they sound. Men will be their own accusers and
condemnation. The excuse lays bare a very frequent motive of indolence—
namely fear, built on a misconception of the character of the Lord and Giver of
all gifts. Men darken their own spirits by thinking of God as demanding rather
than as giving—and that while everything they have and see should teach them
He is the God who gives. Such thoughts of Him paralyse activity and destroy the
one all-powerful motive for service. Only when we know His infinite love, and
are moved by His mercies, shall we task every power in grateful and joyful


507


AS re
dh ile


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


SSS


CHAP, XIX.


service. The prince’s answer is difficult, as no explanation of the “bank” is
wholly satisfactory. Perhaps the best is that which takes it to mean the Church
in its associated efforts, in some part of which the most timid may share, and,
bringing his small contribution to the common stock, may be able to do something
for Christ. The slotuful servant is deprived of the gift which he had not used.
That looks hard, and often draws forth remonstrances or, at least, our wonder.
But we see it here, and we shall see it yonder. Christ states a law of human
experience which works everywhere. Used faculties grow, unused ones decay.
The parable is not complete with the rewards and retribution of the servants.
Its purpose was to portray the course of events which must precede the ap-
pearance of the kingdom, and the stern judgment which should inaugurate it.
Tn fact, it is the programme of the world’s history till the end, and the enemies
are as important, though not as conspicuous, a part of the whole as the servants.
They represent primarily the Jews, but it is surely an incongruous thrusting of
history into parable to take the terrible vengeance on them, which is the very
last act of the king after he has returned, as meaning nothing more than the
destruction of Jerusalem. Surely the “slaying” here is more terrible than
physical death. It points to that same awful retribution of hatred and
opposition to the King of which the New Testament is full. That expression
“before me” leads us tremblingly to think of “everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord.”—Maclaren.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 11—27.


Vers. 11-27. The Pounds.

I. True followers.—These must be
tried. Outward respect for a present
master is no test of character, no evi-
dence that his servants are fit for the
positions to which they aspire. But
faithfulness to a long-absent Lord,
faithfulness to past memories, faithful-
ness to present duties and responsi-
bilities, faithfulness to an undying
hope that He shall come, will come,
even though He seem to tarry long—
that will test the character, and that will
be rewarded with undreamt-of honour.

II. Seeming followers.—These are
not true. They love not; they follow
only through fear. Therefore thy
cannot abide faithful in absence, though
they are not swre enough openly to
throw off their allegiance. Theirs will
be bitter loss and disappointment.

III. Open enemies.—There are these
as well. Their pride of heart and
badness of life make them prefer the
rule of a Barabbas to that of the holy
Lord. They do not even pretend to be
disciples. There is, therefore, no de-
gradation for them when He appears;
there is simply swift destruction. They
are not surprised at the sentence passed


508


upon them. They have openly cast in
their lot with His enemies; if He
comes in power, they know what their
end will be.—Hastings.


The Parable of the Pounds.

I. The occasion of the parable.

II. The historical incident in the
parable.

III. The parable—a prophecy. 1.
Of His own departure. 2. Of continued
opposition to His rule. 3. Of a time
of probation for His servants. 4. Of
His triumphant return.

IV. The parable—a lesson in indi-
vidual responsibility—Each traded,
was reckoned with, rewarded, or
punished individually.—W. Taylor.


The True Preparation for the Coming
of the Kingdom is that of Character.

I. The faithful and their reward.—
Increasing spiritual capital. Divine
approval. A larger sphere.

II. The unfaithful, and their loss.—
To neglect the gospel is to be in peril,
and to risk loss. Negative excellence
is not positive obedience. The idler’s
penalty is a soul dwarfed and un-
spiritual. The soul loses the capacity


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





for love and service. The pound is
taken away. The soul progressively
deteriorates, by refusing to come into
right relations with God.—Palmer.


The Parable is a Parallel.Pursue
the subject along the lines furnished
by the laws of trade.

I. Some capital is needed. —1.
Natural. 2. Spiritual endowments.

II. Only the authorised money can
be used in commerce.

III. Time and opportunity must be
given.

IV. There must be wholesale and
retail in trade.—The few are called to
the first, the many to the second.

V. Both buyer and seller must gain
@ profit.

VI. “Till I come” limits the
trading season.—When Christ comes,
probation ends.— Wylie.


Structure of The Parable—The in-
troduction (ver. 11); the parable
(vers, 12-28). The parable :—

I. The fidelity of the servants
during their Lord’s absence put to the
test (vers. 12-14).

If. The servants judged.—1. The
faithful servants rewarded (vers.
15-19). 2. The faithless servant con-
victed and punished (vers. 20-26).

III. The rebellious citizens slain
(ver. 27).


Servants and Subjects.—The parable
sets forth the twofold relation in which
the ruler stands. 1. To his servants.
2. To his subjects. The servants repre-
sent the apostles and disciples ; their
faithfulness or unfaithfulness to the
trust committed to them is praised or
blamed; the citizens represent the
Jewish people, and their disobedience
to their rightful Lord is punished.


A picture—

I. Of the King of the kingdom of
God. 1. His origin. 2. His destiny.
3. His departure and return.

II. Of His servants.—1. Their cal-
ling. 2. Their giving account. 3, Their
reward,


CHAP. XIX.





III. Of His enemies—1. Their
hatred. 2. Their impotency. 3. Their
punishment.


The parable teaches—

I. The need of a patient waiting for
Christ.

II. Of an active working for Him
till the time of His return.


“ Should immediately appear.’—The
parable is spoken to correct several
erroneous opinions concerning the king-
dom of God.

I. That the kingdom would very
soon appear.—lIn contradiction to this
idea the long journey and the con-
sequent delay are spoken of.

II. That all would joyfully submit
to it.—The parable speaks of bitter but
unsuccessful enmity on the part of some.

III. That the subjects of the king-
dom would enter on a life of inactive
enjoyment.—In opposition to this, long
and patient labours are spoken of.


Ver. 12. “ A certain nobleman.”

I. An intimation of the kingly de-
scent and dignity of our Lord.

II. A prophecy of His departure
from earth.

III. A comforting representation of
His departure to the Father.—As the
means ordained for obtaining the
kingly power and glory.


Ver. 13. ‘ Occupy.” —I.e., “ employ in
trading.” How remarkable is this s¢il/
ministry, these occupations of peace in
which the servants of the future king
shall be engaged, and that while a
rebellion is raging! Why did he not
distribute weapons to his servants?
Because the duty of the servants was,
with the diligent but silent occupation
of their pound, to lay the rudiments of
the kingdom, and so to prepare tk,
world for the outbreaking of it ; which
yet should only be when the King Hi -
self returned in His glory.—TZvench


Christ's Traders. — The innagery
of the text suggests the work of the
servants while the Master is gone.


509


CHAP. XIX.


I. The stock-in-trade.—What is it
that all Christian men have in com-
mon? The gospel, the message of
salvation. This is the “‘ pound” which
each Christian has equally. Let us
not be ashamed of it.

II. The trading.—In the trading is
to be included the whole of the outward
life which is to be shaped by the prin-
ciples and motives contained in the
message of the gospel. Specially the
idea is involved of spreading the Word
which has been received. The Christ-
ianity of any man must be very
shallow who feels nothing of the obli-
gation which it lays upon him to
communicate it to others. Make a
business of it. Such is the meaning of
the metaphor. Do it as you do your
business.

III. The audit—The day arrives
for scrutiny and judgment. There are
varieties in the profits. Christ rewards,
not success, but diligence. It is not all
the same whether we have traded with
our pound or hidden it in a napkin.
A higher sphere of service is granted
to the diligent traders.— Maclaren.


Ver. 14. An Embassy.—The enmity
of the citizens.

I. It is capricious, for they assign
no reason for their dislike.

II. It is deeply-rooted, as implied in
the contemptuous “this man.”

III. It is unsuccessful.


Ver. 15. “ Having received the king-
dom.”—The elevation of their master
to sovereignty places the servants in a
totally new position. Not only does he
manifest towards them a satisfaction
proportionate to the success of their
labours, but, their master, acting
now as their king, assigns to them
posts in the government of the state,
corresponding in importance to the
respective results of their activity. So
will it be at the second coming of
Christ. The humble work accomplished
during the absence of the Lord will
be the measure of the power entrusted
by Him to each on His appearing.—
Godet.


510


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


Ver. 16. “Thy pound.”—In deep
humility the faithful servants acknow-
ledge that they claim no merit for
the success that had attended their
labours. Cf. ‘I laboured more
abundantly than they all, yet not I,
but the grace of God which was with
me” (1 Cor. xv. 10). ‘ Not unto us,
O Lord, not unto us, but unto Thy
name give the praise” (Ps. cxv. 1).


Ver. 17. “In a very little.”—Cf.
xii. 48: xvi. 10.


“ Over ten cities.’—‘‘ We shall also
reign with Him ” (2 Tim. ii. 12). It is
perhaps not unduly spiritualising a
mere detail of the parable to think of
the reward being the privilege of com-
municating spiritual benefits to others ;
the ten or five cities to be thought of
as communities of moral beings whom
the glorified believer raises to his own
level of spiritual life.


Ver. 18. ‘ Gained five.”—A_ lesser
degree of success in consequence of less
strenuous energy in work. This is im-
plied by the facts that the servants had
equal sums entrusted to them, and that
the servant, though receiving a reward,
receives no special commendation from
his lord.


Ver. 19. “Over five cities.”—The
glory of each differs ; their common joy
is the same.


Ver. 20. The Servant’s Defence.—It
is fearful to sin ; it is more fearful to
delight in sin ; yet more to defend it.


“ And another came.”—Rather, and
the other. The word used implies that
this servant belonged to a different
class from those who had preceded him
in the interview with the master.


Ver. 21. “TZ feared thee.”—Te:,
knowing that his master was a man of
austere character, who would be pitiless
in punishing him for the loss of the
pound, he had kept it safely, and now
restored it as he had received it. So


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


-


that he regarded himself as free from
blame, even if he could lay no claim to
commendation. The words ‘thou
takest up,” etc., seem rather a pro-
verbial description of a hard, grasping
character than as specially appropriate
to the circumstances of the case.


Ver. 22. “ Thou knewest,” etc.—TI.e.,
“ All the more, therefore, shouldest
thou have sought to satisfy my de-
mands; and thou mightest have satis-
fied them, though perhaps not to the
full, with very little expenditure of
labour. If the trouble and risk of trad-
ing were too great, I might at least
have received the interest which a
bank gives for money lodged in it.”


A Legal Christian.—This man, it
seems to me, represents a believer who
has not found salvation in Jesus Christ
to be as attractive as he had expected
—a legal Christian, who knows nothing
of the grace of the gospel, and is ac-
quainted only with its moral require-
ments. It seems to him that the Lord
asks a great deal, and gives very little.
This feeling leads him to do as little
as possible. He thinks that God ought
to be content with abstinence from evil-
doing, and with an outward respect to
His gospel.—(odet.


Ver. 23. “ The bank.”—Probably it
is vain to try to find a spiritual counter-
part to this detail of the parable. The
reply of the Lordis, virtually, “ If thou
wouldest not do and dare for me in
great ventures of faith, yet at all
events in humbler paths, in safer and
less perilous, thou mightest have
shown fidelity, and have preserved me
from loss.”


Ver, 24. “ Take from him the pound.”
—The punishment for unfaithfulness is


CHAP. XIX.





the loss of the faculty for service, And
it is especially worthy of notice that
this sentence of condemnation is strictly
in accordance with the Divine law that
prevails in the natural world. Let
any member of the body or faculty of
the mind lie disused for a time, and, by
the very fact of disuse, its power is
diminished or destroyed.


Ver. 25. “ And they said unto Him.”
—tThis interruption is remarkably like
that of Peter in chap. xii. 41 ; and the
reply (ver. 26), virtually corresponds to
that of Jesus in chap. mi. 42. The
king apparently takes no account of
the surprise his words have excited, but
in ver. 26 he expounds the principle on
which his judgment is based.


Ver. 26. “ Unto every one.”—It is
not merely that the one receives more
than before he had, and the other loses
what he had. This is not all; but that
very gift which the one forfeits, the
other obtains; one is enriched with a
pound withdrawn from the other ; one
takes a crown which another has let
go (Rev. ii. 11) ;—even as we see con-
tinually one, by the ordinance of God,
stepping into the place and the oppor-
tunities which another has neglected,
despised, and misused, and so has lost
(Gen. xxv. 34, xxvii. 36, xlix. 4, 8;
1 Sam. xvi. 1, 13; 1 Kings ii. 35;
Isa. xxii. 15-25; Acts i. 25, 26;
Rom. xi. 11).—Trench.


Ver. 27. “ Bring hither and slay.” —
They who will not submit to Christ
the crucified will be crushed by Christ -
the King. Every eye shall see Him ;
they also who pierced Him. Meekly
now He stands at the door and knocks ;
then He comes as the lightning comes.
—Arnot.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 28—A8.
A New Kind of King.—St. Luke takes no notice of the stay at Bethany, and


the sweet seclusion which soothed Jesus there.


He dwells only on the assertion


of royalty, which stamped an altogether unique character on the remaining


hours of Christ’s life.


I. Christ’s part in originating the triumphal entry.—He sent for the colt,


511


CHAP. XIX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





nr


with the obvious intention of stimulating the people to just such a demonstra-
tion as followed. Note the remarkable blending of dignity and poverty in ‘‘ The
Lord hath need of him.” It asserts sovereign authority and absolute rights, and
it confesses need and penury. He is a king, but He has to borrow even a colt
on which to ride in triumph. Though He was rich, for our sakes He became poor.
Jesus then deliberately brought about His public entry. He thereby acts in a
way perfectly unlike His whole previous course. And He stirs up popular feel-
ings at a time when they were specially sensitive, by reason of the approaching
Passover and its crowds. Formerly He had avoided the danger which He now
seems to court, and had gone up to the feast, as it were, in secret. But it was
fitting that once, for the last time, He should assert before the gathered Israel
that He was their King, and should make a last appeal. He deliberately makes
Himself conspicuous, though—or we might say because—He knew that thereby
He precipitated His death. The nature of His dominion is as plainly taught by
the humble pomp as is its reality. Gentleness and peace, a sway that rests not
on force nor wealth, are shadowed in that rustic procession and the pathetic
poverty of its leader, throned on a borrowed colt, and attended, not by warriors
or dignitaries, but by poor men, unarmed, and saluted, not with the blare of
trumpets, but with the shouts of joyful, though, alas! fickle hearts,

II. The humble procession, with the shouting and the background of hostile
spies.—The disciples eagerly caught at the meaning of bringing the colt, and
threw themselves with alacrity into what seemed to them preparation for the
public assertion of royalty, for which they had long been impatient. How
different the vision of the future in their minds and His! They dreamed of a
throne; He knew it was a cross that wasin store for Him. They broke into loud
acclamations, summoning, as it were, Jerusalem to welcome its King. Christ’s
royalty and Divine commission are proclaimed from a thousand throats, and then
up swells the shout of praise, which echoes the angels’ song at Bethlehem, and
ascribes to His coming power to make peace in heaven with an else alienated world,
and thus to make the Divine glory blaze with new splendour, even in the highest
heavens ; their song was wiser than they knew, and touched the deepest, mysteries
of the unity of the Son with the Father, of reconciliation by the blood of the cross,
and of new lustre accruing to God’s name thereby, even in the sight of princi-
palities and powers in heavenly places, Their shouts died away, and their faith
was almost as short-lived. High-wrought emotion is a poor substitute for steady
conviction. But cool, unemotional recognition of Christ as King is almost as un-
natural. There were cool observers there, and they make the foil to the glad
enthusiasm. Note that these Pharisees, mingling in the crowd, have no title for
Jesus but “ Teacher.” He is no King to them. To those who regard Jesus but
as a human teacher, the acclamations of those to whom He is King and Lord
- always sound exaggerated. People with no depth of religious life hate religious
emotion, and are always seeking to repress it. A very tepid worship is warm
enough for them. Formalists detest genuine feeling. Propriety is their ideal.
Christ’s answer is probably a quoted proverb. It implies His entire acceptance
of the character which the crowd ascribed to Him, His pleasure in their praises,
and, in a wider aspect, His vindication of outbursts of devout feeling, which shock
ecclesiastical martinets and formalists.

III. The King plunged in bitter grief in the very hour of His triumph.—The
fair city brings before His vision the awful contrast: of its lying compassed by
armies and in ruins. He hears not the acclamation of the crowd. ‘He wept,”
or, rather, ‘‘ wailed ”—for the word does not imply tears so much as cries. That
sorrow is a sign of His real manhood, but it is alsoa part of His revelation of the
very heart of God. The form is human, the substance Divine. The man weeps
because God pities. Christ’s sorrow does not hinder His judgments. The woes


512


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE, CHAP. XIX.





which wring His heart will, nevertheless, be inflicted by Him. Judgment is His
“ strange work,” alien from His desires ; but it is His work. Note the yearning
in the unfinished sentence. “If thou hadst known.” Note the decisive closing
of the time of repentance. Note the minute prophetic details of the siege, which,
if ever they were spoken, are a distinct proof of His all-seeing eye. And from
all let us fix in our hearts the conviction of the pity of the judge, and of the
judgment by the pitying Christ.

IV. Christ’s exercise of sovereign authority in His Father’s house.—Two
things are brought out in the compressed narrative. 1. The fact. It was fitting
that, at the end of His career, as at the beginning, He should cleanse the Temple.
The two events are significant as His first and last acts. The second one, as we
gather from the other evangelists, had a greater severity about it than the first.
The need for a second purifying indicated how sadly transient had been the effect
of the first, and was thus evidence of the depth of corruption and formalism to
which the religion of priests and people had sunk. 2. His vindication of His
action. It isin right royal style. The first cleansing was defended by Him by
pointing to the sanctity of “ My Father’s house”; the second by claiming it as
“ My house.” The rebuke of the huckstersis sterner the second time. The pro-
fanation, once driven out, and returning, is deeper; for whereas, in the first
instance, it had made the Temple a “house of merchandise,” in the second it
turned it into a “ den of robbers.” Thus evil assumes a darker tint by lapse of
time, and swiftly becomes worse if rebuked and chastised in vain. We see
here (1) Christ’s calm courage in continuous teaching in the Temple; (2) the grow-
ing hatred of the authorities; and (3) the eager hanging of the people on His
words, which baffled the murderous designs of the rulers. Meekly and boldly
He goes on the appointed way. The day’s task of winning some from impend-
ing ruin shall still be done. So should His servants live, in patient discharge of
daily duty, in the face of death, if need be. The enemies, who heard His words
and found in them only food for deeper hatred, may warn us of the possibilities of
antagonism to Him that lie in the heart, and of the terrible judgment which they
drag down on their own heads, who hear, unmoved, His daily teaching, and see,
unrepentant, His dying love.—Maclaren.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 28—48.


Vers. 28-44. The Triumphal Entry of
Jesus into Jerusalem. _

I. The preparations for it (vers.
28-36).

II. The entry itself (vers. 37-38).

III. The murmurs of the Pharisees
(vers. 39, 40).

IV. The lamentation over the city
(ver. 41-44).


Ver. 28. “ Had thus spoken.”—And
when He had thus spoken, had thus
judicially, in His own revealed royal
person, decreed the destruction of His
foes, He went onward to Jerusalem,
there to deliver Himself up as the
Paschal Lamb into their hands.—


Stier.


Ld


Ver. 29. “ Sent two of His disciples.”
—The sending of the two disciples is
an indication of the deliberate purpose
of Jesus to give special solemnity to
this scene. Hitherto He had with-
drawn Himself from popular homage ;
but He wished to be proclaimed once
at least as Messiah and King in the
midst of His people (ver. 40). This
was the moment of manifestation so
impatiently desired by His brethren
(John vii. 3, 4), and was also a last
appeal to the population of Jerusalem
(ver. 42). There was nothing in this
course of action to compromise His
work, for He well knew that His life
was drawing near to an end (xiii.
32, 33). He therefore allowed free


513


CHAP, XIX.


course to the enthusiasm of the multi-
tude ; He even provokes the manifest-
ation which follows, while He gave to
it a more peaceful and humble charac-
ter than it might have assumed,—
Godet.


Ver. 30. “ Never man sat.”—
Humble as were the arrangements
for this triumphal entry into Jeru-
salem, a royal dignity is manifested in
the spirit in which they were made.
The animal chosen to carry the Saviour
was to be one which had never before
been used on any common occasion.


Ver. 31. “ The Lord hath need.”—
These words seem to imply that Jesus
knew the persons to whom the disciples
were sent—that they were friends or
disciples. Perhaps in this incidental
allusion we have another indication
of previous visits paid by Jesus to
Jerusalem.


Ver. 32. “Found even as He had
said, ””—Prophetical fore - knowledge
rather than omniscience seems to be
indicated by the action of Jesus on
this occasion.


Ver. 35, 36. Jesus Claims and Re-
ceives Homage.—Jesus virtually claimed
homage, and His disciples responded to
Him by paying it. They might, no
doubt, easily have procured ordinary
trappings for the animal on which He
rode, but they chose to prove their
desire to consecrate themselves and
their possessions to His service by
making use of their own garments.
Jesus, by accepting their homage,
asserted His royal dignity, and by
the humble circumstance of His
triumph, as arranged by Him, pro-
claimed that His kingdom was not
one of this world.


Vers. 37-44. I. The joy of the dis-
ciples and of the multitude on coming
in sight of the city.

Il. The grief of Jesus at the sams
moment.


514


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


Vers. 37-48. I. The purpose Christ
developed.He came to teach, to heal,
to exemplify a sublime character, to
offer an expiatory sacrifice, to manifest
His Kingship.

II. The homage Christ received.

III. The sorrow Christ felt.

IV. The kingly duty Christ ful-
filled.— Palmer.


Ver. 37. “ Began to rejoice.” —Once
mounted on the ass, Jesus became the
centre of the procession, visible to all,
and the scene began more and more to
assume an exceptional character. It
is asif a breath from on high, a pre-
cursor of that of Pentecost, had moved
the populace. The sight of the city,
and of the Temple, which at this very
point appeared in all their beauty,
contributed to the outburst of joy and
hope which came so suddenly. All
hearts recalled at this moment the
miracles which had marked the career
of this extraordinary Man—miracles
which been so numerous as almost to
have exhausted the sense of wonder.—
Godet.


Ver. 38, I. The character in which
Jesus is to be received. The King
that cometh in the name of the Lord.”

II. The happy results anticipated
from His reign.—1. Peace in heaven—
2.€., peace re-established between heaven
and earth. 2. “Glory in the highest”
—fresh and more wonderful manifesta-
tions than had been given before of
God’s gracious character and of His
majesty and power.


Ver. 39. “Some of the Pharisees.” —
They cannot in any sense have been
disciples of Jesus. Their spirit was
exactly like that of modern Socianism ;
they objected to prophetical expressions
being used and lofty epithets being
applied to one whom they regarded as
merely a teacher.


“ Rebuke Thy disciples.” —The Phari-
sees had, for the time, lost the power of
silencing the acclamations of the people,
and so they have recurrence to Jesus


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XIX.





himself. They were offended that He
accepted recognition as the Messiah,
and perhaps were even afraid of the
enthusiasm of the populace leading to
a seditious outbreak against the Roman
authorities.”


Ver, 40. “The stones will imme-
diately cry out.’—Hitherto the Lord
had discouraged all demonstrations in
His favour ; latterly He had begun an
opposite course. Onthis one occasion He
seems to yield His whole soul to the
wide and deep acclaim with a mysteri-
ous satisfaction, regarding it as so
necessary a part of the regal dignity in
which, as Messiah, He, for the last
time, entered the city, that, if not
offered by the vast multitude, it would
have been wrung out of the stones
rather than be withheld.— Brown.


Vers. 41, 42. The Tears of Christ
over the Indifference of Men.

J. Spiritual indifference was the
sign of concealed ruin.—1l. Indiffer-
ence conceals from men the downward
progress of the soul’s life. 2. It, at
the same time, hides the Christ who
alone can save.

IJ. In spiritual indifference Christ
saw a self-wrought ruin.

Ill. In spiritual indifference He
saw ruin rapidly becoming hopeless.
— Hull.


I. The tears and words of Christ are
the tears and words of a true patriot.

II. He lamented the destruction of
Jerusalem as a theocratic kingdom—
as a Church.

III. Jerusalem was a home of souls
—a hive of living men and women—
whose rejection of Him involved over-
throw and ruin.—Ziddon.


Ver. 41. “ Wept over it.” The words
just spoken by the Pharisees displayed
that obstinate resistance to Him which
involved the ultimate ruin and over-
throw of the city and nation. The
contrast between what was and what
might have been, was so great that He
could not refrain from lamentation.





Ver. 42. “ Hven thou.”—Or, “thou
also,” i.¢., “ thou, as well as the humble
crowd of disciples now forming the
procession.”


“ Thy peace.” —Probably an allusion
to the meaning of the name Jerusalem
—the “ city of peace.”


“ Belong unto thy peace.”—Accept-
ance of the sovereignty of Jesus would
have meant laying aside that worldly
and rebellious spirit which brought
about the ruin of the nation.


Ver. 43. “Cast a trench.”—Cf.
Isa. xxix. 3: “And I will encamp
against thee round about, and will lay
siege against thee with a mount, and
I will raise forts against thee.”


Ver, 44, I. The visitation of Jerw
salem by Christ our Lord was
unobtrusive.

II. The visitation of Jerusalem was
final. Our Lord’s words account
(1) for the decay and ruin of nations;
(2) for the decay and fall of churches ;
(3) for the decay of seats of learning ;
(4) for loss in the individual life, when
manifest warnings and visitations are
neglected.— Liddon.


Visitation.—God’s visitations are con-
nected in Holy Scripture with various
motives.

I. The common use of the word
associates it with judgment; with the
judicial infliction of punishment of
some sort (Ps. Ixxxix. 32; Numb.
xvi. 29).

II. But Divine visitations are often
connected with a purpose of blessing
(Gen. xxi. 1; 1 Sam. ii. 21).

III. Visitation sometimes, too, means
warning—a meaning intermediate be-
tween that of blessing and judgment
(Ps. xvii. 3; Job x. 12). It is in this
sense that our Lord describes His own
ministry as the visitation of Jerusalem.
It was partly a visitation of judgment,
as our Lord judged the scribes and
priests and Pharisees, though His


515


CHAP. XX.


fae} __ P a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





judgment was not final. Yet more
was it a visitation of blessing; it
brought with it instruction, grace, and
pardon. Failure to know the time of
a visitation is followed by grave con-
sequences, because (1) it implies a
culpable deadness of spiritual interest,
and (2) an equally blame-wo:thy pre-
occupation with some other more en-
grossing interest.—Liddon.


Ver. 45. “ Began to cast out.”—From
the parallel passage in St. Mark we
learn that the cleansing of the Temple
did not take place on the day of the
triumphal entry. On that day Jesus
entered the Temple and looked round
about upon all that was passing in it
(Mark xi. 11). On the following day
He purified it from the abuses which
had sprung up in it, and which had
not been effectually checked by His
first act of cleansing (John ii. 15).


Ver. 46. “ My house,” etc.—In the
reply of Jesus there are quotations
from two passages in the prophets—
Isa. lvi. 7 and Jer. vii. 11.


Ver. 47. “ The chief priests,” ete.—
Three classes of persons were roused to
opposition :

I. The chief priests, whose neglect
of the Temple was reproved by the
action of Jesus, and whose gains were
diminished by the suppression of the
traffic.

II. The scribes, who were envious of
the fame and influence He acquired by
His teaching.

III. The “chief of the people,” or
the wealthy classes, who were for the
most part attached to the Sadducean
party, and afraid of the effects of any
patriotic movement. From this point
the Pharisees, who must have approved
of the cleansing of the Temple, cease to
be the most prominent persecutors of
Jesus.


Ver. 48. “ Very attentive.’—Rather,
“hung upon Him.” Hung upon
Him, as the bee doth on the flower,
the babe on the breast, the little bird
on the bill of herdam. Christ drew the
people after Him by the golden chain
of His heavenly eloquence.—J. Trapp.








CHAPTER XX.
CRITICAL NOTES.


VuR, 1. One of those days.—Rather, “one of the days” (R.V.). Preached the gospel.—
Lit. ‘“‘evangelised.” This beautiful word is almost confined to St. Luke, who rses it twenty-
four times, and St. Paul, who uses it twenty times. Chief priests, etc.—Thus all classes
of the Sanhedrim were represented. This was a formal and official message sent to make
Jesus declare Himself as a Divinely commissioned prophet, in which case the Sanhedrim had
power to take cognisance of His proceedings as a professed teacher. Came upon Him.—
The phrase perhaps has reference to the suddenness and hostility of the action taken.
The motives of Christ’s enemies are disclosed in chap. xix. 47.

Ver, 2. By what authority !—J.e., by what kind of authority; it was not that of a rabbi,
or priest, or magistrate, for Christ held none of these offices. These things.—Probably
special reference is made to the cleansing of the Temple, as well as to the acceptance of the
popular homage, and the triumphal entrance into Jerusalem.

Ver. 4. The baptism of John.—Z.e., the whole mission and teaching of John, of which the
baptism was the central point. If they acknowledged that John’s mission was from heaven,
they had an answer to their own question, for John had borne witness to Jesus as the
Messiah, and as having received the Holy Spirit.

Ver. 5, They reasoned, etc.—We would understand that they went apart and discussed th >
matter among themselves, Believed.—Gave credit to his testimony concerning Me.


516


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XX.
OO


‘ Alii Stone.—The word is an emphatic one, and is used only here; it means “to stone
o death.”

Ver. 7. They could not tell.—Rather, “ they knew not” (R.V.). Their reply was, virtually,
not ‘‘ We do not know,” but “We do not wish to say”; and to this inward thought Christ
replies, “ Neither tell I you.” Their incompetence to decide in the case of John disqualified
them for judging in the case of Jesus.

Ver. 9. Then began He.—The opening of a fresh series of parables and discourses. This
parable.—The substance of which is partly a history of the ingratitude and rebelliousness
of the Jewish people, and partly a prophecy of their final act of apostasy in rejecting and
slaying their Messiah, and of the punishment that would follow. A certain man.—The man
represents God, the vineyard the Jewish nation, the husbandmen the rulers of the Jews.
This parable is intimately connected with Isa. v. 1/7. For a long time.—The idea implied
is that abundant opportunity was given for a return for all God’s mercy to Israel.

Ver. 10. A servant.—By the servants are to be understood. the prophets. For the treat-
ment they received see 1 Kings xviii. 4, xxii. 24-27; 2 Chron. xxiv. 21; Jer. xxvi. 20-23,
xsxvii. 15: cf. also Neh. ix. 26; Heb. xi. 36, 37. Of the fruit.—Te., payment in kind.

Ver. 12. Cast him forth.—A certain gradation in acts of insolence and violence is implied.

Ver. 13. My beloved son.—The distinction between the son and the other servants is
plainly indicated (cf. Heb. iii. 5, 6). Yet the Son takes upon Him “the form of a servant”
(Phil. ii, 7). Christ here speaks of Himself, not as Redeemer, but as preacher of righteous-
ness. When they see him.—Omitted in the best MSS. ; omitted in R.V.

Ver. 14. This is the heir.—An implication that the leaders of the Jews were secretly
conscious that Christ’s claims were well founded. Nicodemus, speaking for his class, said,
early in Christ’s ministry, “We know that thou art a teacher come from God” (John iii. 2).
The words, too, of Caiaphas seem to imply a latent consciousness that Jesus was the
Messiah (John xi. 49-52).

Ver. 15. So they cast him out.—Here the prophetical part ofthe parable begins. The
allusion is either to excommunication, to delivering Him over to the heathen, or to His
suffering death outside the walls of the city. If this last be the fulfilment of the prophecy,
we may compare with these words, John xix. 17; Heb, xiii. 11, 12.

Ver. 16. He shall come.—In St. Matthew this reply is given by the people in answer to
Christ’s question. This coming of the Lord is here plainly identified with the destruction
of Jerusalem. God forbid,—Lit., “ Be it not so”; a phrase found here only in the Gosples.
There seems no special reason why, in the passages in the New Testament where it occurs,
the Divine name should be used in translating it ; it is scarcely reverent so to use it.

Ver. 17. And He beheld them.—Rather, “ But He looked upon them” (R.V.); a fixed
glance to add force to the quotaticn from Scripture which He was about to make. That
is written.—Ps. cxviii. 22; a psalm from which the multitude had quoted in acclama-
tions the day before. (Hosanna, Matt. xxi. 9, is from the twenty-fifth verse of that
psalm, where it is rendered “save now.”) ‘Head of the corner.—“ The stone is regarded
both as a foundation-stone and a stone at the angle of the building, binding the two walls
together” (Farrar).

Ver. 18. Broken.—Rather, ‘“ broken to pieces” (R.V.). Grind him to powder.—Rather,
“it will scatter him as dust” (R.V.). In the latter there is probably an allusion to Daniel
ii. 35. They fall on the stone who are offended at Christ in His low estate (Isa. viii. 14;
Luke ii. 34). ‘Of this sin His hearers were already guilty. There was yet a worse sin which
they were on the point of committing, which He warns them would be followed by a more
tremendous punishment: they on whom the stone falls are those who set themselves in
distinct and self-conscious opposition against the Lord; who, knowing who He is, do yet
to the end oppose themselves to Him and to His kingdom ” (Trench).

Ver. 19. And they feared the people.—The state of mind in which the attempt to ensnare
Jesus was made: “and they did so in fear of the people” ( Adford).

Ver. 20. They watched Him.—Rather, “and having watched for an opportunity.” Spies,—
Men “suborned.” Just men.—Z.e., honest, ingenuous men, perplexed with a doubt which
He might solve. Power and authority of the governor.—J.c., ‘‘to the Roman power, and to
the authority of the governor.”

Ver. 22. Tribute.—The word means a poll-tax which had been levied since Judea became
a Roman province. The insurrection of Judas of Galilee had been occasioned by the belief
that it was unlawful to pay this tax, since God was the only true ruler of the Jewish people.
This belief was held by a large section of the people: if Christ decided against it, He would
alienate them; if He agreed with them He would embroil Himself with the Roman authority.
The idea that the Herodians who, as St. Matthew says, joined with the Pharisees in putting
this question, approved of the tax, is utterly unfounded. It is a mere conjecture of Origen’s.
There would be very little craftiness in the plot if two classes, one of them notoriously
opposed to the payment of the tax, and the other as notoriously in favour of it, were
represented in the same deputation. The Herodians, as clinging to the last fragment of


517





CHAP. XX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





Jewish national independence in the rule of the Herods, would naturally be opposed to
complete subjection to Rome,

Ver. 24. A penny. —The Roman denarius.

Ver. 25. Render, therefore.—It was a decision of the rabbis that “ wherever any king’s
money is current, there that king is lord.” By accepting the coinage of Caesar they had
acknowledged his supremacy in temporal things, and consequently his claim to tribute.
But the answer goes further. The followers of Judas of Galilee regarded the authority of
Ceesar as incompatible with that of God. Our Lord distinguishes between temporal and
spiritual sovereignty, and shows that the two are not opposed to each other. God was no
longer, as of old, the civil ruler of His people. They had rejected His authority, and He
had given them over to a foreign power, who reigned and claimed tribute by His ordinance
(cf. Rom. xiii. 1,7). But God was still, and must ever be, the spiritual Ruler of the world,
and to Him now, as ever, worship and obedience were due,

Ver. 27. Sadducees.— Members of the aristocratic and wealthy class, which included the
higher ranks of the priesthood. It is a popular error, based on a statement of Jerome’s,
that they rejected all the Jewish Scriptures but the Pentateuch. They accepted the later
Scriptures but rejected the Oral Law and traditions. Like all Jews, no doubt, they attributed
a higher degree of inspiration to the Pentateuch than to any other part of the Old Testament.
Deny the resurrection.—T.e., of the body, and apparently even the immortality of the soul.
The Pharisees, on the contrary, believed in the resurrection of the body and a future life,
much in a Christian sense, though they had somewhat carnal ideas of the nature of the
future state.

Ver. 28. Moses wrote.—Deut. xxv. 5.

Ver. 29. Seven brethren.—Probably a fictitious case. The difficulty however, would have
been the same if there had been only two brethren.

Ver. 33. For seven.— Rather, “ for the seven” (R.V.). It is difficult to see what triumph
the Sadducees would have won if Jesus had agreed with some of the rabbis who had dis-
cussed this question, and decided the matter in favour of the first husband.

Ver. 34. The children of this world.—The R.V. absurdly changes this to “ the sons of this
world.” The phrase “ marry” is appropriate to “sons,” but ‘“‘ are given in marriage ” applies
only to women. Though “sons” is a literal translation, a general word like “ children” is
evidently called for.

Ver. 35. To obtain that world.—-Or, “ to attain to that world” (R.V.).

Ver. 36. Neither can.—Rather, “for neither can” (R.V.). The reason why there is no
marriage in that state is that there is no death: so that it is not necessary to raise up a new
generation to take the place of the old. Equal unto the angels.—J.e., in being immortal.
Christ distinctly asserts the existence of these beings, which the Sadduceesdenied. Children
of God.—J.e., not because of their ethical character, but because they become “ partakers of
the Divine nature,” receiving life by the direct action of God in raising them trom the dead.

Ver. 37. Even Moses showed.—Moses, whose supposed silence on this point the Sadducees
laid such stress upon. At the bush.—Rather, ‘in the place concerning the bush” (R.V.) ;
z.e., in the section of the book of Exodus known by that name (chap. iii.).

Ver. 38. Not a God of the dead.—But for Christ’s interpretation, the profound meaning
of the name by which God then called Himself could scarcely have been discovered with
any measure of certainty. “Our Lord here testifies of the conscious intent of God in speaking
the words. God uttered them, He tells us, to Moses, in the consciousness of the still
enduring existence of His peculiar relation to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob” (Meyer). ‘‘ The
groundwork of His argument seems to me,” says Alford, “to be this: the words ‘I am thy
God’ imply a covenant. There is another side to them: “Thou art mine” follows upon “I
am thine.” When God, therefore, declares that He is the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
He declares their continuance, as the other parties in this covenant. It is an assertion
which could not be made of an annihilated being of the past.”

Ver. 38. All live unto Him.—J.e¢., none are annihilated ; those who have passed away from
earth and are counted by us as dead, are living in the sight of God. See this same thought
expounded in Rom. xiv. 8 and Acts xvii. 28.

Ver. 39. Thou hast well said.—The Pharisees as a class would be glad to see their
opponents, the Sadducees, refuted, and some of them were evidently generous enough to
express their feelings of admiration at the wisdom displayed by Jesus on this occasion.

Ver, 40. Durst not ask.—J.e., did not presume to frame any more captious questions, or to
endeavour to entrap Jesus in His teaching.

Ver. 41. To them.—Z.e., to the scribes. Christ.—Rather, “the Christ” (R.V.). David’s
son.—Cf. John vii. 42.

Vers. 42. David himself.—Ps. cx. 1. David was popularly supposed to be the author of
the psalm. Even if he were not, the point on which Christ lays stress—viz., that in it Divine
honours are paid to the Messiah, who was to come of David’s line, would be unaffected.
Christ is not discussing the authorship of the psalm and affirming that it was written by


518


HOMILETIC COMMEN TARY Te SL LUKE, CUAP. XX,
wee ete Sas i Eel a, AYE a Sar ce


David, but drawing the attention of the scribes to a statement in Scripture which was
inconsistent with their belief that the Messiah would be a mere man. The Lord, etc.—Le.
“ Jehovah said unto my Lord.”

Ver, 43. Thy footstool—R.V. “the footstool of thy feet.” The same tautology is in the
original; but it is doubtful whether it was worth while to coin an awkward English phrase
by such a literal translation.

Ver. 44. How is He, then, his son ?—The solution is given in Rom. i. 3, 4; Christ was the
Son of David accorling to t 1e flesh, and yet the eternal, pre-existent Son of God.

Ver. 45, Then in the audience.—Rather, “and in the hearing” (R.V.).

Ver. 46. Long robes.—Hither an official dress or an exaggerated obedience to the law
concerning dress (Numb, xy. 38-40). Chief rooms.—Rather, “ chief seats” (R.V.).

Ver. 47. Devour widows’ houses.—Cf. 2 Tim. iii. 6. For a show.—Rather “ for a pretence ”
(R.V.). Damnation.—Rather, “ condemnation ” (R.V.).


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—8.


The Question of Authority.—The question put by the chief priests and scribes
as to the authority which Jesus exercised was not altogether an unreasonable one.
They were the guardians of the religion of Israel, and of the institutions which
had been found.d by Divine sanction for the preservation of that religion. Had
they been single-minded and upright men, with minds open to truth, their
question might have been met by Jesus in a very different way. As it was, they
were under the influence cf a twofold prejudice, which incapacitated them for
acting as judges of Christ’s claims.

I. They refused to recognise any authority as genuine which did not emanate
from themselves.—They regarded the office of the priesthood, of which they were
ministers, as of supreme authority ; and since Christ did not belong to the tribe
of Levi, they failed to see that He had any right to assume exceptional power,
or to set aside that which they exercised. They committed the mistake of over-
looking the fact that the authority of the priestly office is secondary and derived,
and therefore subordinate to the Living Word of God. Even under the Old
Testament dispensation it had been evident, time after time, that authoritative
declarations of the Divine will were not given exclusively through members of the
priestly caste. Most of the prophets belonged to other tribes than that of Levi, and
their authority was accepted by both pricsts and people. Yet the fact that Jesus
had no official position—that He neither belonged to a priestly family nor was
accredited as a teacher by any one of the rabbinical schools—was virtually taken
by the priests and scribes as a proof that He was usurping functions to which
He had no right, in teaching men and in laying down rules for their guidance
in spiritual things. In the Epistle to the Hebrews we find an indication of
the extent to which this question troubled the minds of Jews who had accepted
Christ. There the writer asserts that Jesus is a priest of an order far older
than that of Levi, and superior to it—a priest in the same sense as Melchizedek,
whom even Abraham recognised as of higher rank than himself.

IJ. They were blind to the ample proofs Jesus had already given of His
Divine authority.— This fact it is that causes us instinctively to regard the
question as uncalled-for and impertinent. Christ had now been for more than
two years a prominent figure in Jewish society, aud we are astonished that His
greatness had not impressed all beholders. The people who heard Him speak
declared that He spoke with authority, and not as the scribes; but their rulers
were too much under the influence of prejudice to form the same opinion. In
the life and work of Christ abundant proof had been given, to those who had
eyes to see, of His heavenly commission. 1. In the nature of His teaching.
His intimate acquaintance with human nature, His exalted conceptions of the
requirements of God’s law, His unerring statements of the relations which man
should sustain towards God and towards his brethren, and His stern condemna-


519


ip


CHAP. xx.  HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





tion of all falsehood and hypocrisy, should have convinced His hearers of His right
to the authority He claimed. The truth of His teaching was so apparent that
no rank with which man might have invested Him would have added weight to:
His words. 2. In the holiness of His life. His conduct and actions were open
to the scrutiny of all, and He could ask, without fear of a reply, “‘ Which of you
convinceth Me of sin?” A Divine holiness and a Divine compassion were
manifested by Him. He thought of those whom the wold forgot ; He had pity
on those who were ignorant and out of the way; the poor and outcast were the
objects of His care: every hour of His life was devoted to ministrations on behalf
of others. By these marks, as well as by His zeal for the honour of God, might
the priests and scribes have perceived His consecration to the office of Redeemer
of men. 3. In His miracles. Day after day He had displayed a mysterious
power in overcoming ills that affect humanity. He had healed the sick, cleansed
lepers, given sight to the blind, and raised the dead. A few days before, in the
presence of a great assembly, He had performed the most wonderful of all His
mighty works in recalling Lazarus from the grave. None contested the authen-
ticity of these miracles; even the chief priests and scribes did not refuse to
believe that He had performed them. Yet they failed to see that the works
of Christ supplied the answer to the question they put to Him—that no one
could have wrought these works unless God had been with Him. In all ages
ecclesiastical prejudices have blinded men to the worth and significance of the
teaching and of the holy lives and works of men who have not drawn their
authority from the Church. Instead of frank acknowledgment of good work |
done, there are often curious and impertinent inquiries as to the validity of |
“the orders” such men have possessed. Such miserable prejudices find a suffi-
cient reproof in the refusal of Christ to give any formal justification of His right
to teach the ignorant, and show compassion to the miserable.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 1—8.


J. A rebellious question (vers. 1-20).

II. A malicious question (ver. 21-26).

III. A scoffer’s question (vers.
27-38).

IV. Our Lord’s question (vers.
39-47).—W. Taylor.

Ver. 1. “Came upon Him.’—This
deputation marks a deliberate and
formal inquiry on the part of the
Sanhedrim.

T. It consisted of men who were
entitled, from their office and rank, to
institute careful investigation into the
authority of all teachers of religion.

Ii. But of men who were prejudiced
against Jesus.

III. It came at far too late a period.
—Jesus had now been at least two
years before the public—had performed
many indubitable miracles, and had
been accepted as a teacher by multitudes
in all parts of the land.


520


Ver. 2. “ By what authority ?”—A
twofold question.

I. Does Thy power proceed from
God?

II. What messenger of God conse-
crated Thee to this activity ?—The
reply of Jesus, requiring them to make
up their mind as to the claims of John
the Baptist, is, therefore, most pertinent
to the second of these questions.


Ver. 3. “I also will ask you.”—The
Divine method of judgment.

I. Sinners are made to pass judg-
ment on themselves.

II. Are reduced to silence in the
presence of their Lord.


Ver. 4. “The baptism of John,” ete.
—The question (1) revealed that it
was in no truth-loving temper of mind
that the rulers had interrogated Jesus
as to His authority, and (2) it con-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


tained an answer to their question. If
they accepted the mission of His fore-
runner as Divine, they were bound to
accept His as of the same character ;
if they repudiated the Baptist, they
virtually declared their own incom-
petency to judge spiritual things.


Ver. 5, 6. ‘ They reasoned with them-
selves.” —The bad faith of the rulers of
the people was manifested clearly by
their present conduct. 1. They were
more anxious to escape the dilemma
in which the question of Christ placed
them than to return a truthful answer.
2. They professed doubt as to John’s
Divine mission, though they had
virtually pronounced against it by re-
fusing to believe in him. 3. They
were not ashamed to admit to them-
selves that they were animated by fear
of the people rather than by fear of
God—that they followed the dictates of
carnal policy, while professing to be
zealous for the interests of true re-
ligion,


CHAP. XX.


Ver. 7. “ They could not tell.”—They
confessed their incompetency to decide
on the authority of a prophet: Christ,
therefore, declined to accept them as
judges of His claims.


Ver. 8. ‘ Neither tell I you.”—Now
both are silent; but He, because, on
good grounds, He will not speak ; they
because they, through their own fault,
cannot speak. And among the people
present as witnesses there is no one
who could seriously doubt which of the
two parties leaves the field victorious.
—Van Oosterzee.


The Indignation of Jesus.—The words
of Jesus are animated both by indigna-
tion and contempt. “If you declare
yourselves incompetent to judge of the
claims of John, much more are you
incompetent to judge of my claims.”
They had admitted failure as leaders of
the people: Christ proceeds to brand -
them, in the parable that follows, as
faithless and rebellious.


MAIN HOMILETIOS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 9—18.


The Vineyard and its Keepers.—The pungent severity of this parable, with its
transparent veil of narrative, is only appreciated by keeping clearly in view the
circumstances and the listeners. They had struck at Him with their question
of His authority, and He parries the blow. Now it is His turn, and the sharp
point goes home. ; ;

I. The preparation of the vineyard.—1. It is planted and furnished with all need-
ful appliances for making wine (see Matthew), which is its great end. The direct
Divine origin of the religious ideas and obsexvances of “ Judaism” is thus asserted
by Christ. The only explanation of them is that God enclosed that bit of the wilder-
ness, and with His own hands set growing there these exotics. Neither the theology
nor the ritual is of man’s establishing. 2. Thus prepared, the vineyard is next
handed over to the husbandmen. These are the Jewish people. No doubt the
Sanhedrim was the chief object at which Christ aimed the parable. But they
only gave form and voice to the national spirit, and “the people: loved to have
it so.” National responsibilities are not to be slipped out of by being shifted on
to the broad shoulders of governments or influential men. Who lets them be
governments, and influential? Christ teaches both rulers and ruled, then,
here, the ground and purpose of their privileges. They prided themselves on
these as their own, but they were only tenants. They made boast of the
law, but they forgot that fruit was the end of the Divine planting and equip-
ment. Holiness and glad obedience were what God sought. 3. Having installed
the husbandmen, the owner goes into another country. Centuries of compara-
tive Divine silence followed the planting of the vineyard. Having given us our
charge, God, as it were, steps aside: to leave us room to work as we will, and so
to display what we are made of. He is absent in so far as conspicuous oversight


521


CHAP. XX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


and retribution are concerned. He is present to help, love, and bless. The
faithful husbandman has Him always near, a joy and a strength, else no fruit
would grow ; but the sin and misery of the unfaithful are that he thinks of Him
as far off.

II. The habitual ill-treatment of the messengers.—These are, of course, the
prophets, whose office was not only to foretell, but to plead for obedience and
trust, the fruits sought by God. The whole history of the nation is summed up
in this dark picture. There is no more remarkable historical fact than that of
the uniform hostility of the Jews to the prophets. That they should have had
prophets in long succession is surely inexplicable on any naturalistic hypothesis.
Such men were not the natural product of the race nor of its circumstances, as
their fate shows. How did they spring up? The only explanation is that stated
here: “ He sent His servants.” Christ treats the whole long series of violent
rejections as the acts of the same set of husbandmen. The class, or nation, was
one, as the stream is one, though all its particles were different; and the
Pharisees and scribes, who stood with frowning hatred before Him as He spoke,
were the living embodiment of the spirit which had animated all the past. In
so far as they inherited the taint, and repeated the conduct, the guilt of all
the former generations was laid at their door. They declared themselves their
predecessors’ heirs; and as they reproduced their actions, they would have to
bear the accumulated weight of the consequences.

III. The mission of the son and its fatal issue (vers. 13-15).—Three things
are noticeable here. 1. The unique position which Christ here claims, with
unwonted openness and decisiveness, as apart from, and far above, all the
prophets. They constitute one order, but He stands alone, sustaining a closer
relation to God, They were faithful as servants, but He asason. Rulers and
people must decide whether they will own or reject their king, and they must
do it with their eyes open. 2. The owner’s vain hope in sending his son. He
thought that he would be welcomed, and he was disappointed. It was his last
attempt. Christ knew Himself to be God’s last appeal, as He is to all men, as
well as to that generation. He is the last arrow in God’s quiver. When He
has shot that bolt, the resources even of Divine love are exhausted, and no more
can be done for the vineyard than He has done for it. 3. The vain calculation
of the husbandmen. Christ puts hidden motives into plain words, and reveals to
His hearers what they scarcely knew of their own hearts. But how was the
rulers’ or the people’s wish to “seize on Hisinheritance” their motive for killing
Jesus? Their great sin was their desire to have their national prerogatives and
to render no true obedience. The ruling class clung to their privileges, and
forgot their responsibilities, while the people were proud of their standing as
Jews, and careless of God’s service. Neither wanted to be reminded of their
debt to the Lord of the vineyard, and their hostility to Jesus was mainly because
He would call on them for the fruits. If they could get this unwelcome and
persistent voice silenced, they could go on in the comfortable old fashion of lip-
service and real selfishness. It is an account of the hostility of many men who
are against Him. They want to possess life and its good, without being for ever
pestered with reminders of the terms on which they hold it, and of God’s desire
for their love and obedience. They have a secret feeling that Christ has the
right to ask for their hearts, and so they turn from Him with anger, and
sometimes with hatred.

IV. The application of the parable.—Our Lord, in this last portion of His
address, throws away even the thin veil of parable, and speaks the sternest truth
in the nakedest words. He puts His own claim in the plainest fashion, as the
corner-stone on which the true kingdom of God was to be built. He brands the
men who stood before Him as incompetent builders, who did not know the stone


522


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP, XX.





needed for their edifice when they saw it. He declares, with triumphant con-
fidence, the futility of opposition to Himself—even though it kill Him. He is
sure that God will build on Him, and that His place in the building, which shall
rise through the ages, will be, to even careless eyes, the crown of the manifest
wonders of God. Strange words from a man who knew that in three days He
would be crucified! Stranger still, they have come true! He is the foundation
of the best part of the best men ; the basis of thought, the motive for action, the
pattern of life, the ground of hope, for countless individuals ; and on Him stands
firm the society of His Church, and is hung all the glory of His Father’s house.
Rejection of Christ involves an awful doom. The doom has two stages: one, a
lesser misery, which is the lot of Him who stumbles against the stone, while it
lies, passive, to be built on ; one more dreadful, when it has acquired motion and
comes down with irresistible impetus. To stumble at Christ, or to refuse His
grace, and not to base our lives and hopes on Him, is maiming and damage, in
many ways, here and now. But suppose the stone endowed with motion, what
can stand against it? And suppose that the Christ, who is now offered for the
rock on which we may pile our hopes and never be confounded, comes to judge,
will He not crush the mightiest opponent as the dust of the summer threshing-
floor 2— Maclaren.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 9—18.


Ver. 9-18. The Parable of the Vine-
yard.—\. Its references to the Jews.—
Its special reference was to the teachers,
the scribes and Pharisees. The lesson
is very plain. They or their fathers
had rejected the prophets who had
come in the name of God, and now
they were about to cast out and even
kill the beloved Son of God Himself.
Here, therefore, they are warned
solemnly that their privileges will be
taken from them, and they themselves
will suffer the just punishment of their
abuse of these privileges.

II. But the parable reaches to us
also—We have each our own vine-
yard to keep—that is to say, our work
to do for God, and our life to live for
God. He will call us to account for
the deeds done in the body. To teach
us to live for Him, He has sent us also
prophets and apostles and martyrs,
preachers and teachers. They come in
humble guise, perhaps; but when they
are pure and true, the conscience and
the Spirit of God tell us they are God’s
messengers. According to our treat-
ment of them shall be our judgment.—
Hastings.


The Wicked Husbandmen. — This
parable tells—


I. The greatest favour.
II. The greatest sin.
III. The darkest doom.—Wells.


I. The vineyard.—1. The owner of
the vineyard. 2. What he did with it.

II. The husbandmen.—l. Their
privileges, and how they used them.
2. Their rebellion, and how it ended.—
Watson.


I. The circumstances in which the
vine-dressers (as representing the
leaders of the Jewish people) are
placed.

II. Their past conduct (vers. 10-12).

III. Their present conduct (vers.
13-15).

IV. The chastisement to be inflicted
on them.


The History of the Theocracy.—
Jesus here traces the course of the
history of the theocracy. The true
significance of that history is unveiled
in a most profound manner. From
the foundation of the ancient covenant,
down through the ministry of the
prophets to the advent of Jesus Him-
self, His rejection and death, the very
consequences of His death not yet con-
summated—the rejection of Israel and


523


CHAP. XX.


the transference of the kingdom of God
from the Jews to the Gentiles ;—all is
presented in the simplest imagery and
with the most terrible clearness. At
the same time an answer is given to
the question of the priests as to the
source of His authority. He is the
Son, the Heir, the last messenger from
their Master.—Godet.


Ver. 9. “ To the people.” —Christ had
repelled the attack, but now He carries
the war into His enemies’ quarters.
He had unmasked the hypocrisy of His
enemies, and shown the dilemma in
which their pretended ignorance placed
them: now He brings their guilt to light
and foretells that their rejection of
Him will lead to the ees in of
the Gentiles.


“Went into a far country.”—In the
miracles which went along with the
deliverance from Egypt, the giving of
the law from Sinai, and the planting
in Canaan, God openly dealt with His
people—made, as we know, an express
covenant with them; but, this done,
withdrew for a while, not speaking
any more to them face to face (Deut.
xxxiv. 10-12), but waiting in patience
to see what the Law would effect, and
what manner of works they, under the
teaching of their appointed guides,
would bring forth.—7Trench.


Ver. 10. ‘Sent a servant to the
husbandmen.”—Nothing is more re-
markable in the history of Israel than
the constant co-existence within her
pale of two entirely opposite classes of
men—that of the moral triflers, too
numerously represented among those
exercising official influence; and that
of the men of consuming zeal for
righteousness, that is, the prophets.
—Bruce.


“Give him of the fruit.”—These
fruits which are demanded are in no
wise to be explained as particular
works, nor yet as a condition of
honesty and uprightness, but much
rather as the repentance and the


524


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE


inward longing after true inward
righteousness which the Law was un-
able to bring about. It is by no means
implied that the Law had not an in-.
fluence in producing uprightness ; it
cuts off the grosser manifestations
of sin, and reveals its hidden abomina-
tion, so that a righteousness according
to the Law can, even under the Law,
come forth as fruit. While yet, to be
sufficing, this must have a sense of
the need of redemption for its basis
(Rom. iii. 20-25). The servants, there-
fore, here appear as those who seek
for these spiritual needs, that they may
link to them the promises concerning
a coming Redeemer ; but the unfaithful
husbandmen, who had abused their
own position, denied and slew these
messengers of grace.—Olshausen.


Ver. 11. ‘“Hnireated him shame-
fully.” —Cf. Neh. ix. 26: “ Neverthe-
less, they were disobedient and rebelled
against Thee, and cast Thy law behind
their backs, and slew Thy prophets
which testified against them to turn
them to Thee ; and they wrought great
provocations.” See also 2 Chron. xxiv.
20, 21; Jer. xliv. 4.


Ver. 12. Cast him out.”—The vine-
dressers procecd from bad to worse : the
first messenger they beat; the second
they beat and outrage ; the third they
wound and fling out of the vineyard.


Ver. 13. “J will send my beloved
Son.”—The failure of this attempt
implies (1) that the resources even of
heavenly love are exhausted, and (2)
that the impenitent fill up the measure
of their guilt,


“Tt may be they will reverence.”—
Two alternatives :—
I. Reverence shown to the Son.
II. Or, at least, hesitation to inflict
on Him ill-treatment like that suffered
by the servants previously sent.


Anthropomorphism.—Strictly speak-
ing, indeed, this thought does not
apply to God, for He knew what would


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





happen, and was not deceived by the
expectation of a more agreeable re-
sult; but it is customary, especially
in parables, to ascribe to Him human
feelings. And yet this was not added
without reason, for Christ intended to
represent, as in a mirror, how deplor-
able their impiety was, of which it
was too certain a proof that they rose
in diabolical rage against the Son of
God, who had come to bring them
back to a sound mind. As they had
formerly, as far as lay in their power,
driven God from His inheritance by
the cruel murder of the prophets, so
it was the crowning point of all their
crimes to slay the Son, that they, might
reign as in a house which was without
an heir.— Calvin.


“They will reverence him.” —'The
lord of the vineyard has one expedient
left. He will send his only and well-
beloved son. The thought which lies
on the surface is the estimate formed
in heaven of the mission of the Son of
God. It was something different, not
in degree, but in kind, from any other
instrumentality that had been or could
be employed for touching hard hearts
and awakening dormant sensibilities.
We know how opposite was the result.
Hearts were only stimulated into a
greater degree of resistance by the
mission of the Divine Son. Not one
generation or one nation only which
has thus argued. Men in all ages
have felt the critical nature of the
interposition of Jesus Christ, and have
roused themselves to put Him down
with an energy stimulated by the
thought of the finality of the enter-
prise. In this recognition of the
greatness of the stake at issue, Christ-
ians find nothing to complain of,
everything to rejoice in. Jesus Christ
is the key of the position. The text
describes the anticipation in heaven,
chronologically antecedent to the
reception below. “It may be they
will reverence Him when they see
Him.” The word “reverence” used
here occurs in several other places and
zontains three elements :—


CHAP, XX,
I. Attention.—This is the first
element of reverence. Oan there be


reverence without attention? Is there
not much irreverence among priests
and people alike? Neglect of Christ’s
word? Careless living ?

II. Awe is the second element in
reverence.—There is much unhallowed
familiarity in present-day religion.
Too much emotional fondness. Christ
risen and enthroned is too muc_
forgotten. How little is felt of 3+
John’s awe in His presence !— When
I saw Him, [ fel: at His feet ag
dead.”

IIT. Shame is the third element.—
It might have been thought that the
sight of the son would awaken in the
husbandmen a sense of shame for those
misdeeds of theirs which had made his
coming necessary. Whether shame
enters into all reverence is a question
which may wait. It must, however,
enter into all that reverence which
forgiven sinners feel for Jesus Christ.
There is nothing like the sight of the
Saviour for quickening the sense of
the multitude and the shamefulness of
personal sins. Because I am ashamed
before Him now, I hope not to be
ashamed before Him at His coming.—
Vaughan.


Ver. 14. “ Let us kill him.” —We, on
the contrary, say, ‘“ This is the Son of
the Eternal God; let us believe on
Him, and the inheritance shall be
ours.” —Sutton.


Ver. 15. “And killed him.”—Jesus
relates, with striking calmness, and as
a fact already accomplished, the crime
which they are preparing to commit
upon His person. It is as though He
told them that He would not seek te
escape out of their hands.— Godet.


Ver. 16. Give the vineyard to others.
—If the husbandmen who are dis-
possessed represent the heads of the
Jewish theocracy, the others who take
their place must be understood to repre
sent the apostles and their successors,


525


CHAP. XX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





Vers. 17-19. The Rejected Stone.—A
codicil added to the parable of the vine-
yard. The Jews were familiar with
the ideas connected with the corner-
stone.

I. The stone at rest.—Men falling
or rushing on a big rock hurt, not the
rock, but themselves. The Redeemer
resisted in the day of grace, means
loss and harm to those resisting. We
must come into some kind of contact
with the Son of God. Alas! He has,
on earth, to bear the weight of many
sinners striking against Him.

II. The stone in motion.—The rock
is raised in mid-heaven, hovers over the
assailants for a while, and then falls
on their heads. Here the destruction
is final and complete. Christ’s enemies
will be overwhelmed by His own power
put forth in the day of judgment. The
first bruising may be cured : the grind-
ing to powder accomplished by the
Judge when the day of grace is done
can never be healed. Many resented
this doctrine from the lips of Christ.
Some resent it keenly still, But there
is no escape from the solemn truth
that those who in this life reject
Christ must bear the weight of His
judgment in the world to come.—
Arnot.


Ver. 17. “ What is this, then ?”—
I.e., if the evil-doers were not to be
overthrown, the prophecy of Scripture
would not be fulfilled.


Ver. 18. “Fall on this stone.” —
Those persons are said to fall wpon
Christ who rush forward to destroy


Him; not that they occupy a more
elevated position than He does, but
because their madness carries them so
far that they endeavour to attack
Christ as if He were below them.
Christ tells them that all they will
gain by it is, that by the very conflict
they will be broken. But when they
have thus proudly exalted themselves,
He tells them that another thing will
happen, which is that they will be
bruised under the stone against which
they so insolently dashed themselves.—.
Calwin.


J. An injury which may be healed.
—The bruising caused by a man’s un-
believing opposition to Christ under
the gospel.

II. Irremediable destruction.—
Accomplished by the wrath of the
Judge when the day of grace has
passed.


Rejection of The Gospel.—The two
clauses of the text figuratively point
to two different classes of operation
on the rejection of the gospel. The
one class represents the present hurts
and harms which, by the natural opera-
tion of the thing, without the action of
Christ judicially at all, every man re-
ceives in the very act of rejecting the
Gospel, and the other represents the
ultimate issue of that rejection.

I. Every man has some kind of
connexion with Christ.

II, The immediate issue of rejection
of Christ is loss and maiming.

III. The ultimate issue of unbelief
is irremediable destruction when
Christ begins to move.— Waclaren.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 19—26.


_ Cesar and God.—Jesus thus refuses to decide formally a question of politics,
Just as, on another occasion, He had refused to interfere between the two


brothers who were in dispute about an inheritance.


It was not for settling


questions like these that He came to earth. More than once the people sought


to force Him to take up the réle of a political leader, but in vain.


He firmly


refused to compromise His cause by associating it with any of the political
factions of His time. Yet He did not merely maintain a prudent silence on this
occasion, when the question of the lawfulness of paying tribute to Rome was


526


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XX.








brought to Him for solution. He spoke words which cast a new light upon the
whole subject, and which solved the difficulty which these men hypocritically
ea to experience, but which really troubled many devout hearts in
srael.

I. It was new to hear that the theocracy was now a thing of the past.—Up
to this time the religious ideal of Israel was the subordination of civil society to
the priestly order: though the nation was actually subject to a foreign power, it
was considered that the normal condition of matters ought to be the direct
government of the state by ministers of Jehovah, acting in His name and
employing, by His authority, all the resources and powers that are at the disposal
of earthly kings and rulers. It was a magnificent dream, but all attempts to
realise it had hopelessly failed. Christ now distinguishes between the two
spheres of national life: the one is purely civil, and may be an empire, a
kingdom, an oligarchy, or a democracy; the other is purely religious and in it
God is the supreme Ruler.

II. The duties belonging to both spheres are to be discharged in a religious
spirit.— Christ did not represent civil society as a domain which is withdrawn
from holy influence, and, as it were, isolated from that in. which God rules. One
of the most striking characteristics of the gospel is that it ignores the pagan
distinction between things sacred and things profane, and that it does not make
religion a distinct part of life, but a Divine influence upon every part, which
penetrates, pervades, and governs the whole. St. Paul states this fact in very
strong terms: “ Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the
glory of God.” And wherever Christianity exists as a living power it acts upon
the consciences of men and directs their conduct, not only in matters of specially
religious duty, but also in all that concerns the well-being of the body social. It
purifies public opinion, brands as evil all customs and practices of a degrading
kind, and spreads its shield over the weak and helpless. None of the spheres of
human activity can be sealed against it.

III. Yet there is a profound distinction between religious and civil society,
both with regard to the domains they occupy and the modes of action they
employ.—The domain of the State is that of the present life and of interests that
are purely temporal. The State ought to secure for each individual the free
enjoyment of all rights and liberties belonging to him, and to endeavour to
increase the sum of happiness of all who are under its care. But it has to do
only with man as a citizen. All teaching concerning God, the human soul,
religious duties and aspirations, and the hope of immortality, are out of its
province. It should stand neutral towards all varying forms of religious belief,
as the defender of liberty of conscience, and of the religious rights of all. The
Church and the State also differ in the nature of the means which they employ.
The arm of the State is force; it has the power and the right to overcome, by
material strength, all resistance to its laws. The arm of the Church is persuasion ;
it has not the power or the right to use force for the establishment or main-
tenance of any form of religious belief. ‘The weapons of our warfare are not
carnal” (2 Cor. x. 4), said one of the greatest of its champions. Its sword
is the Word of God; its instrument of triumph is the cross, which symbolises
the submission of its Lord to sufferings and death; and the Spirit which
animates it is compared to a dove. Such are the figures under which Holy
Scripture represents the power it wields. To the State we owe tribute, obedience
to its laws, and the sacrifice of our time and strength for securing the common
good. ‘To God we owe ourselves—the homage of mind, will, and heart. The
influence of the world and of sin may almost have obliterated the Divine
image and superscription upon the soul which proclaim that it belongs to God
and should be rendered to Him ; but they never wholly disappear.


527


CHAP. XX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 19—26.


Ver. 19. “The chief priests and
scribes sought.”—There is (1) a bitter-
ness against Christ, which arises from
a misunderstanding of Him; but (2) a
still deeper and more intense bitterness
is manifested here by men who under-
stood Him far too well, and who were
only the more estranged from Him in
consequence.


Ver. 20. “ Take hold of His words.” —
They could not find Him guilty in any
of His actions, but hoped to force Him
into some hasty utterance upon a
complicated question.


“* Just men.”—I.e., they came pre-
tending to be upright persons who were
perplexed on a point of duty; but their
real intention was to entrap Him into
the expression of an opinion which
might be used against Him.


Ver. 21. “ We know that Thou,” etc.—
It is not hard to see the treachery that
lay beneath this praise. The Jews were
firmly convinced that it was unlawful to
pay tribute to Cesar, but found it ad-
visable to conceal their feelings of aver-
sion. Thcse who now approached
Christ wished, by flattering His courage
and integrity, to force Him to express
an opinion of which they might take
advantage to put Him to death.


Ver. 22. “Js it lawful for us ?”—
The difficulty of the question arose
from the coutradiction between the
condition of subjection in which the
nation actually was at the time, and
the independence which it should have
enjoyed, and which seemed to be
anticipated and promised in _ the
writings of the prophets.


The True Way to Follow.—The way
to follow in this abnormal position
was not that of revolt, which in this
case would have been revolt against
God, but that of humiliation, repent-
ance, and devout submission to God,
who alone could give them deliver-
ance, since it had been national sin


528


that had led to their being subjected
to the Gentile yoke. The error which
Jesus dissipates, in His reply, consisted -
in applying to the actual state of the
nation the principle laid down by God
as governing its normal state. Jesus
virtually said to those who interrogated
Him, “Become ye again dependent
upon God, and He will render you in-
dependent of Cesar; but until He has
accomplished that deliverance you are
bound to fulfil the duties which belong
to your present state.” —Godet.


Ver. 23. “Perceived their crafti-
ness.”-—Neither force nor craft could
prevail against the Lord. In an instant
He saw through the wiles of His
enemics, and escaped the snare they
had laid for Him. Thus He exempli-
fied the counsel He gave to His
servants and combined the wisdom of
the serpent with the harmlessness of
the dove,


Vor. 24. “Show me a penny.”—It
was not to gain time that He desired
that a denarius should be shown Him:
the image and title it bore decided the
question that was put to Him.


“ Whose image and superscription ?”
—Christ serenely walks through the
cobwebs spun by His enemies, and
lays His hand upon the fact. “The
currency of the country proclaims the
monarch of the country. It is too Jate
to ask questions about your tribute
when you pay your bills in his money.”
Does not the other side of Christ’s
answer—‘to God the things that are
God’s”—rest upon a similar fact?
Does not the parallelism require that
we should suppose that the destiny of
things to be devoted to God is stamped
upon them, whatever they are, at least
as plainly as the right of Cesar to
exact tribute was inferred from the
fact that his money was the currency
of the country ?

IT Note the image stamped upon
man, and the consequent obligation.—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XX.


RR a a a ee ee eee ee


Our spirits show that God is our Lord,
since we are made in a true sense in
His image, and therefore only in Him
can we find rest. We are like God in
that we can love; we are like Him in
that we can perceive the right, and
that the right is supreme; we are like
Him in that we have the power to say
eae WELL

IT. Look, next, at the defacement of
the image and the false expenditure
of the coin—Our nature has gone
through the stamping-press again, and
another likeness has been deeply im-
printed upon it. The awful power that
is given to men of degrading them-
selves till, lineament by lineament, the
likeness in which they are mad>
vanishes, is the saddest and most
tragical thing in the world. Yet
every fibre in your nature protests
against the prostitution of itself to
anything short of God. Only misery
and unrest can ensue. Only when we
render to God the thing that is God’s
—our hearts and ourselves—can we
find repose.

IIl. The restoration and perfecting
of the defaced image.—Because Jesus
Christ, the God-man, has come, and in
our likeness presented to us the very
image of God and irradiation of His
light, therefore no defacement that it is
possible for men or devils to make on
this poor humanity of ours need be
irrevocable or final, and we may look
forward to a time when the coinage
shall be called in and re-mint«d in new
forms of nobleness and of lkeness.—
Maclaren.


Ver. 25. Cesar and God.—We owe
to kings, as rulers, (1) Honour; (2)
obedience to the laws; (3) payment of
taxes; (4) the duty of prayer. We
owe to God (1) ourselves; (2) our


substance; (3) our time, talents, and
influence; (4) our love.


I. Religion and loyalty should
accompany each other.

II. In cases where the commands of
earthly rulers interfere with the will
of God, they are to be disobeyed, at


whatever hazard or loss.


Two Distinct Spheres.—Things civil
and things sacred are (1) essentially
distinct from each other, yet (2) quite
harmonious. Neither may overlap or
intrude itself into the sphere of the
other. In the things of God we may
not take law from men (Acts iv. 19,
v. 29), while in honouring and obeying
Cesar in his own sphere we are ren-
dering obedience to God Himself (Rom.
xiii. 1-7).— Brown.


“‘ Render.’—The chief priests and
scribes had asked if it were lawful to
give tribute to Cesar, as if tribute were
a boon. Christ reminds them that it is
nota gift, but a due. Render, therefore,
tribute of your coin to Cesar; and
tribute of yourselves, coined in the
Divine mint, and stamped with the
Divine image and superscription, to God.


“ Render unto Cesar.” —This precept
of Jesus is developed in Rom. xii., xiii. ;
in Rom. xii., “‘ Render to God,” and in
Rom, xii. “‘ Render to Cesar.”


Ver. 26. “ Marvelled at His answer.’ —
All the synoptical Gospels lay stress
upon the astonishment excited by the
the reply of Christ, and thus imply
that it was expressed in some very
visible manner. The statement here
mace, that His enemies “ could not take
hold of His words before the people,”
gives a hint of the critical position in
which He would have been placed if He
had failed to silence the questioners.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 27-—40.


The Question Concerning the Resurrection.—There does not seem to have been
any sinister intention on the part of the Sadducees who now approached Christ
saying that there is no resurrection, and stating a case which seemed. in


their opinion, to cast ridicule upon the doctrine.


They came to him with «


stale piece of casuistry, conceived in a spirit of self-complacent ignorance, pu.


MM


529


CHAP. XX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





still sufficiently puzzling to furnish them with an argument for their disbelief,
and with a difficulty to throw in the way of their opponents. It was drawn
from what is called the levirate law of marriage, appointed by Moses to limit and
curtail certain evils in the rude state of society then existing. A certain woman
was married successively to seven brethren. Whose wife shall she be in the
resurrection? What a confused state of society there must be in the future
world—if, indeed, there is a world beyond the grave! Christ might have dis-
missed the stupid and frivolous question with contempt. If He had replied that
the woman would be the wife of the first or of the last of the brethren, the
Sadducees could scarcely have invalidated the reasonableness of the statement.
But He was pleased to do more than rebuke the presumptuous ignorance of
the questioners ; He draws aside the veil that hides the future world, and gives
us a glimpse of new conditions of life there, and also bestows upon mankind
definite assurance of the immortality of the soul.

I. He refutes the erroneous opinions of the Sadducees (vers. 34-36).—He
shows that their question went on the false theory that the forms and relations
of the present, sensible life would be transferred to the future, spiritual life. In
the resurrection-state there will not be a repetition, pure and simple, of our
present conditions. It will not be a state of probation, but of perfect and
unending blessedness. The children of the resurrection will be children of God,
partakers of His nature, and subject no longer to the law of change and death
which prevails here. Here it is but the species, the race, that has perpetuity ;
there the individual life is assured of immortality. No provision will, therefore,
be necessary for the succession and renewal of the race. The Sadducees had
virtually denied the power of God by asserting that life in another world must
be a mere reflex and repetition of the life of the children of this world. With
the shallowness and dogmatism that so often distinguish men of the rationalistic
school to which they belonged, they took for granted that that which was in-
comprehensible to them must be set aside as untenable. And therefore Christ
reminds them (Matt. xxii. 29) of the infinite power of God from whom all life
comes——who created the present order of things, and who is able to re-form or
transform our beings, and to fit us for life in a new and higher sphere of
existence.

II. He points out that the doctrine of immortality is implied in the Divine
revelation to man (vers. 37, 38).—The words of Christ plainly indicate that
belief in the immortality of the soul is bound up with the very idea of religion.
It is as though He had said, “ You believe that God has spoken to men,
summoned them to faith in Him, and to a life of obedience to His will, and that
He has formed a covenant with them. How could God place Himself in so near
a relation to individual men, and ascribe to them so high a dignity, if they were
mere perishable existences ?—if they had not a being akin to His own, and destined
to immortality?” We may note the fact that the promise of blessings made
when this special relationship was established between God and Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, was not fulfilled in this life. There was nothing in their earthly lot
which distinguished them from others of their time, to whom no such promise
was given. They had hardships and trials like other men, and confessed that
that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth. In obedience to the call of
God they gave up the ties of country and kindred ; “‘ wherefore God gave them a
better country, that is an heavenly.” The promise was not that God would
reward their obedience by blessing them with wealth, length of years, tran-
quillity, or other earthly benefits, but that He would be theiz God. It was not
limited by the condition that He would be their God so long as their earthly life
would continue. And, centuries after the mortal bodies of these patriarchs had
mouldered into dust, God spoke to Moses of His covenant with them (which was


530


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XX.


also their covenant with Him), as still existing, and of them, therefore, as in
possession of that heavenly and eternal inheritance after which they had longed.
‘The Sadducees had probably supposed that the words simply meant, ‘‘I am the
God in whom Abraham, Isaac and Jacob trusted.” Yet to what had their trust
come, if there were no resurrection? To death and nothingness, and an ever-
lasting silence, and a land of darkness, after a life so full of trials that the last
of these patriarchs had described it as a pilgrimage of few and evil years.
Though we may never at any time cherish doubts concerning the facts of a resurrec-
tion and of the immortality of the soul, as these Sadducees did, we may derive
spiritual strength and consolation from these words of Christ, especially from the
way in which He associates these doctrines with God’s mercy and condescension.
He does not merely assert that, from the constitution of our nature, we are
immortal, or that, from His own personal knowledge of the unseen world, He can
assure us of the fact, but He points out that it is necessarily implied in the
communion of the believer with His God. God has come near to us, and called
us to love Him, and to be conformed to His will; if we obey Him, He takes us
into His keeping, and makes us partakers of His own nature. The truth, as
Christ expounds it, is not merely calculated to satisfy an intellectual curiosity
which only few may feel, but to allay those doubts and fears concerning the
future which, from time to time, trouble the hearts and consciences of all—not
merely to assure us that there is a future world, but that it will be well ‘here
with all those who trust in God. He knows His own, each by name; His
covenant is with each of them personally, it is an eternal bond between Him and
them, and is a sure pledge of their highest welfare.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 37—A0.


Vers. 27-33. The Question of The
Sadducees: designed (1) to set forth
the unreasonableness of the popular
faith, and (2) as an apology for their
own unbelief. Yet propounded in a
somewhat frivolous and _ sarcastic
spirit.


Vers. 34-36. The Reply of Christ.

I. The conditions of life in the
world to come are absolutely different
from those of the present world.

II. Death being abolished, marriage,
which was instituted in order to pre-
serve the race from extinction, will
come to an end.


Ver. 36. “ Children of God.”—Lit.,
“sons of God.” On earth men are
sons one of another; but there each
one will receive his new body from
God Himself, by an immediate Divine
action, so that, as among the angels,
there will be no relation of filiation ;
hence the latter are all called ‘the
sons of God.”—Godet.


Ver. 37. “ Now that the dead are
raised.” —Christ does not remain satis-
fied with having triumphed over His
opponents, but, knowing they are
entangled in error, adds to His reply
a further word of enlightenment.


“God of Abraham,” etc.—A_ two-
fold relation :—

J. That by which God takes Abra-
ham under His especial care.

II. That by which Abraham makes
God the only object of his worship
and his sole refuge.


Ver. 38. “ Live unto Him.”—T.e., in
relation with Him. The ties between
them and men on the earth are broken,
but they live in communion with God.


The God of the Living.—Our Lord’s
refutation of the Sadducees’ question
lay—

I. In exposing their ignorance of
the heavenly nature.—Spiritual bodies
are angelic ; their relationship is that


531


CHAP. XX,


mT ae ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





of brothers and sisters in a great
family.

II. God’s words through Moses
imply the continued life in the un-
seen.—That which is dead cannot
realise or do its part to God, neither
can God do His part to it. The
“dead” really live. And life implies
union of soul and body. Death seems
division, but to God it is not really so.
The “ dead” body is in some calculable
relation to the departed spirit, and they
will come together again.

III. What are the consequences of
Christ’s teaching ?—1. As regards the
body. In heaven’s language the body
never really dies. Do not despise the
body. You may long for its renewal.
But meanwhile honour, reverence, use


“lives.” Nearer to the fountain of
life, drinking in more of its living
waters.

IV. Who, then, are the dead ?—
Those who, in life, are living separate
from their own souls. Awful words !
Not considering their soul, not loving
their soul, soulless. And so both soul
and body are separate from God.
These are the truly dead.—Vaughan.


Vers. 39, 40. “ Thow hast well said.”
—On hearing this prompt and sublime
reply, the scribes, who had sought in
vain for that which Jesus had with
such ease brought to light, could not
refrain from expressions of joy and
surprise; and as they saw that every
snare laid for Him only brought His


well, the body. 2. As respects the
spirit. It is not dormant. It, too,


wisdom into clearer relief, they aban:
doned this mode of attack.—Godet.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 41—47.


A Warning against False Guides.—The attempts to check our Lord’s activity,
to betray Him into the expression of an opinion which might have been used
against Him, and to cast ridicule upon His teaching, having failed, His adver-
saries withdrew from the contest. But He was not satisfied with having
main‘ained His ground against them: He now carried the war into His enemies’
quarters.

I. He exposed the incompetency of the scribes and Pharisees as teachers
(vers. 41-44),—They prided themselves on their skill in expounding and inter-
preting the Word of God, and He drew their attention to one of the most
famous of the Messianic prophecies in the Old Testament, and asked them to
solve the difficulty which; according to their principles of interpretation, it
contained. Their dead monotheism had blinded them to the intimations given
in Scripture of the Divine dignity of the Messiah, and consequently they could
return no answer to the question, “ How could David apply the term ‘ Lord’ to
one who was to be descended from him?” Yet the question was not asked
merely in order to show that the Word of God contained passages which they
could not explain. It was also calculated to stir them up to profounder reflec-
tion upon a truth which they had not fairly faced, and to remove one of their
principal grounds of objection to the claims He made. For frequently in the
course of His ministry they had protested against His assumption of Divine
attributes and prerogatives. Their obstinate silence, however, when confronted
with the fact that Divine dignity was ascribed in Scripture to the Messiah, clearly
proved that deeply rooted prejudices filled their minds, and that, therefore, they
were incapacitated for acting as teachers of spiritual truths.

II. He upbraids them with the moral corruption of their lives (ver. 45-47),—
He judged it necessary to set the people on their guard against those whose
religion was only a cloak for the worst vices, and who took advantage of the
reverence which the simple-minded naturally have for all who wear the garb of
piety, to deceive and defraud them. Hypocrisy, pride, and covetousness, are the
three charges He makes against them, They affect a piety of the mast ex-


532


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XX.





aggerated type, in order to conceal the real depravity of their characters. They
are consumed with a desire to secure the applause of their fellows, instead of
being any help or blessing to them. And, worst of all, they plunder the property
of those whom they delude with their religious professions. The picture thus
drawn reminds us of the ecclesiastical abuses in the worst time of the Middle
Ages ; but traces, at any rate, of the same vices will still be found. People are
still so easily deluded by a profession of piety that it is a wonder that hypocrites
are not even more numerous than they are. Popularity and notoriety are still
too often sought after by ministers of religion; and silly women are still so
inclined to run after those who profess an exaggerated picty that one cannot be
surprised at seeing hypocrites and impostors occasionally flourishing at their
expense.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 41—47.


Vers. 41-44. Christ's First and His
last Visit to The Temple.—Immeasurable
is the contrast between the first and the
last visit of our Lord to the Temple.
The less may we leave unnoticed that
the boy Jesus, who, once, by his ques-
tions, threw the teachers in Israel
into astonishment, and by His answers
often made them suddenly dumb, and
the Messiah, who often, on the final
day, both with questions and with
answers, nobly maintains the field,
exhibit really one and the same cha-
racter. The Divine Sonship then pre-
saged is now distinctly known.—Van
Costerzee.


Deeper Truths Unveiled.—Our Lord’s
question does not, by the passage re-
ferred to, solve any difficulty, but rather
throws out a difficulty which might
arrest the attention of a scribe desirous
to know the truth, such as would lead
him to see there was something far
higher and more mysterious about the
Messiah than he supposed. Our Lord’s
words were a clue by which faith might
apprehend the secret nature of the
kingdom. To reason they proved no-
thing; but to faith they opened lofty
views of the Divine economy in the
‘gospel, as far surpassing anything
which reason could have inferred, or
imagination could conceive, as heaven
is above earth.— Williams.


The Present and The Future.
I. Surrounded by enemies, victorious
over enemies—those whom He has now


confuted to be suppressed, if still im-
penitent, by His almighty power.

IJ. Enthroned in the hearts of a
few disciples, but to be exalted to
God’s right hand, and have all au-
thority in heaven and earth.


The Divine Nature of Christ.

J. Revealed to David.

II. Concealed from
Pharisees.

III. Brought to light by Christ
Himeelf.

IV. Accepted by His disciples.

Cf. Rev. xxii. 16—Christ the off- |
spring of David and yet the root
from which David sprang; and John
viii. 58—the Son of Abraham, and yet
before Abraham; also Rom. i. 3—born °
of the race of David, ‘‘ according to the


flesh.”


Mysteries Revealed to Faith and Love.
—Scripture contains mysteries which
can never be solved by the wise and
understanding, but which are revealed
to those who love and obey Christ, and
to them alone.


seribes and


Vers. 45-47. I. Imposition practised
upon society in general.

II. Usurpation of places of honour
in synagogues.

III. Self-seeking ambition in social
life.

IV. Making religion and philan-
thropy a cloak for the grossest frauds.


Ver. 45. “In the audience of all the
people.”—The minds of scribes and


533


CHAP. XXI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,





Pharisees were hardened against Christ:
the hearts of the people were recep-
tive of His word. To them, there-
fore, He addresses a word of warning
against blind devotion to unworthy
leaders.


Ver. 46. ‘‘ Beware of the scribes.” —
Christ dwells upon the external guise
of these self-appointed guides and


Ver. 47. “Devour widows’ houses.” —
J.e., either extort large sums of money
from them, under some religious pre-
text, or take advantage of their posi-
tion as directors of consciences to
enjoy sumptuous feasts in the houses
of their victims.

Cf. 2 Tim. ii. 6. “ Pretenders to
holiness practise most upon women,
who are less apt than men to see


rulers, as an indication of their inward
character: ‘by their fruits ye shall
know them.”


through their hypocrisy, and are easily
inclined to love them on the ground of
religion ” (Chrysostom).


CHAPTER XXI.
CRITTCAL NOLL S.


Ver. 1. Looked up.—From the parallel passage in Mark, xii. 41 we learn that our Lord had
taken his seat in the court of the women, where were the chests for containing gifts and
offerings to the Temple. These chests were thirteen in number, and had trumpet-shaped
mouths for receiving the money. On the chests were labels specifying the purposes to which
the money was to be applied.

Ver. 2. Saw also.—Omit “also”; omitted in R.V. Poor widow.—The word “ poor” is em-
phatic ; almost equivalent to “beggar.” Two mites.—The mite was the smallest Jewish coin,
about equal to a tenth of an English penny.

Ver. 3. More than they all._—The estimate being formed, not on the amount given, but on
the amount remaining after the gift; or, in other words, on the quality of the gift and not
on its quantity.

Ver. 4. Of their abundance.—Rather, “ of their superfluity ’(R.V.). A sharp antithesis to
the destitution of the widow. All the living.—Lit. ‘‘life”—7.e., means of subsistence.
“Yet the word seems chosen expressly to indicate entire devotion of herself, her life, as well
as livelihood, to God’s service” (Speaker's Commentary).

Ver. 5, Gifts.—Rather, sacred “offerings” (R.V.). “Such as the golden chain of Agrippa;
gifts of Ptolemy Philadelphus, Augustus, Helen of Adiabene, and crowns, shields, goblets,
etc.; the golden vine, with its vast clusters, given by Herod” (Farrar),

Ver. 7. And they asked Him.—St. Mark tells us (xiii. 3) that the questioners were the
apostles Peter, John, James and Andrew. The discourse that follows is related by the two
first evangelists as having been uttered on the Mount of Olives. St. Luke does not mention
the place, and but for the parallel reports of the discourse we might have supposed that it
was given in the Temple. There is, however, a break after ver. 7, which agrees with the
change of place. We are, therefore, to understand that the opening incident took place in
the Temple, and that the discourse was spoken in the evening, on the Mount of Olives (see
ver. 37).

Ver. 8. Many shall come.—There are no distinct historical records of such false Christs
appearing before the fall of Jerusalem ; but no doubt there were such. And the time.—J.e.,
special time, crisis. These are the words of false Christs, exciting the minds of men and
leading to expect some extraordinary event as on the point of happening.

Ver. 9. Wars.—War against the Jews was threatened by Caligula, Claudius and Nero.
Commotions,—“ There were serious disturbances (1) at Alexandria, in which the Jews as a
nation were the special objects of persecution; (2) at Seleucia about the same time, in which
more than fifty thousand Jews were killed; (3) at Iamnia, near Joppa” (Alford). Not by
and by.—Rather, ‘‘ not immediately’’ (R.V.).

Ver. 11. Great earthquakes.—Alford gives a list of earthquakes that took place between
the time of this prophecy and the fall of Jerusalem: in Crete, A.D. 46 or 47; in Rome, A.D. 51;
at Apamea in Phrygia, A.D. 53; at Laodicza in Phrygia, A.D. 60; and one in Campania.
Famines and pestilences.—Generally occurring together, One such famine is mentioned in


534


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XXI.





Acts xi. 28, happening in A.p. 49. Suetonius, Tacitus, and Josephus tell of others as taking
place within this period. Fearful sights.—‘‘ Among these would be the ‘Abomination of
Desolation,’ which seems best to correspond with the orgies of the Zealots, which drove all
worshippers in horror from the Temple. Such, too, would be the rumour of monstrous births ;
the cry, ‘ Woe, woe!’ for seven and a half years of the peasant Jesus, son of Hanan ; the voice
and sound of departing guardian-angels, and the sudden opening of the Temple-gate, which
required twenty men to move it (Josephus, Tacitus, passim)” (Farrar). Signs from heaven.
—tThe same historians speak of a comet shaped like a sword, and of the appearance of armies
fighting with each other in the clouds.

_ Net 13. Turn to you for a testimony.—J.e., give you an opportunity of testifying for your

ord.

Ver. 16. Some of you.—Certainly two of the apostles who had put the question to Christ,
perhaps all of them, died violent deaths.

Ver. 17. Hated of all men.—Cf. Acts xxviii. 22.

Ver. 18. Not a hair.—From a comparison of this with ver. 16 we see that the promise is a
spiritual one: no real harm come to you. In Acts xxvii. 34 the promise is a literal one.

Ver. 19. In patience, etc.—Rather, “in your patience ye shall win your souls” (R.V.) ; or,
“by your endurance of all these things ye shall acquire your souls ;” it is God’s appointed
way by which you will win salvation.

Ver, 21. Flee to the mountains.—It is recorded by Eusebius that the Christians left Judwa
before the siege of Jerusalem, and took refuge in Pella, in the north of Perea. Probably
the “ oracular warning,” which is said to have occasioned this action, was in this passage of
the Gospel. In the midst of it.—Rather, “of her” (R.V.)—<.e., Jerusalem. In the countries.
—Rather, “in the country ”(h.V.), or “in the fields.”

Ver. 22. Days of vengeance.—A reference, perhaps, to xviii. 8.

Ver. 23. Woe unto them.—The word “ woe” here, contrary to the general rule, seems to
express simply pity for those in that condition.

Ver. 24. They shall fall, etc.—TZ.e., this people. Josephus says the slain in the war with
the Romans amounted to 1,100,000, and that 97,000 were sold into slavery, mostly to Egypt
and the provinces. Trodden down of the Gentiles—“ All sorts of Gentiles—Romans, Saracens,
Persians, Franks, Norsemen, Turks—have ‘trodden down’ Jerusalem since then” (furrar').
Times of the Gentiles.—J.e., fixed times, seasons, or opportunities, until the acceptance or
rejection of the gospel by the Gentiles.

Ver, 25. Signs in the sun, etc.—Omit the article before sun, moon, and stars; omitted in
R.V. The signs seem to be metaphorical of the vicissitudes of nations and the downfall of
thrones,

Ver. 26. Men’s hearts failing.—Rather, “men fainting” (R.V.). The earth.—The word
implies ‘‘the habitable world.” The powers of heaven.—The stars, the Host of Heaven.

Ver. 28. Your redemption.—J.c., the completion of it by Christ’s appearing.

Ver. 32. This generation.—The word so translated means both those living at a certain
time and also a race: in the former sense the prophecy found fulfilment in the destruction
of Jerusalem, forty years later; in the latter sense it implies that the Jewish race will con-
continue till the end of all things.

Ver. 34. Surfeiting.—The headache and dizziness resulting from drunkenness. In the
three classes of danger—“ surfeiting, drunkenness, and cares of this life”—we have results
of past debauchery, present incapacitation for attending to spiritual interests, and anxiety
concerning the future.

Ver. 35. As a snare.—This should be connected with ver. 34: “come on you suddenly as a
snare;”soin R.V. That dwell.—Lit. “that sit” securely.

Ver. 36. Accounted worthy.—A better reading is “prevail ”—~“ that ye may prevail to
escape” (R.V.)—i.e., be in a condition to escape. :

Ver. 36. And to stand.—Lit. “to be set ”—7.¢., by the angels.

Ver. 37. And in the day time.—‘“ And every day” (R.V.). “The notice is retrospective,
applying to Palm Sunday and the Monday and Tuesday in Passion Week. After Tuesday
evening He never entered the Temple again. Wednesday and Thursday were spent in
absolute and unrecorded retirement, perhaps with His disciples in the house at Bethany,
until Thursday evening, when He went into Jerusalem again for the Last Supper” (Farrar).
Abode in the mount.—Perhaps bivouacked in the open air.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—6.


Self-sacrifice.—This little incident occupies a striking place in the Gospel
records. Jesus has just uttered woe after woe upon His hypocritical and
malignant foes, and is about to impart to His disciples a revelation of dread
events yet to come—the overthrow of the Jewish people, the destruction of the


935


ell oe 7


CHAP. XXI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


Temple, and startling phenomena that would usher in His Second Coming.
Between His burning words of denunciation and the awe-inspiring disclosures
He makes to His disciples, comes this genial appreciation of a deed of self-sacrifice
and love, done by a poor and obscure worshipper as she passed out of the house
of God. As if to show that no feelings of personal anger mingled with His
righteous anger, and that, though his heart was sad, His mind was unruffled, He
sat down as an unoccupied spectator in the court of the Temple, and, with gentle
voice and mien, commented upon the good deed which had come under His
observation. We may note His approval of the principle that self-sacrifice is an
essential part of true worship, and the commendation He bestowed upon the
action of this poor widow.

I. Self-sacrifice an essential part of true worship.—The fact that provision
was made in the Temple for gifts and offerings to be presented by worshippers as
they retired, is very significant. It teaches that all worship of God should tend
towards and end in self-sacrifice. We come to church to worship God—to join
with the saints upon earth, and with the angels and the redeemed in heaven, in
adoring the Divine majesty and holiness. This is our reasonable service, and by
it our lives are sanctified. We humble ourselves before Him who is of purer


eyes than to behold evil; in His presence we disclose our thoughts, we acknow-
ledge our transgressions and secret faults, and seek to exhibit that contrition
that will justify forgiveness. We contemplate the mercy God has revealed,
adore the Saviour whom He has sent, rejoice in the thought of the Divine com-
passion, and give expression to our gratitude in hymns of praise. This is the
worship which God seeks; it is the hu-y incense which is acceptable to Him:
but this worship should issue in self-sacrifice. Sacrifice is the one main idea in
every form of religion known to man. Horrible as many of the forms of sacri-
fice have been, and are, among heathen races, yet in all cases they proclaim the
same great truth, that man owes himself and all he has toGod. And Christianity,
above all other religions, sets forth this truth. What is the cross but the
symbol of the greatest of all deeds of self-sacrifice—the complete surrender of a
life for the glory of God and the good of mankind? What does it teach but that
we belong altogether to God, and should yield ourselves to Him? This is how
the holy apostles conceive of religion. In all their writings they remind us that
we are not our own, but His, and that we should offer ourselves to Him as a
living sacrifice, holy and acceptable.

II. The commendation bestowed upon the poor widow.—Why were the two
mites of greater value than all the geld and silver which others cast in lavishly ?
Because, trifling though they were in intrinsic value, they were the sign of a
complete and unreserved sacrifice of the whole being to God. She gave herself ;
the tiny bits of copper were but the symbol of this higher, nobler offering.
This it was that threw into insignificance all the treasures that enriched the
coffers of the Temple, and even the gifts with which wealthy devotees had adorned
the building and made it the pride of the nation. Others gave something they
could afford to spare—gave of their superfluity—and in this way gave less than
she did. So that it is not a question of giving much or little of our property to
a good cause, but of discovering by the light of this passage of Scripture whether
we are offering to God a complete sacrifice of ourselves, or are substituting for it
something which we can afford to part with, but which in comparison with our-
selves has no value. Anything short of the gift of our all to God is unacceptable
to Him. ‘Take the case of those who would fain dedicate only part of the life,
of the affections, of the interests, to His service. The young man, let us say,
plans out the sort of life he would like to lead; he forms schemes of self-
advancement, happiness, and self-gratification, from which thoughts of God are
excluded. Religion is kept, as it were, in reserve, to be a resource and a consola-


536


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


ee ee ee ee


CHAP. XXI.


tion, when all the pleasures of life are exhausted, and the time of old age,
weakness, and disappointment, has come. When the fortune is made, and success
is won, there will be leisure for heavenly things. Is not this professing to give
‘the superfluity and to retain the essential part? And yet we cannot be sure of
retaining it, for at any moment death may seize the whole. We have the word
of Christ to assure us that we do not lose what we give to God, but lay up for
ourselves a treasure in heaven, which will never know diminution, but be an
abiding possession. The life which is consecrated to God is not robbed of its
delights—nay, it alone is the happy life; it multiplies present enjoyments a
hundredfold, and secures for us the crown of eternal blessedness. But if we
choose to keep all for ourselves, we are sure of losing it. ‘She cast in all the
living that she had.” “ How foolish of her!” some will say. Yes; it has been
by folly like this, by lavish and unselfish lovo, that the world has been redeemed.
Her action remains as a cutting robulke of the selfish, worldly spirit, and of that
mean and calculating prudence which even the world despises. For if there are
few in the present age who have imitated her literal impoverishment of herself
for the sake of religion, there are many who havo followed a like course for the
sake of country. There are many who havo, from patriotic motives, forfeited
property, happiness, and even reputation, and are willing to give up their lives for
their country’s sake. And what is admirable in the lower sphere is surely not
ridiculous in the higher. It is, then, with something like a reproachful pang of
conscience that we should listen to the commendation bestowed on this poor widow :
“‘ She of her penury hath cast in all the living that she had; she hath cast in
more than they all.” (See an interesting sermon on this text by Bernier: “ La
veuve, ow le don sans réserve.”)


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 1—6.


Vers. 1-6. The Widow's Offering and
the Stones o} the Temple.—While the
disciples were wondering at the
majestic towers and carved stone-work
as a great offering dedicated by man
to God, Christ had seen in the gift of
the poor widow an offering equally
great in the eye of Heaven. The con-
trast suggests—

I. The true measure of sacrifice.—
Not the greatness of the outward act,
but the perfectness of the inward
motive,

II. The true idea of a temple.—
The disciples saw God’s dwelling-place
in the house of stone with its Holy of
Holies and altars of sacrifice. Christ
saw it in the broken heart of the
widow.

Three practical lessons we may
learn: 1. A lesson of duty—to live to
God in small things; to dedicate our
lives to Him, even if we have no great
opportunities of service, and are vexed
by cares. 2. A lesson of encourage-
ment. Live to God in all things;


consider no sacrifice too great or too
small; do your best in everything, as
in His sight ;—and you will find Him
everywhere. 3. A lesson of warning.
The Jews had come to see God only
in the Temple at Jerusalem. As a
consequence they became formalists—
the surrender of their souls was
forgotten. And the splendid Temple
fell! So now and ever. Forget the
Divinity of all life, and the temple
of your soul will become desolate.—
Hull.


Vers. 1-4. The Eye of Christ.‘ He
beheld.” This text is full of instruc-
tion; it encourages the very humblest
to give; it thus makes giving a uni-
versal duty and privilege ; it proclaims
a searching paradox as to more and
less; and it requires us to feel that
our givings are scrutinised by Him
before whose judgment-seat we are to
stand.

I. The circumstances are instruc-
tive.


537


CHAP. XXI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





II. The scrutiny of the Saviour was
very searching.

III. This poor widow gave all she
had.—Relatively, it was a great gift.

IV. The Lord does not receive any
offering unless it is large enough to
prove self-denial on the part of the
giver.—The money in itself is valucless
to God, but is of value as representing
thankfulness, self-denial, prayer, and
trust.— Symington.


_Hypocrisy and Piety.

I. Some pretended to love God.—
They did their good works, their
“‘righteousness,” to be seen of men.
They loved themselves, their reputa-
tion—not God.

II. One really loved God. — She
gave all she had. She had nothing
left. There was no_ ostentation.
There would have been condemnation
had others known that all she gave
was “two mites.” Really, however,
others only gave a little, this worshipper
gave all, out of grateful love to God.

III. What pleases God.—Not out-
side show, not display of goodness, not
ostentatious giving of much. But love,
gratitude, humility, self-sacrifice —
these are pleasing in God’s sight. We
can please God in little, if that little is
our all.— ‘“ Sunday School Chronicle.”


Heartiness in Action.—Giving is one
form of action for God. What is the
aspect which many of the Lord’s people
present to the world in this particular?
Where is their heartiness in it? How
much is there of form, and how little of
decided action! Many who are steeped
in poverty are rich indeed in action.
The poor widow is a case in point.

I. She was of no account in the
world’s estimation.

II. She was of no account, so far as
man was concerned, in the Temple of
the Lord.

III. Yet she alone receives the com-
mendation of the Lord.—To Him who
seeth not as man seeth she was im-
measurably above all others.

IV. Learn that when we think we
are unobserved we are doing all


538


under the immediate eye of God.— We
too often forget that we are the ser-
vants of One whose eye is ever on us,
taking note of what we think, and
speak, and do. In all our givings we
should so perform these acts that we do
not desire them to be hidden from the
eyes of God. He who is like this poor
widow will delight in the thought that
his Lord knows all. Act, then, on all
occasions as though you wished Jesus
to look on. —Power.


“Two mites."—Just between the
woes and predictions of doom there
befel an exquisite little incident, full of
the tenderest and loveliest beauty.
Jesus was sitting over against the
treasury, watching the givers.

J. He sees who give, what they
give, why they give.

II. He is arrested by the liberal
giving of a poor widow.—He had
pleasure in what she did. He com-
mends her with an overflow of joy.
He says nothing to herself—nothing
in her hearing even; but He teaches
the disciples a lesson in the political
economy of the kingdom of heaven.

III. The money value of the offer-
ing was very small.—Probably it was
the smallest of any presented there
that day. But the relative value was
very great. She had nothing left after
giving her two mites. So this was the
greatest offering of all contributed that
day.

IV. The offering had also spiritual
value, because of what it represented.
—Men may value money for itself ; the
Lord does not. It is the heart He
cares for. Jesus would not have spoken
as He did unless her offering had ex-
pressed grateful love to God, and trust
in Him for time to come, whatever may
betide. Were the principles which
appear in this little incident to pervade
all Christian giving, the Lord’s trea-
sury would contain exactly the right
sum.—Cuwlross.


The Widow's Mites.
I. It is good to have our Lord’s
estimate of the earth’s gifts.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XXI.


———————————————— ="


IT. In the eyes of Christ, this
offering was of great price.

III. This value arose from the
motive and spirit of the giver.— Miller.


Human and Divine Estimates.—The
widow’s offering was, in the eyes of
men—

I. Less than all.—Only a farthing.
Not worth giving.

II. More than all—In Christ’s
estimate. She had given all, and left
nothing. The others had retained
much. What is Christ’s estimate of
your givings ?—W. Taylor.


I. The lively interest which Christ
takes in the smaller details of our life.

II. The special interest He takes in
the free-will offerings of His servants.

III. The mode in which He mea-
sures our offerings of money or ser-
vice.— Ibid.


Ver. 1. “‘ Looked up.”—IJ.e., turned
His attention from those who had been
listening to Him, and took note of
what was going on near at hand, where
the boxes for receiving offerings stood.


Ver. 2. “Two mites.”—She might
have kept one of them.—Bengel.


Ver. 3. “ More.” —Jesus draws atten-
tion to the moral quality of the action,
and bestows on it the praise which
vulgar minds usually reserve for liber-
ality that bulks largely in quantity.
With the two mites she gave her heart
also.


Vers. 4, 5. T. The action of the poor
widow appeals to Christ as worthy of
admiration.—As having great moral
and spiritual value.

If. The disciples admire the mag-
nificence of the Temple building.—


the preceding verses!


They are impressed with the splendour
that appeals to the senses and delights
the esthetic taste.


Ver. 4.“ Of her penury.”—I. The
loving heart counts no sacrifice too
great.

II. The gracious Redeemer despises
no gift, however small, when the
motive of the giver is pure.


A Flower in The Desert.—What a
contrast to the greed with which the
scribes and Pharisees are charged in
This incident,
which meets His notice just at this
moment, is like a flower which He sees
suddenly springing up in the desert of
official devotion, the beauty and fra-
grance of which fills His heart with
joy.—Godet.


Ver. 5. “ Adorned.’—1. Beauty of
outward semblance. 2. Yet perish-
able for lack of the indwelling spirit of
religion.


“ Gifts.” —The disciples take pleasure
in looking upon the splendid gifts,
made for the most part by heathen
princes ; they delight in them (1) be-
cause of their beauty and value, ard
(2) doubtless because they saw in them
the fulfilment of such prophetical
passages of Scripture as Ps. Ixxii,
Isa. Ix. They can scarcely fail to infer,
from Christ’s words, that a doom rests
upon the sanctuary; yet they can
searcely realise the fact, and almost
intercede for its preservation.


Ver. 6. “ Not be left one stone.” —
1. The beauty of these things will not
persuade the enemy to spare them.
2. The strength of the buildings will
not be able to resist the power of the
enemy.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses T—38.


The Great Prophecy.—The intimation so suddenly and unexpectedly given by
Jesus, that the Temple, upon which the disciples looked with such admiration, was
doomed to utter overthrow, filled their minds with a strong desire to know some-


thing of the course events would take in time to come.


The veil had been partly
539


CHAP. XXI. H OMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





lifted, and they were eager to know more than had been disclosed by this hasty
glimpse into the mysterious future. They could not disassociate the overthrow of
the Temple from the end of the world and from the second coming of their
Master, and in this discourse upon the last things, these three great events are
the chief topics, no intimation, however, being given of the precise intervals of
time that would elapse between them. In this prophetic picture time is, as it
were, annihilated, and one great series of events after another is seen looming up
in the distance with equal clearness of detail ; so that we can easily believe that
‘the impression was left upon the mind of the disciples that close upon the destrue-
tion of the Jewish state would come the end of the world, and the establishment
of the visible kingdom of Christ. All through the discourse we see that the
purpose Jesus has in view is rather to strengthen the faith of His disciples, by
forewarning them of trials and difficulties through which they would have to pass,
than to satisfy their curiosity as to the future.

I. Events immediately succeeding His departure (vers. 8-19).—He forewarns
His disciples against dangers that would especially assail them ; they would be
liable to be misled by religious pretenders, to be terrified by startling changes
and disasters, to be persecuted on account of their faith in Him, to be betrayed
by kinsfolk and friends, and to be forced in some instances to choose between
death and loyalty to their Master. Some of these dangers would be all the
greater because of the strength of their faith; others because of the weakness
of the flesh. Their firm persuasion of the fact that Christ would return to
earth would predispose them to believe rumours of His having returned; their
belief that all events are ordered by God might incline them to be hasty in
offering interpretations of the significance of great changes in human society,
or of remarkable natural phenomena. Nor are Christians in our own day free
from the risks against which Christ here warns His disciples. A feverish ex-
pectation of the return of Christ has been and is cherished by many, and leads
to an unwholesome form of religious life, and toa credulity that renders those
who cherish it an easy prey to unscrupulous pretenders. Many, too, are eager
to find in events of the present day the fulfilment of the prophecies of Scrip-
ture, and draw down contempt upon themselves and upon the studies to which
they are addicted by the glaring errors and absurdities into which they fall.
The second class of dangers of which Christ speaks are those which arise from
human weakness; the stress of persecution, the treachery of friends, and the
hatred of the world, were only too likely in some instances to put the loyalty
of His followers to a severe test. Hence He lays great emphasis upon the
special aid which He would give to those placed in such trying circumstances.
He would impart wisdom and skill that would enable them to maintain their
cause before kings and rulers, and see to it that no real loss or injury resulted
to them. They might be put to death, but not a hair of their head would
perish—their true life, their highest interests, were secure in His keeping.

II. Provision for the safety of His followers when Jerusalem should be de-
stroyed (vers. 20-24).—For some years after His departure the fate of the
Christian community seemed to be closely connected with that of the Jewish
people and religion. Christ’s followers still observed the Mosaic laws, and fre-
quented the Temple, and were largely of Jewish race. Hence when the over-
throw of the Holy City seemed at hand there was great danger that many
of the Christian population would be carried away by the fanatical delusions
of those about them, and believe that at the last moment God would inter-
vene and save the nation by a miraculous deliverance. But Christ here warns
them that at a certain period the path of duty and safety would lie in their
separating themselves from those upon whom the Divine vengeance was to
be poured out. When the Roman armies began to compass the city they must

540


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE. CHAP. XXI.


save themselves by flight; a place of refuge would be opened up for them, and
they must hasten to take advantage of it. No obscurity hangs about this part
of Christ’s prophetic discourse; the danger and the mode of deliverance are
plainly pointed out, and history records the fact that none of the Christian com-
munity perished in the destruction of Jerusalem. Nor is the fate of the nation
upon whom such dire chastisement was to be inflicted left surrounded with a
cloud of darkness. They would be overwhelmed by many disasters, and their
capital would be trodden down of the Gentiles ; but only for a time—“ until the
times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.” A gleam of hope enlightens the darkness;
though cast off, they are not cast off for ever.

III. The promise of the second coming (vers. 25-36)—In an earlier discourse
on this topie (xvii. 26-30) Jesus had described the state of carnal security in
which the world would be plunged at the time of the end. He now describes the
sudden breaking up of this security. ‘In the midst of this deep spiritual sleep
and worldly torpor extraordinary symptoms will, in a moment, usher in one of
those cosmical revolutions which our earth has more than once experienced.
Like a ship which starts at every joint before it falls to pieces, the globe which
we inhabit, and our whole solar system, undergo unwonted changes. The motive
forces, which until now have been under rule, are, asit were, freed from the laws
that govern them by some unknown power. And mankind, terrified by the
shocks which break up what had been called the solid earth, and which are the
prelude to its dissolution, pass an hour of anguish far keener than any yet
known.” In contrast with the fear and horror of the ungodly world stands the
joy of those who see in the coming of the Son of Man the advent of their
Redeemer. Their fainting spirits are revived, their hopes are crowned by the
event which fills those who are unprepared with anguish and dismay. The
practical exhortation which Jesus adds to this revelation of the future is the
necessity of constant watchfulness and prayer. Those who are His should be free
from the tyranny of the present, and should keep themselves from the vices and
follies that consume those who live only for this world. They should be on their
guard against sin, and should pray for heavenly succour to aid their own feeble
strength. So shall they be found worthy, not only to escape punishment, but to
stand accepted with the Son of Man.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES i—388.


Vers. 7-38. Last Words.

I. Last words in the Temple.

II. Warnings about the Temple.—
Its present beauty. Its approaching
fall. The premonitory signs. The
days of vengeance.

III. Warnings for ourselves, —
“ Watch and pray.”—W. Taylor.


The Prophecy of the Overthrow of
Jerusalem.

I. The circumstances in which the
prophecy came to be uttered (vers.
5-7).

i The prophecy-itself (vers. 8-27).
1. The state of the world, and the
position in which believers will be


placed, after the departure of Jesus
(vers. 8-19). 2. The destruction of
Jerusalem and of the Jewish people
(vers. 20-24). 3. The second coming of
Christ (vers, 25-27).

IIf. An exhortation to watchfulness.
(ver. 28-36).


Ver. 7. “ When shall these things be ?”
—The desire to know the future is,
within certain limits, natural and
legitimate. Christ does not here con-
demn it, but satisfies and sanctifies it.


Ver. 8. “ That ye be not deceived,” —
This gives the key-note to the whole
discourse. The purpose Christ has in


541


CHAP, XXI.


view is a practical one—to describe the
course of duty to be followed in trying
circumstances, and to supply grounds
for encouragement and motives to per-
severance.

The disciples of Christ would lie open
to this danger—

I. Because of their strong desire for
their Master’s return.

II. Because many would be carried
away by a foolish credulity.

III. Because it is difficult to resist a
strong popular movement.


Ver. 9. “ Be not terrified.”—1. You
know the worst that any of these
temporal judgments can do to you.
2. God is your refuge.

These things are (1) not accidental.
(2) They are under the control of God.
(3) They are overruled for His glory
and for the welfare of those who trust
in Him.


Vers. 10,11. “ Nation shall rise,” ete.
—The passage combines in one view
the whole of the various social and
physical crises of development in the
whole New-Testament dispensation.—
Lange.


Vers. 12-17. Evils to Be Anticipated.
—tThe disciples are to be prepared (1)
for persecution, both on the part of
the ecclesiastical and civil authorities ;
(2) for treachery on the part of kins-
folk and friends ; (3) for violent death ;
(4) for the hatred of the world.


Vers, 12-15. A Threefold Consolation.
—1. The persecution is for Christ’s sake.
2. It gives an opportunity for testifying
for Him in the most striking manner.
3. In circumstances of special danger
they receive special aid from Him.


Ver. 15. “A mouth and wisdom.”—
Ie. (1), wisdom to know what to say ;
(2) ability to say it as it should be
said.


Ver. 16. “Ye shall be betrayed.”—
The fate which Christ Himself was so
soon to meet would fall to the lot of


542


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


some of His disciples in the ages to
come. The disunions prophesied in
ii. 34, xii. 53, would lead to this un-
natural cruelty — parents, brethren,
kinsfolk and friends turning against
the followers of Christ and betraying
them into the hands of enemies.


Ver. 17. “ Hated by all men.”—This
prophetic word found fulfilment even
in the first period of the Church. Cf.
Rom. viii. 35-37; 1 Cor. iv. 9, 10;
2 Cor. xi. 23-29; Heb. x. 32-34.


Vers. 18, 19. Security Promised.

I. Negatively : no real harm should
befall them.

II. Positively : by their perseverance
in the midst of all these persecutions,
they should preserve their souls.


Ver. 18. “ Not an hair . . . perish.”
—A figurative expression, which implies
(1) that notice would be taken of
every loss incurred for the sake of
Christ; (2) that the cause would be
well worth all losses undergone for it ;
(3) that an ample recompense would be
given.


“ Not an hair... perish.”—1. Not
without the special providence of God.
2. Not without recompense. 3. Not
before the time.


Ver. 19. “Jn your patience.” —The
worldly method of keeping possession
of life is by repelling force with force.
Not so is it to be with the disciples of
Christ. They find protection by en-
durance, and not by violence; thus
they preserve the true life, whatever
else they may lose.


Ver. 20. “The desolation thereof is
nigh.” —I.e., that the siege would not
be raised. The Jews, in their obstinacy,
believed, even to the last, that the siege
would be raised, and that supernatural |
deliverance would come.


Ver. 21. “ Depart out.”—I.e., from
the city. This warning was very
necessary, for after the rebels had for


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XXI.


ee ee eee


some time established themselves in
the holy place, they would not allow
any to quit the city.—(Josephus, B. J.,
v. 12).


Ver. 22. “* Vengeance.” —J.e., of God’s
vengeance, not of man’s. Even Titus
seems to have been conscious that he
was a minister of Divine retribution.


Ver. 23. “ Them that are with child,”
ete.—An ejaculation of compassion for
those who (1) are unable to protect
themselves; and (2) see those whom
they love dearest exposed to great
danger.


Ver. 24. The Ruin of The Jewish
People.—1. Multitudes slain with the
sword, 2. Multitudes carried captive.
3. Their beautiful city laid waste by
the Gentiles.


Vers. 25-36. The Second Coming.
I. The preceding terrors.
II. The hope and safety of believers.
III. The certainty of it.
IV. The way to prepare for it.—
W. Taylor.


Ver. 25. “ Signs in the sun,” etc.—


Different signs from those spoken of in
ver. 11. The language is that of the
Hebrew prophets: Amos viii. 9;
Joel ii, 30, 31; Ezek. xxxii. 7, 8.
Cf. also Rev. vi. 12-14. ‘‘ How far this
prophecy will be literally fulfilled can-
not be determined. If the whole
passage be taken figuratively, then a
remarkable commotion in the sea of
nations is predicted, but it may refer
to physical perturbations ushering in
the new earth. The perturbations,
whether physical or not, will be por-
tentous, producing general anxiety and
despair in view of the further terror
these events presage. This is evident
from ver. 26.—“Popular Commentary.”


Ver. 26. “ For fear,” etce.—TI.e., both
(1) fear on account of the present
state of matters, and (2) an anticipation
of worse things to come.


-pectation.


Ver. 27. The Last Judgment.—
Christ’s second coming in point of time
is first in the order of spiritual in-
struction. The study of it prepares us
for that of the first coming.

I. Our Lord is referring to a future
event. — The nearer coming at the
destruction of Jerusalem is a shadow
of the more remote and more awful
Advent. The solemn words of Christ
cannot be exhausted by a reference to
the destruction of the Holy City. That,
and every other judgment, is a fore-
cast of the last day.

II. It is difficult to realise the cer-
tainty of the last judgment.

III. What will be the significance
of that great event to each of us ?—
We shall see Jesus Christ as He is. We
shall know ourselves as never before.
The ‘‘ vain things” of earth and time
will not avail us then. The materials
for the judgment are getting ready.
Only, He who is to judge us then,
offers to save us now. There is time
to take such fast hold upon His cross,
as to look forward without terror to
standing before His throne.—Ziddon.


“The Son of Man coming.”—This
coming is evidently that referred to in
1 Thess, iv. 16, at the first resurrection
(Rev. xx. 5, 6); a comparison with
Rev. xix. I1f. suggests that this
advent precedes the millennium, but
upon that point there has been much
dispute. The safest opinion is that a
personal coming of Christ is here meant,
to take place after the times of the
Gentiles are fulfilled, and to be pre-
ceded by great catastrophes.—Popular
Commentary.


Ver. 28. ‘* Look up.”—The word
means to raise one’s self from a stoop-
ing posture, and is here applied to those
previously bowed under tribulations.
The idea of joy and hope is, of course,
implied, as in the other phrase, “ Lift
up your heads”—which, however,
suggests more strongly the idea of ex-
That which terrifies the
world (the near approach of Christ), is
hailed with delight by the Christian.


543


iy
‘ee iv,


\


CHAP. XXI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


Vers. 29-33. The Parable of The Trees.
—The budding forth of trees in spring
shows that the coming of summer is
(1) sure and (2) near at hand. So,
too, the signs specified would indicate
that the kingdom of God was near at
hand, and that the prophecy of Christ
would surely be fulfilled.


Ver. 29. “The fig-tree.”—Perhaps
our Lord speaks here especially of a
fig-tree, because this had served Him
so frequently as a type of the Jewish
people (Mark xi. 12-14 ; Luke xiii. 6-9).


Ver. 30. “Know of your own
selves.” —J.e., it is not necessary to in-
form you; the sight of the buds upon
the trees convey their own message that
summer is at hand.


Ver. 31. “The kingdom of God.”
—TI.e., as a kingdom of glory; the
final establishment of the reign of
Christ.


Ver. 32. “This generation shall not
pass.’—The reign of Christ over the
Church militant on earth may, in one
sense, be regarded as beginning with
the destruction of Jerusalem. Then
the old economy passed completely
away, and Christ was made manifest
to mankind as the only One who had
fulfilled the Messianic prophecies of the
past, and as the sole Mediator between
God and man.


Ver. 33. “ Heaven and earth shall
pass away.”—After the discourse had
risen to this height, there would ensue
a dreary anti-climax, if we were to
recognise in these words only a figura-
tive description of the destruction of
the Jewish state. Our Lord points
evidently to the destruction of the
earthly economy, which shall be fol-
lowed by the appearance of a new
heaven and a new earth (2 Pet. iii. 8-14),
and gives assurance therewith that
even then, when an entirely new order
of things shall have come in, His words,


544





in particular the promises of His com-—
ing, then first fully understood and
fulfilled, would not cease to remain
words of life for all His own.—Van
Oosterzee.


“ My words shall not pass away.” —
The temple of the visible universe, an
edifice much more firmly based than
that which the disciples would fain
have Jesus admire, is, for all that, less
enduring than the warnings and
promises of the Master who speaks to
them.—Godet.


Ver. 34. “ Take heed.” —Two forms of
danger.

I. Sensuality.—Which stupifies the
conscience and hardens the heart.

II. Worldly cares.—Which absorb
the attention, and divert it from
spiritual things.


Ver. 35. “As a snare.”—l. Will
come unexpectedly. 2. Will hold them
fast for destruction.


Ver. 36. “ Watch ye therefore.”

I- The aim to be kept in view.—
1. To escape punishment, and (2) to
attain reward.

II. The means to be used.—l.
Watchfulness—to be on guard against
sin and attentive to duty,and (2) prayer
—habitual communion with God.


“To stand before the Son of Man.” —
1. To be acquitted by Him as our
Judge. 2. To attend on Him as our
Lord—to minister to Him and serve
Him day and night in His temple.


Ver. 37. “ He was teaching.”

I. The labours of the day.—He
taught constantly in the Temple (1) in
spite of opposition ; (2) though He knew
that the city and nation were devoted
to destruction. Some might be per-
suaded to flee from the wrath to
come.

II. The peaceful nights. — Partly
spent, perhaps, in the society of friends,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XXII.
rec ean eT wc See ee ee


and in communion with God—the noise eagerness to hear Him. 2. The in-

and tumult of the city left behind. terest aroused in simple, unprejudiced

minds afforded a greater testimony to

Ver. 38. “Came early in the the worth of His teaching than the

morning.” —1. The zeal of Christ in sullen opposition and dislike of those
teaching awakened in many a special in authority afforded against it.








CHAPTER XXII.
CRITICAL NOTES.


VER. 1 Feast of unleavened bread.—Which lasted for a week. Called the Passover.—An
explanation for Gentile readers. Strictly speaking, it was the 15th Nisan, and not the whole
week, that was the Passover, “ the great day of tue feast.”

Ver. 2. Chief priests, etc.—The Pharisees now drop out of the foreground. Those now most
active against Christ were the Sadducean party. Sought.—This corresponds to the calling
of the council and the deiiberation spoken of in John xi. 47. For they feared.—Before this
clause such words as “ but not on the feast day” are to be understood.

Ver. 3. Then entered Satan.—Je., put it into the heart of Judas to betray Christ. The
phrase is used in John xiii, 27, with greater emphasis than here, to describe the final
abandonment of Judas to his wicked purpose.

Ver. 4, Captains.—JZ.c., of the Temple (see ver. 52). These were commanders of the body
of Levites who kept guard in the Temple. They were, strictly speaking, civil and not
military officers. One of them had the special title “captain of the Temple” (cf.
Acts v. 26, iv. 1). Betray Him.—Rather “deliver Him” (R.V.).

Ver. 5. Covenanted.—Tc., agreed to pay. The actual payment was evidently made at a
later meeting, when the definite plan of betrayal was fixed upon, Money.—St. Luke does
not state the amount, perhaps because the thirty pieces of silver foretold in prophecy would
not have significance for a Gentile reader.

Ver. 6, In the absence of the multitude.—Or perhaps “ without tumult” (R.V. margin).

Ver. 7. The day of unleavened bread.—Strictly speaking, the first day of unleavened bread
was the 15th Nisan (7.¢., beginning from the evening of the 14th), when the paschal lamb
was killed. But the day here spoken of was evidently the 14th, as the Passover was not yet
slain. On this day it was usual, though not necessary, to abstain from leaven; and by
including it the feast was sometimes reckoned as lasting eight days (Josephus, Anz¢., II. xv. 1).
If, then, we take the 14th day at its legal beginning (i.¢., after sunset on the 13th), it is
possible that our Lord and His apostles celebrated the Passover a day before the usual time.
This would harmonise the narrative of the synoptical Gospels with that of St. John. The
former speak most definitely of the Passover being celebrated by our Lord, and the latter as
definitely of the Passover as still to be observed by the Jews. The whole question is an
extremely difficult and perplexing one, but probably the above is the simplest solution of i
The passover.—Z.¢., the paschal lamb. Killed.—Rather, “sacrificed” (R.V.).

Ver. 8. Peter and John.—“ It was a solemn message, and for it were chosen the two chief
apostles” (Alford).

Ver. 10. A man.—The secrecy with which the place of celebration was pointed out was
probably occasioned by a desire to prevent Judas being acquainted beforehand with it. It
would seem that Christ Himself had, without His disciples’ knowledge, made arrangements,
perbaps with one friendly to Him, for celebrating the feast in hishouse. Bearing a pitcher.—
Probably the significance of this sign is to be explained by the fact that it was the custom
for the head of a family to draw a pitcher of pure water for kneading the unleavened bread.


It was a formal piece of ritual .
Ver. 11. Goodman.—Ze., as in xii. 39, the paterfamilias. Guest-chamber.—The same word


which is translated “inn” (ii. 7). ;
Ver. 14. The hour.—Je., appointed for the paschal supper. Sat down.—J.e., reclined


NN 545


cHaPp. xxu. MHOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





the custom of standing at the paschal feast having been long given up by the Jews,
Twelve apostles—Omit “twelve”; omitted in R.V. Probably the word is taken from
Matt. xxvi. 20 ; Mark xiv. 17.

Ver. 15. With desire, etc.—A Hebraism for “I have earnestly desired.”

Ver. 16. I will not any more, etc.—“ He should hold no more social converse with them
on earth up to the period when the work of redemption by His blood (that sacrifice of which
the Passover was the type) should be accomplished, and the kingdom of God established ”
(Bloomfield).

Ver. 17. And He took—Rather “and He received a cup” (R.V.)—.e., the first cup of the
Passover-meal, of which Christ evidently drank. Gave thanks.—As was usual before
partaking of this cup. The formula of thanksgiving was, “Blessed be Thou, O Lord our
God, who hast created the fruit of the vine.” To this Christ evidently alludes in ver. 18.

Ver. 19. Which is given for you.—Tiis clause is not found in the parallel passages in
St. Matthew and St. Mark. In some MSS. tae phrase that corresponds to it in 1 Cor. xi. 24
is “ which is broken for you.” In the R.V. this last is relegated to the margin, and the text
is, “ which is for you”—which seems a mutilated sentence. New Testament.—R.V. “new
covenant.” The word means both a will and an agreement. In the new relation between
God and man there is both an adsoiute element (will), and a conditional (covenant).

Ver. 21. Him that betrayeth.—If the order of events be here given, it is clear that Judas
partook of the last supper.

Ver. 22. Determined.—Fixed by the counsel of God (cf. Acts ii. 23, iv. 27, 28;
Rev. xiii. 8).

Ver. 24. A strife among them.—Perhaps this is related out of its order, and is to ! e under-
stood as having occurred at the beginning of the supper, when Christ practically r buked it
by washing the disciples’ feet (John xiii. 4 /f.), to which action He here alludes in ver, 27.

Ver. 25. Gentiles.—A hint that the spirit animating the disciples was heathenish in its
character. Benefactors.—A title taken by some kings—e.g., Ptolemy Huergetes (the word
here used).

Ver, 26. Greatest.—R.V. “the greater.”

Ver. 28. Have continued.—Words specially appropriate to the present time, when the end
of the time of trial was at hand. Temptations.—Or “trials” (cf. James i. 2, 3).

Ver. 30. Sit on thrones.—Perhaps the word “ twelve ” used in Matt. xix. 28 is here purposely
omitted.

Ver. 31, Simon, Simon !—-The repetition of the name gave combined solemnity and tender-
ness to the appeal. Desired.—R.V. “asked to have you,” or (margin) “ obtained you by
asking.” ‘Not content with Judas” (Bengel). Have you.—Plural—i.e., the apostles,

Ver. 32. I.—Hmphatic. Fail.—Implies total extinction, Strengthen.—The use of this word
and the cognate substantive thrice by Peter in his two epistles (1 Pet. v. 10; 2 Pet. i. 12,
iii. 17), and in the first passage in a connection with the mention of Satan’s temptations, is
remarkable,

Ver. 33. I am ready.—Rather, ‘“‘ Lord, with thee I am ready,” etc. (R.V.). The “with thee”
is emphatic,

Ver. 34, Peter.—‘‘ The only occasion on which Jesus is recorded to have used to him the
name He gave him. Itisused to remind him of his strength as wellas his weakness” (Farrar).
Shall not crow.—St. Mark alone says “ twice.”

Ver. 35. When I sent you, etc.—The kindness and hospitality with which they were met
on the former occasion are contrasted with the enmity to which they will now be exposed—
against which they will need to guard.

Ver, 36. A sword.—For self-defence. ‘'he strong ngure makes the warning all the more
memorable.

Ver. 37. For the things, etc.—JZ.e., either the prophecies, one of which is quoted, are to be
aeceomplished, or the things which befall me are approaching their termination. Probably
the former is to be preferred.

Ver. 38. It is enough.—Not “ they are sufficient,” but “that will do.” It seems to be an
ironical reply, indicating that in taking His words literally they had misunderstood Him,
and simply dismissing the matter.

Ver. 39. As He was wont.—This accounts for Judas being able to lead those who
apprehended Jesus to the place where He was to be found.

Ver. 40, At the place.—A garden or farm called Gethsemane (i.¢., “the oil-press ”), perhaps
belonging to a friend or disciple. He said to them.—He left eight of the apostles, and took
Peter, James, and John further into the recesses of the garden, and to them gave this
exhortation.

Ver. 41. Withdrawn.—R.V. “parted from them”; lit. “torn away” (cf. Acts xxi. 1).
The word implies reluctance to leave; but no great stress need be laid on it, as the special
meaning may have been dropped in colloquial use.

Ver 42. Father, etc.—The sentence should be translated, ‘“ Father, if Thou be willing to


546


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XXII.





remove this cup from Me [well]; nevertheless, not My will, but Thine be done.” The
word translated “remove ” is in the infinitive, and not in the imperative.

Ver. 43. There appeared an angel, etc.—This and the following verse are omitted in some
very ancient MSS., perhaps from the mistaken idea that they derogate from the Saviour’s
majesty. It is possible, however, that they did not appear in the first edition of the Gospel,
but were added later. There is strong evidence in their favour from patristic writers:
Justin Martyr, Ireneeus, and Hippolytus refer to them. The appearance of the angel was
evidently after the first prayer Christ offered in the garden—that quoted here. St. Luke
summarises the other two prayers in the phrase (ver. 44), “‘He prayed more earnestly.”
Strengthening Him.—The word implies imparting physical strength. Weare not to think of
spiritual strength or consolation being given.

Ver. 44. Great drops of blood.—The words might be understocd either of copious streams
of sweat pouring like blood from a wound or of sweat actually tinged with blood. It is,
however, probable that the latter is meant. Ifthe former had been meant, it is difficult to
see why the words “ of blood” should have been used. Cases are on record of such “ bloody
sweat” occurring in certain morbid states of body, or under the pressure of intense emotion.

Ver. 45. Sleeping for sorrow.—As is well known, extreme grief has a stupifying effect, and
often induces heavy, though unrefreshing, sleep.

Ver. 47. A multitude‘ Composed of Levitical guards under their generals, a Roman
tribune with some soldiers, part of a cohort from the Fort of Antonia, and some priests and
elders” (Farrar). To kiss Him.—The preconcerted sign.

Ver. 48. Betrayest thou ? etc.—In the order in the original the basest circumstance of the
deed of treachery is made prominent—“ Judas, with a kiss betrayest thou? ” etc.

Ver. 50. One of them.—St. John tells that it was Peter, and that the servant’s name was
Maichus. Perhaps the synoptists omit the former name, from prudential motives. Suffer ye
thus far.—If we are to understand these words as addressed to the disciples, they mean,
“Let them do what they please; resist them not,” and are equivalent to the longer speech
reported in Matt. xxvi. 52-54. If, however, they are addressed to the captors, they might be
interpreted to mean, “ Allow Me thus much liberty ”’—i.e., to set Him free for a moment to
heal the wounded man. The former is perhaps to be preferred, as the words can be under-
stood as virtually equivalent to the remonstrance addressed to the disciples in the parallel
account in St. Matthew, and as the next words of Jesus are spoken to the captors,

Ver. 52. A thief—Rather, “a robber ” (R.V.).

Ver. 53. This is your hour, etc.—Te., “ This is the time when power is given you against Me
by the determinate counsel of God (Acts iv. 28), and in which the Power, or Prince, of dark-
ness, is permitted to exercise his rancour against Me” (Bloomfield). Perhaps there is also an
allusion to the darkness of the night, as harmonising with deeds of treachery and violence.

Ver. 54. Then took they Him.—R.V., “And they seized Him.” The high priest’s house.—
Te., the house of Caiaphas. St. John alone mentions a preliminary and perhaps informal
examination in the house of Annas.

Ver. 55. Kindled a fire—“ The spring nights at Jerusalem, which is 2610 feet above the
level of the sea, are often cold” (Farrar). Hall.—Rather, “court” (R.V.), Sat down
among them.— More literally, “sat in the midst of them” (R.V.).

Ver. 56. Sat by the fire.—Rather, ‘‘sat in the light [of the fire]” (R.V.).

Ver. 58. Another.—The gender of the original word is masculine. St. Matthew and
St. Mark speak of this second accuser being a woman, or the same woman as first charged
bim with being a disciple of Jesus, ‘The discrepancy, if any, is scarcely worth noticing.
Man.—A term of expostulation in the original, to which our version here exactly corresponds
—“man” being similarly used in English.

Ver. 59. A Galilean.—Recognised as such by his dialect.

Ver. 61. The Lord turned.—This was not during the trial, for Peter was then in the outside
court, but as Jesus crossed the court on His way from the house of Caiaphas. St. Luke gives
no account of the trial before Caiaphas.

Ver. 65. Blasphemously.—Rather, “reviling Him” (R.V.). The word ‘blasphemy ” has
changed its meaning ; it formerly denoted “ reviling ” or “ scurrility.” :

Ver. 66. As soon as*it was day.—The court of the Sanhedrim could only be held in the day-
time; consequently all that was done in the presence of Caiap’:s, when Christ was first
tried, had to be repeated at the formal meeting. This accounts fo: the questions and replies
recorded by St. Matthew and St. Mark, as spoken in the house of Vaiaphas, being here set
down as taking place in court, The elders of the people.— Properly, “the presbytery of the
people,” the body of elders—i.e., the Sanhedrim (cf. Acts xxii. 5). The place of meeting is
uncertain.

Ver. 67. Art thou the Christ ?—Out of a claim to be the Messiah they wished to construct
a charge of treason; as the Roman authorities, who alone had power of life and death,
would not attach importance to a charge of “ blasphemy.”

Ver. 68. If I also ask you.—“ If I put questions to educe from your own mouths proofs of


5AT


——
CHAP. XXII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE, |
SnD ReENT aL STEN ry hota Re ke ew


My innocence or of the validity of My claim to be Christ, ye will not answer Me or release
Me.” The words virtually mean, “ The trial is an unfair one, as 1 am not allowed to argue My
case.” Nevertheless, Christ judges that the time has come for an open statement of His
claims (vers. 69, 70).

Ver. 69. Hereafter, etc.—Rather, “ but from henceforth shall the Son of Man be seated at
the right hand,” etc. The cross, now so near at hand, will be the first step to the throne of

lory.

: Ver 70. Ye say that I am.—Or, “Ye say it, because lam ”(R.V. margin). This is a
Hebrew phrase, equivalent to, “ Your words are true.”


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—6.


The Unholy Covenant.—So great was the enmity of the chief priests and scribes
\ against Jesus that they had definitely resolved to put Him to death. The only
question was how they could best accomplish their design (ver. 2). The feast of
the Passover was at hand, when the city would be crowded by pilgrims from all
parts of the land, and from foreign countries; and the Jewish authorities were
afraid that a serious riot might be caused if they took any open and precipitate
step in carrying out their project. The inhabitants of Jerusalem were largely
under their influence; but Christ still enjoyed a considerable measure of
popularity among His Galilean countrymen, many of whom would be present
in the Holy City on the occasion of the feast. Their present intention evidently
was to take no action during the feast, but to wait until the bands of pilgrims
had returned to their homes. The unexpected offer, on the part of Judas, to
deliver Him into their hands, however, determined them to act at once and to
arrest Jesus before the feast. The sight of the chief priests and scribes entering
into an unholy compact with the traitor apostle for the destruction of our blessed
Lord suggests some solemn lessons.

I. It brings to light the fact that there is no alternative between obedience
to Christ and enmity against Him.—It is impossible to ignore Him. The chief
priests felt that power was slipping away from them, and that the movement
with which Jesus was associated was out of their control. They must either yield
to Him or take instant action against Him. In like manner Judas, who had cast
off his allegiance as a disciple, went straightway to the enemies of his Lord and
planned with them how he might betray Him unto them. This fact that there
is no alternative between being a disciple and an enemy was clearly stated by
Christ Himself in the word ‘‘ He that is not with Me is against Me.” And what
was the case when the Saviour was upon earth, still holds good: all who are
brought into connection with Christ are forced, by an inexorable law, to take up
either the one attitude towards Him or the other. He claims our worship as
God incarnate, and He lays down rules of conduct for the guidance of all men,
and if we refuse to accept His claims, or to obey His precepts, we instantly
become hostile to Him.

II. It also shows that it is out of our power to fix the limit to which we will
go, when once we have entered on a sinful course.—Both the chief priests and
scribes and the disloyal disciple were led, by their alienation from Christ, to the
perpetration of the most shameful deeds: actions from which they would once
have recoiled with horror now seem necessary, and do not shock them. They
are deliberately planning the murder of an innocent person under the guise of
zeal for religion. All checks of conscience are powerless to control them. The
priests forget their sacred office, the claims of justice, and the covenant between
God and Israel of which the feast now at hand was so solemn a memorial, and
think of nothing but the gratification of their personal hatred of Jesus, Judas
forgets all his Master’s love and compassion, His wonderful deeds and teaching,
His holy and innocent life; he forgets all that was due from him as a disciple,


548


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.  cuap. xx.





a friend, and an apostle, to that Master with whom He had lived so long in
intimate communion, and in whose character and conduct even the closest
scrutiny could discover no flaw or stain. Without a shudder he sees the un-
hallowed joy upon the faces of the enemies of Christ as he discloses to them the
hatred against Him that fills His breast also, and he arranges with them the
price at which his treachery is to be rewarded. Probably neither of the parties
would have believed it possible for them to descend to such a depth of infamy,
when first they began to be conscious of alienation from Jesus. A sivful course
is a course downhill ; it may be in our choice to enter upon it or not, but when
we have wilfully entered upon it, it is not in our power to check ourselves and
to fix the point at which we shall stop.

III. The historian lays stress upon the special guilt of apostasy from
Christ.— While both chief priests and scribes were guilty of grave sin in planning
the death of Jesus, the traitor apostle was guilty of a worse offence than theirs.
They had never been Christ's disciples ; their enmity had been open and intense
from a very early period in His career. The peculiar infamy of Judas is indicated
by St. Luke in the reminder (ver. 3) that Judas had been of the number of the
twelve, and in the statement that Satan entered into Him, as an explanation of
his shameful conduct. He does not speak of Satan as entering into the chief
priests and scribes. Some palliation of the guilt of the latter might be found in
their ignorance of the Saviour, and in the false conceptions they had formed
of Him. The knowledge Judas had of Christ, only intensified the heinousness
cf his sin in betraying Him. A very solemn lesson is here contained for all
who are professed disciples of Christ. Our responsibilities are increased by
our relations with Him. The sin of those who wilfully depart from Him is
necessarily greater than that of those who never acknowledged Him as their
Lord and Master.

IV. The history before us is an illustration of there being an over-ruling
Providence.—God makes even the wrath of men to serve Him. The priests had
decided to take no present action, but to wait till the feast was past. But it was
part of the Divine purpose that the death of Christ should occur at the time of
the feast—that then He, who is our Passover, should be sacrificed. And hence
the very treachery of Judas was made to serve a higher end. Without any
violation of human free-will the purposes of God were carried into effict, and
those who were simply bent upon gratifying their own selfish and evil feelings
were unconsciously made to assist in accomplishing a plan predetermined by God.
God’s power cannot be resisted; if we are not fellow-workers with Him con-
sciously and deliberately, He will yet be glorified by controlling and directing
all our actions in accordance with His own will.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 1—6.


Ver. 1. “ Feast of unleavened bread.”— and the sacrifice of the true Passover,
The rulers of the people were unwilling the Lamb of God, which taketh away
to put Christ to death at this season, the sin of the world.
as they dreaded an uproar being caused
among the people. Yet in the provi- Ver. 2. “Sought how they might kill
dence of God their counsels were over- Him.”—-On more than one occasion
ruled. Had Christ been put to death at before they had endeavoured to take
any other time, there would not have Him, but He had escaped from them,
been that coincidence between the offer- for He would not then be taken (John
ing of the typical lamb, sacrificed year x. 39). But at the very time when
after year for nearly fifteen centuries, they were unwilling to take Him, He


549


CHAP. XXII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





willed to be taken: so, against their
will, they fulfilled the types and
prophecies in killing Him who is the
true Paschal Lamb.


Ver. 3. ‘Then entered Satan.”’—At
first Satan came to make the heart of
Judas his own; now he enters, because
it is his own.— Hall.


Ver. 4. “Went his way.”—Un-
conscious of being under the control of


the evil passion by which He had given
Satan access to his heart.


Ver. 5. “Were glad.”—-The thing
wished for, but scarcely expected, being
now within reach.


Ver. 6. ‘Sought opportunity.”—
Doubtless he was baffled at first by the
entire and unexpected seclusion which
Jesus observed on the Wednesday and
Thursday of that week.—Farrar.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 7—20.


The Lord's Supper.

I. The preparation.—Peculiar to this Gospel are the names of the disciples sent
to make ready the Passover and the representation of the command as preceding
the disciples’ question, ‘“‘ Where?” The selection of Peter and John indicates the
confidential nature of the task, which comes out still more plainly in the singular
directions given to them. How is the designation of the place which Christ
gives to be understood? Was it supernatural knowledge, or was it the result
of previous arrangement with the “goodman of the house”? Most probably
the latter, for he was in so far a disciple that he recognised Jesus as the Master,
and was glad to have Him in his house, and the chamber on the roof was ready
“furnished” when they came. Why this mystery about the place? Because
Judas was listening, too, for the answer to “‘ Where?” thinking that it would
give him the “ opportunity” which he sought “to betray Him in the absence of
the multitude.” Jesus takes precautions to delay the cross. He takes none
to escape it, but rather sets Himself in these last days to bring it near. The
variety in His action means no change in His mind, but both modes are equally
the result of His self-forgetting love to us all.

II. The revelation of Christ’s heart (vers. 14-18),—He discloses His earnest
desire for that last hour of calm before He went out to face the storm, and His
vision of the future feast in the perfect kingdom. That desire touchingly shows
His brotherhood in all our shrinking from parting with dear ones, and in our
treasuring of the last, sweet, sad moments of being together. But the desire was
not for Himself only. He wished to partake of that Passover, and then to trans-
form it for ever, and to leave the new rite to His servants. We shall best
conceive the course of events if we suppose that the earlier stages of the paschal
ceremonial were duly attended to, and that the Lord’s Supper was instituted in
connection with its later parts. There is no need to discuss the exact stage at which
our Lord spoke and acted as recorded in vers. 15-17. It is sufficient to note that
in them He gives what He does not taste, and that, in giving, His thoughts
travel beyond all the sorrow and death to reunion and perfected festal joys.
The prophetic aspect of the Lord’s Supper should never be left out of view. It
is at once a feast of memory and of hope, and is also a symbol for the present,
since it represents the conditions of spiritual life as being participation in the
body and blood of Christ.

III. The actual institution of the Lord’s Supper (vers. 19, 20).—Note its
connection with the rite which it transforms. The Passover was the memorial
of deliverance, the very centre of Jewish ritual. It was a family feast, and our
Lord took the place of the head of the household. But this memorial ef
deliverance He transfigures—He calls upon Jew and Gentile to forget the.


550


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.  omap. xxtt.


ee Ee ee i Se ES et Ps


venerable meaning of the rite, and remember rathcr His work for all men. He
must have been clothed with Divine authority to abrogate a Divinely enjoined
ceremony. ‘The separation of the symbols of the body and blood plainly indicates
that it is the death of Jesus, and that a violent one, which is being commemorated.
Both parts of the symbol teach that all our hopes are rooted in the death of
Jesus, and that the only true life of our spirits comes from participation in His
death, and thereby in His life. Jesus declares, by this rite, that through His
death a new “covenant” comes into force as between God and man, in which
all the anticipations of prophets are more than realised, aiid sins are remembered
no more, and the knowledge of God becomes the blessing of all, and a close
relationship of mutual possession is established between God and us, and His
laws are written on loving hearts and softened wills. St. Luke alone preserves
for us the command to “ do this,” which at once establishes the rite as meant
to be perpetual, and defines the new nature of it. It is a memorial: “in order
to My remembrance.” Jesus knew that we should be in constant danger of for-
getting Him, and therefore, in this one case, He enlists sense on the side of faith,
and trusts to these homely memorials the recalling to our treacherous memories
of His dying love. He wished to live in our hearts, and that for the satisfaction
of His own love and for the deepening of ours. The Lord’s Supper is a standing
evidence of Christ’s own estimate of where the centre of His work lies. We are
to remember His death. Surely no view of the significance and purpose of the
cross but that which sees in it a propitiation for the world’s sins accounts for
this rite. A Christianity which strikes the atoning death of Jesus out of its
theology is sorely embarrassed to find a worthy meaning for His dying command,
“This do in remembrance of Me.”—WMaclaren.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 7—20.


Vers. 7-38. Outline of The Narrative.
—1. Preparations for the Last Supper
vers. 7-13). 2. The Last Supper
itself (vers. 14-23). 3. The conversa-
tion following it (vers. 24-38).


Ver. 7. “ When the Passover must be
killed.,—The example of Christ in
observing the outward ordinances of
the Jewish religion should suggest
to us the duty of a like scrupulousness
in keeping those of our religion.


Ver. 8. “Sent Peter and John.”—
This errand was (1) an exercise in
faith and obedience ; and (2) the result
of it was calculated to encourage them
to believe in His hidden greatness, in
spite of His humiliation.


Vers. 9, 10.—The mystery with which
Christ surrounded His procedure on
this occasion: 1. By concealing the
information of the place from Judas, it
was a measure of precaution for Him-
self. 2. It impressed upon the minds


of His disciples the fact of His absolute
foreknowledge of all events.


Vers. 10-12.—A Sign Given to The
Disciples : 1. To impress them with the
dignity and solemnity of this Passover
celebration. 2. To convince them of
His own Divine foreknowledge and
almighty power—in predicting what
was to happen and in making pro-
vision for celebrating the feast.


Ver. 10. The Man Bearing a Pitcher.

I. The Passover was observed in
the midst of ordinary life and its
familiar surroundings.—This was a
specially solemn and significant occa-
sion, And yet, peculiarly holy and full
of world-wide, time-long meaning as it
was, it took place among the common
details of family life. It was not held
in a court of the Temple, but in the
upper room of an unknown citizen.
It was not ushered in by powp and
ceremony and portent, but by a humble
servant carrying a pitcher of water for

551


cHapr. xxu. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


household purposes. Our Passover—
the Lord’s Supper—ought not to be
dissociated from our ordinary life,
and made an unearthly, unnatural
experience. Too much superstitious
feeling still clings to the ordinance.
Many are afraid to partake of it.
They practically disobey Christ’s loving
command.

II. The Lord’s Supper is, after all,
but a household service, a family
meal, linked most closely with all the
familiar things of our common life.
—Bread and wine are common things.
The Communion Service is a part of
the common worship of the sanctuary.
Only here the symbols appeal to the
eye, and to the touch and taste. The
Communion Table is only the upper
chamber of the familiar Church. This
is no high mystic service, no exclusive
channel of grace. There is no sacra-
mentarianism about it.

ITI. Let the significant lesson of the
man carrying the pitcher of water,
pointing the way to the upper room,
teach us that so every circumstance
of our ordinary life, however homely,
should have reference to and prepare
for the Holy Supper as often as we are
called upon to observe it.— We should
so live that no special preparation
need be made for our sitting down at
the Lord’s Table—that wherever we
are, and however engaged, we may
always be in a suitable frame of mind
to enjoy the Holy Communion. Let
our whole life, religious and secular, be
of one piece, and so our daily carry-
ing of the pitcher of water for household
purposes, the daily business of our life,
will lead to and prepare for the per-
petual communion feast of heaven.—
Macmillan.


Ver. 11. “The goodman of the house.”
—As there was among His friends a
secret enemy, so was there among His
enemies a secret friend.—Braune.


Ver. 12. “ Upper room.”—The usual
place of resort for large gatherings in
a Jewish house; probably the very
room which also witnessed the appear-


552


ance of the risen Christ to the twelve,
and the descent of the Holy Ghost at
Pentecost.—Farrar.


The Best to be Offered to ChristY—
The man who is to lend the room
knows Jesus, and is, in some measure, a
disciple. He had, apparently, already
been told by some one that such a room
would be required. But the “upper
room” was not the “guest chamber ”
which the Master asked for. It was a
quieter place, not on the ground floor,
but upstairs. Christ asked merely for
the lower room, the common guest-
chamber, but was supplied with a better
reserved for special purposes and
occasions. When Christ makes any
demand on us, let as give Him even
more and better than He asks for.

I. It was an upper room.—aA private
room above the hall or guest-chamber.
The “best” 100m in the house. He
could have privacy there with His
disciples. He wants it all, and all for
Himself. Do we offer to Christ the
best we have 3

II. It was a furnished room.—It
was supplied with couches and table,
with cups and vessels. Are our hearts
furnished and ready with what Christ
loves—prayers, hymns, thanksgivings,
holy thoughts, good deeds, kind words?
There He can rest and abide. |

IIT. It was a large room.—Of
ample accommodation. A party of
thirteen needed more room than a tiny
chamber. Are we niggardly to Christ?
Do we put Him in the smallest room ?
Have we place in our hearts for His
disciples? He will come to bless.
Give Him room to work.— Plummer.


Ver. 13. “ Found as He had said.”
—The directions had been given with
great circumstantiality—the entrance of
the city, a man, meeting them, carry-
ing a pitcher of water, entering a house.
Had any one of these particulars been
found wanting, the prophecy would
have proved untrue, and the disciples
would have failed in their errand.


Vers. 14-23. 1. The words of Jesus
introductory to the Supper (vers.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XXII.


el ee ene oe Ss sp


14-18). 2, The Supper itself, with
the institution of the new rite (vers.
19, 20). 3. The announcement of the
treachery of one of the disciples.


Ver. 14. “The twelve apostles with
Him.”’—The presence of Judas at this
Last Supper in distinctly asserted here,
as well as in ver. 21. Tie fact that
Christ, who was acquainted with his
secret villainy, did not exclude him is
very signiticant. It implies that a
man who makes profession of religion,
and in whose outward life there is
nothing scandalous, cannot reasonably
be denied the external privileges of
religion. The endeavour to secure, by
rigid scrutiny and long probation, that
none but the regenerate are in the
visible Church finds little to counte-
nance it in the New Testament. It is
calculated to discourage the timid and
self-distrustful, and as a matter of fact
it does not keep out hypocrites.


The First Word at The Supper.—
I. An utterance of human tenderness.
—A consecration of all that is purest
and loftiest in the brotherhood of men.
Christ craves to eat with His brother
men. He anticipates the responsive
love of those whom He has called to
Himself—* With you.” This is beauti-
fully, unselfishly human. The heart
of God is human, and longs to find itself
welcomed, understood, and responded
to.

If. An utterance full of the purpose
and travail of the Redeemer.—There
is an element in the longing of Christ
above and beyond the feeling of the
Israelite towards the national festival.
It is the last Passover of the true
Israel of God. The time of the
Re-formation has arrived. The king-
dom is coming. The complete in-
gathering of the redeemed is in view.
And, till then, he takes farewell of all
earthly rite and ordinance.— Lang.


Vers. 15,16. “ With desire,” etc.
I. For the sake of His disciples to
whom, on this occasion of farewell, He


was to reveal the intensity of His affec-
tion for them.

II. For His own sake, because im-
mediately after this Passover He was
to enter into His glory.


Ver. 15. “ZI have desired.” —Very
vehement desire is on no other occasion
attributed to our Lord, either by Him-
self or by others. So great was this
occasion, when, before He left His
disciples, He had to give to them the
new covenant of His Body and Blocd.


“ Before I suffer.”—This is the only
instance in the Gospels in which the
word “suffer” is used in its absolute
sense, as in the creed—‘“ He suffered
under Pontius Pilate.”


Reasons why Christ Desired so
Larnestly to Hat this Last Passover.

I. The Passover had now reached
its end, and found its full meaning.

II. He desired it for the support
of His own soul in the approaching
struggle.—‘‘ Before I suffer.”

Il!. Because His friends needed
special support. “To eat this Passover
with you.”

IV. Because this Passover looked
forward to a!lthe future of His Church
and people.— Ker.


Ver. 16. “ Until it be fulfilled.” —
Jesus has in view a new banquet,
which will be held after the consum-
mation of all things. The Holy
Supper is the bond of union between
the Jewish Passover, which is now near-
ing its end, and the heavenly banquet
yet to come, just as the salvation of
the gospel, of which the Supper is the
monument, forms the transition be-
tween the external deliverance of
Israel and the salvation, at once
spiritual and external, of the glorified
Chureh.—Godet.


Vers. 17-20. The Lord’s Supper is a
Monument Sucred to the Memory of
Jesus Christ.—1. It refers to the death
of Jesus. 2. Its significance does not
depend upon the tragic circumstanccs


553


CHAP. XXII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





of that death, or to its glorious cha-
racter as an act of martyrdom.
3. Jesus represents His death as a sin-
offering ; His blood is shed for the
remission of sins. 4. The sacrament
of the Supper represents Christ, not
merely as a Lamb, to be slain for a
sin-offering, but as a Paschal Lamb, to
be eaten for spiritual nourishment.—
Bruce.


The Last Supper.—The Sppper brings
efore us— 2 /
\ I. A Savitour—Every part of it


fixes our gaze, net on it, but on Him.

II. A human Saviour.—He sits,
eats, drinks, speaks, has a body and
blood, dies.

Ill. A suffering Saviour. — The
bread is broken through and through.
The wine is poured out. These acts
symbolise and emphasise His suffer-
ings. His death is the central fact.

IV. A willing Saviour.—He gave
thanks, though He knew of all that
was in “the cup”—Gethsemane,
Calvary, and the grave. With more
than willingness—with positive joy—
He gave Himself for our salvation.

V. A sin-bearing Saviour.—This is
Christ’s explanation of His own death.
Let us be content with it. He came
to “ give His life a ransom for many.”
—Wells.


Ver. 17. “ He took the cup.”—Te.,
the Paschal cup, of which Christ now
partook for the last time: in ver. 20 it
is the eucharistic cup of which He did
not partake.


Ver. 18. “JZ will not drink.”—As
ver. 16 means, “This is My last
Passover,” so this means, “ This is My
last meal”—My last day. To the
reference here to a future banquet, in
which Christ Himself will participate,
corresponds the saying of St. Paul,
“until He come” (1 Cor. xi. 26).


Vers. 19, 20. The Lord’s Supper is
(1) @ memorial of Christ; (2) a stand-
ing evidence of the truth of Christ-
lanity; (3) an act by which we

554


profess our faith in His atoning
sacrifice ; (4) an act of communion with
God, and with our fellow-believers ;
and (5) one which is intended to lead
us to anticipate our Lord’s second
coming.


Divine Odject-Lessons.— “ This bread.’
“ This cup.”

I. “This bread.”—God does not
separate sign and thing signified.
Nor should we. 1. Zake.-—Christ is to
be taken as we take the bread. He
comes to us from without. He is
offered to us. 2. Hat.—The ‘bread is
ready for eating. It is not grain, but
food. Eating is a perfect illustration
of appropriation, assimilation, incor-
poration. Haten bread makes brain,
heart, hand. Christ should thus create
and nourish convictions, affections,
activities. 3. Divide it.—Pass it
round. It is a family meal. A re-
minder of brotherly love. It is free to
all. There is enough for all.

II. “This cup.”—1l. It is filled.
You are not offered an empty cup.
He gave Himself to fill this cup with
His life-blood for you. 2. It is offered
to you. Not a far-off, vague un-
certainty, like the Holy Grail. It is
brought near, it touches your hand,
your lip. Not to take it were an out-
rage. 3. It is to be partaken of. Un-
touched, it mocks your thirst as the
cup of Tantalus did. It cheers you
only when you taste its contents, 4.
It is passed on. It is a social, not a
solitary cup. The Divine order is from
Christ through His disciples. A symbol
of fraternity. Let all taste of it.—
Wells.


Ver. 19. “Gave thanks.”—1. For
the higher food symbolised by it.
2. As ordaining it to be a means of
spiritual nourishment,


Old and New.—I. An old feast.—
The Passover feast.

II. A new feast.—Christ
Passover Lamb.

III. The new command.—Do this.
—W. Taylor.


the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XXII.





“In remembrance of Me.”—The
word used is more emphatic than
remembrance (which may be _ in-
voluntary); it is a deliberate, inward
act of the will, showing itself by
external signs.


Ver. 20. ‘This cup.”—The fact
that Jesus took in His hands a portion
of bread and a cup of wine forbids
that literal identification of the bread
and wine with His body and blood
upon which both Roman Catholic and
Lutherian divines have insisted. The
distinction between the two was
evident at the time. If such literal
identification were intended, the words


of institution would virtually mean,
“This, in time to come, will be My
body, My blood.” Is it possible that
such an idea entered into the minds
of those who were present at that


Supper ?


“ New Testament.” —A new covenant
between God and man, based upon the
sacrifice of Christ.

I. The free gift of salvation on the
part of God.

II. The acceptance of it, by faith, on
the part of man.—This is symbolised
by the cup which Jesus hands to His
disciples, and which they may freely
take and raise to their lips.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 21—38.


Words of Warning and Counsel.—In the words which Christ spoke after the
institution of the Supper, and before He went forth to meet suffering and death,
we have another proof of His unselfish and disinterested spirit. His thoughts
are not absorbed in His own concerns, but He has leisure to think of His
disciples—to utter words of warning and reproof, and to give them counsels for
the time when they will be deprived of His presence and be brought face to face
with new conditions of life, for which their previous experience would not have
prepared them.

I. He reveals the fact that one of the twelve is to betray Him (vers. 21-23).
—Both sorrow and indignation appear in the exclamation, “ But, behold, the
hand of him that betrayeth Me is with Me on the table.” As He sees the cup
pass from hand to hand, His attention fastens upon Judas, and He cannot refrain
from disclosing the fact that one of those who are now His guests will deliver
Him into the hand of His enemies. For long He had kept silence concerning
the true character of Judas: why does He now break that silence? Surely it
was in mercy to the traitor, who might, even at the eleventh hour, have repented
of his sin and found forgiveness. Death would still have come to Christ, but his
guilt would have been averted. For Christ makes it quite clear that the traitor’s
power over Him is but slight. He does not lament that He is doomed to death,
for He knows that a Divine decree has prescribed death for Him. But He
shudders at the fate of the man who deliberately and wilfully betrays Him. So
skilfully had Judas disguised his real feelings towards Christ, that he averts from
himself the suspicions of his fellow-apostles. Yet, after all, there was nothing
very wonderful in his escaping observation, for those of innocent mind are much
more inclined to suspect themselves of faults and shortcomings than to discern
them in others.

II. He allays the strife for supremacy that had again risen among them
(vers. 24-30).—The question as to who should be the greatest among them had
more than once, before this, raised disputes and contests among the apostles.
But it surprises us to read that on this solemn occasion it should again have
been raised. Perhaps the origin of the present dispute was in rival claims being
put forward to occupy the place of honour by the side of Jesus at the supper-
table. Yet, though the disciples were so far out of sympathy with their
Lord as to indulge in selfish strife for precedence or for supremacy at this


555


tm es
cHap. xxi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


moment, when the thought of His coming sufferings and death was pressing upon
His mind, we discern no trace of anger or of disappointment in His words. He
is neither irritated nor discouraged by the fact that, in spite of His example and
teaching, His disciples still manifest a spirit of carnal ambition, for He knows
that the leaven which is to change their characters has been deposited in their
hearts, and He is fully convinced that in due time the transformation which He
has sought to effect will be wrought. 1. He contrasts the ideal of greatness
which prevails in ordinary human society with that in the new society of which
He is the founder: there strength sr ability gives precedence, here he is greatest
who is most eager to be of service to his fellows. And He brings forward His
own example as an illustration of the spirit that should prevail among them:
He had abdicated the honour He might have insisted upon and had been among
them as one that served. 2. He promises due satisfaction of the aspirations
after glory and honour which it is lawful for even the humblest believer to
cherish (Rom. ii. 7), though the way to have them realised is not by seeking
lordship over others. He acknowledges the fidelity of the apostles to Himself in

‘the time of His humiliation, and He assures them that they shall be associated
with Him in His exaltation. As they are His guests at this paschal supper, so
shall they sit down with Him at the heavenly banquet; as they have recognised
Him as their King, and sought to extend His kingdom, so shall they be partakers
of His royal authority.

III. The warning against self-confidence (vers. 31-34).—Christ discloses the
fact that a serious trial is at hand for all the apostles—that he who was chiefest
among them in faith and devotion would be exposed to greatest danger ; but He
also promises help in the time of need, and anticipates a victorious issue from the
trial. 1. The imminent danger. The enemy of God and man was to assail the
apostles and to attempt to overthrow their faith. His desire to have them, that
he might sift them as wheat, was to be gratified; and, as in the case of Job, he
was to be allowed to try every device for shaking their loyalty to their Master.
He would choose an opportune time for his attempt, when they were separated
from their Master, and left dependent upon their own strength and resources.
Yet his power was but limited; it was by God’s permission that he was allowed
to sift them ; and though he might desire that the wheat might be found to be
but chaff, he could do no more than shake the sieve. 2. The intervention of the
Intercessor. Christ presents Himself as more than a match for the enemy. He
has already foreseen the danger, and has already provided against it (“ I have
prayed”). One apostle is, though he is unconscious of it, in more danger of
utter overthrow than any of his fellows ; and for him the prayer of intercession
has been offered with special fervency. The prayer is not that he may escape
the trial, nor even that he may escape from it unscathed, but that his faith
may not fail—that, however low he may fall, he may still not be utterly cast down.
3. A happy issue from the trial. Christ anticipates a change being wrought in
the character of the apostle that would make him helpful to others in time to
come. By his fall and restoration his rashness and self-confidence would be
purged away, and the experience through which he had passed would make him
sympathetic towards the weak, and able to understand the trials and difficulties
that beset them. Those who have themselves fallen and been truly penitent are
more likely to be helpful to their brethren than others, whose experience has been
more happy and uneventful. The reply of Peter shows how unconscious he was
of the danger in which he stood.

IV. A new order of things at hand, requiring special foresight and courage
(vers. 35-38).—After preparing the disciples for the special trial which is to
befall them in the course of a few hours, He forewarns them that in the days
and years to come they will be confronted with a very different condition of


556


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XXII.





matters from that which had been familiar to them in the time of His earthly

ministry. They had enjoyed a measure of comfort in consequence of the
popularity which He had won in many sections of Jewish society. But now the
final conflict between Him and the authorities of the Jewish people would entail
upon them also a measure of hardship and persecution. 1. He recalls the past.
When He had sent them on their mission through the land, they had found
friends everywhere; though they had gone out without money or provisions,
they had suffered no lack of anything they needed. 2. He foretells the future.
He is to suffer, and they are, to some extent, to suffer with Him. Instead
of trusting to the generosity of others they will need to make provision for
themselves; instead of friends they will find enemies, against whom they
will need to use all legitimate means of self-defence. He would no longer
be with them to protect them, and therefore they would need to use every
precaution for guarding themselves from harm. ‘The disciples, for the moment,
took the precept literally, and pointed out that they were prepared; for they
had two swords in their possession. The Lord does not correct the error, except
by implication ; two swords are enough for protecting the twelve, since litera]
swords are not to be used—since their most efficient weapon would be an all:
suffering patience like His.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 21-38.


Vers.
Note—
I. That the traitor was an apostle.
II. That he would be successful in
accomplishing his evil work.
III. That he would bring down
upon himself a terrible doom.


21-23. Treachery Unveiled.


Ver. 21. “ But, behold.”—Though I
am about to shed My blood for you,
and for all men.


“The hand.”—The hand which had
received the bread and the cup—the
hand which had pledged a covenant
with the enemies of Christ.


Ver. 22. “As it hath been deter-
mined.” —Cf. Ps. xli. 9.


Ver. 23. “ Began to enquire.”—In
their guilelessness they were (1) dis-
trustful of themselves, and (2) un-
suspicious of others.


Vers. 23, 24. “ Which should do this
thing! .. . which should be accounted the
greatest."—In the one question their
humility, in the other their pride, are
manifested. A strange contrast !


Vers. 24, 25. True Greatness.
I. What did the apostles, at this


time in their lives, mean by “the
greatest” ?—The most influential, the
most capable, the most considered. To
some men greatness consists in physical
prowess; to others, the possession of
wealth ; to others, the power of intelli-
gence. In our times, we often mean
by greatness a combination of all these
forms of power—force, wealth, intelli-
gence.

II. Our Lord’s ideal of greatness.—
Very unlike that of the natural man.
An entire contrast. Is it an un-
practical ideal? No. For (1) man’s
true greatness must be the greatness
of his true self ; (2) must be in har-
mony with the true law of his being.
3. Love is the gift, the expenditure of
self — God is leve.” And He permits
man to share in the most glorious
of the Divine attributes, and his share
in this attribute is the measure of his
greatness. The apostles became really
great men after Pentecost, simply
because they followed their Master.
Note, in conclusion (1) the importance
of a true ideal in life. (2) The true
ideal of life—service—is within the
reach of allof us. We can all of us
be really great if we will. The possi-
bilities of service are manifold and
inexhaustible. They lie around us on


557


CHAP, XXII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





every side ; they grow under our feet ;
they outnumber our capacities for
meeting them. To be like our Lord,
we must unlearn the world’s current
ideas of greatness,—Liddon.


Ver. 24. “ Also a strife among them.”
—One apostle was a traitor; the others
though faithful, manifest a spirit of
selfish rivalry which could not fail to
grieve their Master.


“ Should be accounted the greatest.”
—Christ is neither irritated nor dis-
couraged by the unseemly contest ;
He gently bears with the weakness of
the disciples, and He lays down the
principle which should animate them,
in the full consciousness that, in due
time, it would influence and govern
their conduct.


Vers. 25-30. To Strive for Pre-emi-
nence was Unbecoming.

I. Because it manifested a spirit
like that of the heathen (vers. 25, 26).

II. Because it was inconsistent
with the example of Christ Him-
self (ver. 27).

III. Because a high and princely
recompense was reserved for all who
had been faithful to Him.— A kingdom,
a throne, and a place at His table, for
each (28-30).


Ver. 25. “ Benefactors.”—Our Lord
draws a marked contrast between
princes who had assumed the title
because of their beneficent rule, and
Himself, who deserved it, not for exer-
cising authority over His followers, but
for “serving” them.


Vers. 25-27.—I. The worldly ideal
of greatness.

II. The Divine ideal which Christ
introduced and exemplified.


Ver. 26. “ As he doth that serve.’—
Let all the strife of men be—who shall
do best ; who shall be least.— Whichcote.


Humility and Greatness.—1. Humility
a way to greatness. 2. Doing good the


558


object to be kept in view, rather than
being great.


Ver. 27. “I am among you,” ete.—
1. A summary of His earthly life of
humiliation. 2. A fit introduction to
His passion. 3. The watchword, even
now, of His heavenly life.


Vers. 28,29. “Continued with Me:”
Fidelity and Its Reward. :

I. Christ’s grateful acknowledg-
ment of the fidelity of His disciples.
—They had done nobly. Their be-
haviour had been heroic. Persistence
in spiritual life, throughout a curricu-
lum of trial, is not easy.

IT. Christ’s promise of a great re-
ward.-—Noble shall be your reward—
such is the import of the pathetic
utterance. I shall do this in turn to
you who have persisted in fidelity to
Me. Are not the apostles the true
rulers of the world to-day ?— Bruce.


Ver. 28. “ My temptations.”—1. The
privations of His lot. 2. The absence
from His life of the elements of worldly
greatness. 3. The calumnies and plots
of His enemies. 4. His rejection by
so large a section of the people, and by
their rulers.


I. The loneliness of Christ’s life.
II. The temptations that had beset
Him.
III. His gratitude for the fidelity
of the apostles.


Christ's Temptations.—We must not
forget that the Saviour described the
space between the wilderness tempta-
tion and the temptation at the end as
“My temptations.” Not “ My sorrows,”
“ My difficulties,” “My pains,” but “My
temptations.” His virtue was not
cloistered and untried. It was sub-
jected to the hottest fires.

I. He was tempted all His life by
bodily pain and privation.

II. He was constantly tempted to
use His supernatural power.

III. He resisted the temptation to
adopt a false Messiahship, accordant


- «


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XXII.





with the worldly spirit of Judaism,
in favour of an inward kingdom to be
developed by the power of the Divine
Spirit. He would not please His
disciples by taking a temporal kingship.
How significant, then, it is, that when
He describes His life it should come
before His memory as “ My tempta-
tions ” !—WNVicoll.


Vers. 29, 30. “I appoint unto you
a kingdom.” — The words virtually
signify: “TI will give you a royal
dignity, which will be associated with
that which I myself have received, so
that you, who are now My guests at
this Paschal supper, will also sit down
with Me at the heavenly banquet, and
will, in My name, judge the tribes of
Israel.” —Godet.


Ver. 29. “Z appoint.”—Lit. “I be-
queath ” ; a word appropriate for one
so near death.


Ver. 30. “ That ye may eat,” etc.—
It is their association with Christ that
is the source of the honour and power
which the apostles enjoy.

I. As they are faithful to Christ in
His temptations, and now sit beside
Him at the last Passover, He promises
them a place at the heavenly feast.

II. As they share in His humili-
ation, they are assured of participation
in His exaltation—they occupy the
highest places of honour and authority,
even now, in His Church.


Vers. 31, 32. The Sifting of Peter.

I. Sucha character obviously needed
sifting.— He was full of self-confidence.
Self-confidence is the enemy of true
faith. The process is severe, is fiery ;
but if Peter is to be cured of his
tendencies, he must suffer. However
hard the trial, let us pray for sifting,
if only we can thereby learn Peter's
lesson—if only we can be saved from
the failure and regret which follow
confidence in self.

II. But his fall is only half his
story.—The restoration is the comple-
tion of the sifting process. Christ’s


look was the turning point in Peter’s
life. No words were needed to break
his heart.

III. Christ’s further dealing com-
pleted his restoration—Three open
and shameful denials were followed by
three searching questions, reminders
of his threefold fall. But he bears the
trying ordeal patiently. No more
boastfulness. The old self-confidence
is gone for ever. At last he is fit to
lead, to counsel others. He has be-
come “ Rock.”

IV. Two lessons.—1. Look how the
Divine order runs through his life, and
makes its unity impressive. 2, Peter did
not lose strength when he surrendered
self-confidence. He became stronger
than ever, but not in himself. His
confidence is now in his Master.—
Lyton.


The Prayer and the Counter-Prayer.
—The setting and framework give sig-
nificance and solemnity to the words.

I. A revelation of danger.—The
Old-Testament imagery of the scene in
heaven, in the first chapter of Job,
gives the key to the expression of the
text. Satan has again petitioned for
the apostles—to explore and search.
Christ has his fan, Satan has his sieve.
Body, mind, soul—each has its own
danger and temptation. But there is
a dignity, an elevation, and a trem-
bling anxiety in the battle and in the
victory.

IJ. The special personal assurance.
—The transition is from the many to
the one, from the company to the
individual. Was it only for Peter
that the prayer was offered? Then it
was the one prayed for who fell—who,
when trial came, thrice denied his
Lord. But from the fall arose the
conqueror. Christ’s prayer was an-
swered.

TII. The responsibility and privi-
lege of the restored.—There are many
conversions in one life, there is need of
many turnings. Whenever we forget
God we need to be turned. And the
privilege, as it is the responsibility of
the converted, is to strengthen others.

559


CHAP. XXIT.





Peter did so. By his ministry, by his
epistles, by his life and example. This
is the work to which all converted men
are summoned. Pray to be made
acceptable to and potent for good over
other lives.— Vaughan.


A Dangerous Crisis.—l. Jesus re-
gards the crisis as a sifting time for
the disciples, 2. As, though perilous,
one which shall not prove deadly to
their faith. 3. As one which shall not
only end happily, but result in spiritual
benefit to themselves, and qualify them
for being helpful to others.—Bruce.


I. The warning to Peter of coming
danger.

II. The encouragement given him.
|III. The charge laid upon him.


Unconsciousness of Danger.—1. Satan
eager to destroy Peter. 2. Christ eager
todeliver Peter. 3. Peter unconscious
of the danger in which he stood.


Ver. 31. “ Desired.” —He cannot act
except with God’s permission. Cf.
Job i. 12, ii. 6.


“That he may sift you.”—* Whose
fan is in his hand,’ but with the
purpose of gathering the chaff for
himself. Judas had been separated
from the apostolic band: Peter now
stood in danger.


“ Sift.’—The word has not been pre-
served to us elsewhere, but the sig-
nification is not doubtful. The éertiwm
comparationis is the testing agitation :
as the wheat is shaken in the sieve,
that the chaff may thereby separate
itself from the wheat and fall out, so
will Satan also disq:tiet and terrify you
through persecut.ous, dangers, tribula-
tions, in order to bring your faithful-
ness towards Me to apostasy.—Meyer.


Ver. 32. “But I have prayed.”—
1. The power of the Intercessor greater
than that of the enemy. 2. It is
through this power alone that the
faith, even of an apostle, is sustained.


560


1 FEV


!


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





“ Strengthen thy brethren.” —Those
who have themselves been tempted,
and who have learned their own weak-
ness, should be all the more helpful to
their weaker brethren; they should be
all the more compassionate in feeling,
and charitable in the judgments they
form, and hopeful in temperament.


Vers. 33, 34. I. Peter’s ignorance of
himself.
II. Christ’s knowledge of him.


Willingness and Weakness.

I. His sincere desire to share his
Master’s sufferings.

II. The weakness that would betray
him into denying his Master.


Ver. 33. ‘‘ Ready to go with Thee.” —
The words indicate (1) a measure of
self-confidence, as though there were
little ground for the warning just
given; yet also (2) a conviction that
the Lord was the source of his strength.
The phrase, “ with Thee,” is specially
emphatic. When the trial came, Peter —
was following “afar off.”


Vers. 34-38. The Conversation after
Supper.

I. Relative to the dispute for su-
periority (vers. 24-30).

II. To the denial of Peter (vers.
31-34),

III. To the hour of danger now at
hand (ver. 35-38).


Ver. 34. “ Peter.”—This is the only
place in the Gospels where Christ is
said to have addressed the apostle by
his name, Peter. ‘‘ Doubtless there is
a reference to his good confession (Matt.
xvi. 18). Thou, when uttering the
revelation from My Father, and con:
fessing Me to be the Christ, the Son
of the Living God, wast a true Petros,
or stone, built on Me, the living Rock ;
but now thou wilt deny Me thrice,
because thou speakest thine own words
and reliest on thine own strength,
instead of on Me” (Wordsworth).


“« The cock shall not crow,” etc.—The
fact that Peter would succumb before |


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XXII.





the approaching trial might have been
guessed by a shrewd observer of cha-
racter. Christ, however, shows Divine
foreknowledge in predicting the par-
ticulars of his fall: the time when
(cock-crowing), the threefold assertion,
and the form, in which the denial
would be made.


Vers. 35, 36. The Past and The
Future.

I. The ample provision which had
been made for them whilst they had
been in His service.

II. The troubles they would now
have to face. Then they had been, ina
measure, independent of earthly re-
sources ; now they would need to make
use of them. Then their safety had
been assured ; now their enemies would
be more embittered, and self-defence
be necessary.


Principles, not Rules.—The Lord
Jesus Christ came, not to give men
exact and binding rules of conduct,
but large general principles, capable of
the most flexible and various applica-
tion. Rules of conduct are to be
found among His sayings, indeed, as,
é.g., when He bade His disciples, if
smitten on the one cheek, turn the
other also; or when He bade then, if
any man took their coat, to let him
also rob them of their cloak ; or when
He bade them give to every one that
asked an alms of them, or go out on a
journey unprovided with any change of
clothing and with an empty purse. But
these rules were not meant for a literal,
and still less for a universal, obedience,
since our Lord Himself did not in all
cases obey them, nor His apostles ;
nay, more, these rules were thrown
into a paradoxical form, in order that
we might see that they were not mere
rules, and be compelled to search for
the principles which underlie them.
The rules He gave were passing illus-
trations of great principles of justice,
compassion, trust in God, and brotherly
kindness. Observe what our Lord is
here doing. He is repealing a rule


@o0


=


which He Himself had given to His dis-
ciples only a few months ago, although,
as they confess, that rule had worked
very well. He is replacing it by a
new rule, a rule the very opposite of
that which He had previously given
them; a rule which no sane and
reflective man can possibly suppose He
intended them to obey as a rule, since
it is alien to the very spirit, to the
whole drift, of His teaching. Here,
then, we have a clear proof that the
rules given by Christ were not intended
to become ordinances of perpetual
observance; that He did not mean
men to render them a literal, and still
less a perpetual and universal, obedi-
ence; that we must interpret them, as
all other of His utterances, by aid of
our own common-sense and spiritual
insight ; that what we are to obey in
Him is the sacred and eternal prin-
ciples which they illustrate. Formerly
the twelve were to go forth penniless,
unprovided with aught but a staff,
and to bear with meekness whatever
wrongs or insults the world might
inflict on them. Now they are to
put money in their purse, to pack their
scrip with provisions and conveniences,
to exchange their staff for a sword—
not to submit to, but to defy and
conquer, the hostility of the world.
It is impossible to render literal
obedience to both these rules, and we
have no evidence that the twelve ever
attempted to obey the latter rule
literally. Only a few hours after these
words were spoken, St. Peter struck
Malchus with his sword, and only re-
ceived a rebuke from Christ for his pains.
The fact is, that when Christ threw His
teaching into the form of rules He did
not intend us to take them as rules,
but as picturesque and paradoxical
illustrations of principles. Here is the
proof. Christ Himself repeals a rule
which He Himself had given, and
replaces it with a rule the very opposite
of that which He had given—nay,
replaces it with a rule which never
was, and never will be, literally obeyed ,
and thus He drives us to look for the
principles which underlie His word.


561


CHAP. XXII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





He teaches us that as there are times
when we are to win upon the world by
unselfishness and an unresisting, un-
complaining submission to wrong—in
short, by not resisting evil—so also
there are times in which we are to
resist, to strive against it manfully, to
arm and nerve ourselves for the defence
and furtherance of the faith. If, at
times, we are to be meek for the truth,
at other times we are to be valiant for
the truth. Rules breed customs, and
customs breed corruption. Whereas,
if we have principles instead of rules,
we are obliged to use our common-
sense in applying and in varying our
application of them ; we are compelled
to observe and reflect, to let our
thoughts play freely round them, to
learn and grow wiser by experience.
And all these—observation, reflection,
the use of good sense and experience—
are educational influences of the high-
est value. It is by these we live, and
keep our principles alive, and help to
give life to the world around us.—
Cox.


Vers. 35-38. Sword and Garment.

I. In the letter these counsels seem
to point to a policy the opposite of
non-resistance.—Jesus seems to say
that the great business and duty of
the hour for all who are on His side
is to furnish themselves with swords.
So urgent is the need that he who
wants a weapon must sell his garment
to buy one.

TI. But the very emphasis with
which He speaks shows that His
words are not to be taken in the
literal, prosaic sense.—It is very easy
to see what He means. His object is,
by graphic language, to convey to His
disciples an idea of the gravity of the
situation. “Now,” He would say,
“now is the day, yea, the hour, of
battle. If My kingdom be one of this
world, now is the time for fighting,
not for dreaming. Now matters have
come to extremities, and ye have need
of all your resources. Equip yourselves
with shoes, and purse, and knapsack,
and, above all, with swords and war-


562


like courage.” The disciples did not
understand His meaning. They put
a stupid, prosaic interpretation on
Christ’s parable. “It is enough,’
said Jesus, with a melancholy smile.
“Two swords,” What were two swords
for twelve men and against a hundred
weapons? Enough only for one who
does not mean to fight at all. They
were not called on to fight literally,
against flesh and blood, but in the
bloodless spiritual conflict.— Bruce.


Ver. 35. “ And He said unto them.”
—Not without reason have I spoken
of what is so momentous (vers. 31-34) ;
for now, when I am no longer with
you, your situation will be quite other-
wise than before. There now comes
for you a time of care for yourselves
and of conflict.— Meyer.


Ver. 36. ‘“ But now.”—Once the
least care was superfluous; now the
most anxious care was not too much, ~


“A sword.”—I.e., they would now
be reduced to such a condition, in
which the men of this world would
resort to such means of defence.


* Parable of the Sword and the Garment.
—wNo saying like this is to be found
in any of the other gospels. It is a
parable. Let us enforce it.

I. It is uttered with solemn em-
phasis.

II. It teaches that there is a conflict
in the Christian life—A sword is
needed. Better lack a garment than
lack a sword. But it is a battle in,
and not of, this world that Christ
speaks of.

III. Marvel not at the vehemence
of the words.—There are two reasons


for it. 1. They contradict flesh and
blood. It is painful to be always
armed. It makes life a perpetual
effort. Nature would let us be indo-


lent and self-sparing. 2. In_ this
conflict deception and_ self-deception
are ever busily working, and he who
might gird himself for more difficulty


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


is in danger of relaxing effort under
illusion. It is Satan’s master-art to
persuade us that there is no battle—
that all are agreed. But no! one
must fight either against the world
or for it. He cannot be neutral. So
delay not the purchase of the sword.
Sell your very garment now, and buy
it. The garment of pride, of slothful-
ness, of carelessness, of worldliness, of
besetting sin—sell it, discard it, fling it
away, and buy of Christ the sword of
grace and faith, of love, and the Spirit,
which whosoever hath must be more
than conqueror. Thus, in this world,
in all courage and in all strength, you
shall be Christ’s soldiers.— Vaughan.


Ver. 37. “ Reckoned among the trans-
gressors.”—The connection is this:
“Your situation among men will be
one of neglect, and even of danger ;
for I Myself am about to be reckoned
among transgressors.”


CHAP. XXII.





words of Christ—how different from
that spiritual enlightenment which
they manifested after the day of Pen-
tecost ! and (2) the patience and gen-
tleness of our Lord in dealing with
them.

“ Tt is enough.”’—Perhaps the words
are slightly ironical. “Two swords are
enough for all the fighting that you
will be called upon to engage in.”


The Conversation Broken off.-—Ilf
it were possible for us to imagine our
Lord for a moment in the Paschal
night with a melancholy smile on His
heavenly countenance, it would be at
the affair of the two swords. Twa
swords over against the whole might
of the world, of hell, and of death,
which were to engage in the assault
upon Him! He accounts it impossible
to make the whole preposterousness of
this thought as visible to them as it is
to Himself, and therefore breaks off


the conversation on the subject, in the
tone of one who is conscious that others
would not understand Him, and .who
therefore holds all further speech im-
possible.— Van Oosterzee.


Ver. 38. “ Here are two swords.” —
Note (1) the slavish, literal interpre-
tation which the disciples gave to the


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 39—46.


The Strife and the Victory.—At first sight there is something very surprising
in this scene in the garden of Gethsemane. Without anytliing to prepare us for
its occurrence it suddenly breaks in upon the gospel narrative, like a storm
coming one knows not whence. After the peaceful celebration of the Passover,
after the institution of the Supper in which His sacrificial death is so plainly
indicated, after the long conversations which, for pathos and depth of significance,
have no parallel in history, and after the quiet walk through the sleeping city,
there comes in an instant this profound outburst of anguish. Certainly Jesus
knew beforehand, and for a long time past, that His work of salvation would be
concluded by His death. When He entered Jerusalem He knew that He would
not depart alive from the city that slew the prophets. He clearly saw events
hurrying on to this close, and knew that but a brief interval divided the fleeting
popularity that attended His triumphal entry into the city from His condemna-
tion and death. Yet it was only in the course of this evening that He knew
that the hour—AHis houwr—was at hand. He had seen Judas leave the room,
and had perceived that this night was to be His last. Then once more the
enemy whom He had defeated in the wilderness made a final assault upon Him,
and the last temptation possible beset Christ in the garden of Gethsemane: it
arose from the fear of death.

I. First of all there were the dreadful circumstances of the form of death
He was to meet.—Doubtless this constituted part, though perhaps but a sub-


563


A


cHar.xxm. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





ordinate part, of the temptation now presented to Him. Must He not have
shuddered as He thought of the sufferings involved in a death by crucifixion.
He was clothed with our flesh and was as sensitive as we are to bodily pain.
The first of His temptations in the wilderness had been to put an end to the
bodily pains excited by hunger by acting independently of the Divine will, and
we can easily believe that the tempter now again appealed to the natural instinct
of self-preservation by suggesting that He should not submit to the tortures of
crucifixion.

II. Then, too, there was the moral infamy connected with His execution as
a malefactor.—He knew that crucifixion would expose Him to the abhorrence of
the whole Jewish people, for it was written in their law, ‘‘ Cursed is every one
that hangeth on a tree.” It was a lingering form of death, which subjected.
those who underwent it sometimes to days of helpless misery, and left them at
the mercy of all who chose to mock and insult them. It was a death which
would proclaim Him as a false pretender to the rank and dignity of the Messiah,
and brand Him as a malefactor. What wonder if the thought of dying such a
death filled Him with agony !

III. Death itself, apart from the pains and ignominy of crucifixion, was full
of horror for Him.— He was partaker of our nature, and for every man death,
though inevitable, has something terrible in it, which can never fail to strike
dread into the spirit. It was a man of God who gave to it the name of “the
king of terrors.” There is in all of us a natural instinct which recoils from it,
and Christ, who was in all points like us, doubtless partook of this. But if
there is in our case an instinct which leads us to recoil from death, there is,
doubtless, another which accepts it as natural and sees in it a punishment for -
sin. We feel that we have not, or have no longer, an inalienable right to life.
But He who suffered agony in Gethsemane had that right, and it is a feeling of
this which rises up in revolt in Him at the very moment when He sees death
to be imminent. Death is the wages of sin, and sin never had any hold upon
Him. Now all at once He realises that He must pass through that dark portal
through which all sinners are doomed to pass. He who was without sin must
accept the wages of sin. Yet, did Jesus Christ hesitate as to accomplishing His
work? In this hour of anguish, does He consider whether He will carry it
through to the end or give it up? No, not fora moment. He is determined to
accomplish His work, but the question rises in His mind, Are death, and the
death of the cross, the necessary means for that end? His work He does not
even name, That which He asks His Father to spare Him, if possible, is the
act which appears to Him as the consummation of His work—the “ cup,”
which represents His death. It was necessary, not only that Jesus should die,
but that He die of His own free-will—that He should wish to die. And when
once His will had been brought into conformity with the will of His Father His
agony was past. He has won the victory by complete renunciation of Himself.
The sacrifice He offers is accepted, though not yet consummated, and in
Gethsemane the fundamental act of our salvation is accomplished. There
are in the history of the plan of God two gardens—the garden of Eden and the
garden of Gethsemane. The one is exactly the counterpart of the other. In
the one the first son of God asserted himself against his Father, and sought, by
disobedience, to add some Divine element to his humanity. The consequence was
that he died and entailed death upon the whole of his race. In the other the
second Son of God subjected His own will to that of His Father, and, in perfect
obedience, offered Himself unto God. The consequence, in His case also, was that
He died; but, since He gave up His life freely, He took it again, and became
the Author of life to all His brethren, who, for His sake, receive the pardon of
their sins. (See Berguer’s Sermons: “ Gethsémané ”).


564


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





CHAP. XXII.





SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 39—46.


Vers. 39-46. Gethsemane.—One of
the most prominent and mysterious
passages in our Lord’s life.

I. Suffering of peculiar intensity.

II. A conflict between inclination
and duty.

III. Explainable only on the ground
that He died to bear the great burden
of sin.

IV. Duty overmasters inclination. —
He offers Himself willingly for the
cross and the grave.—Wicoll.


Ver. 39. “As He was wont.”—
Retirement for (1) converse with God,
and (2) with our own hearts, is salutary
for us, especially after celebration of
the Lord’s Supper. The fact that
Christ Himself found solace and
strength in this way is highly signi-
ficant.


The Calmness of Jesus.

I. Note the spirit in which the great
agony was approached._—_How we go
into a trial is often of as much import-
ance as how we behave ourselves in it.
In entrance into trial, in continuance
in it, in egress from it, Jesus was
perfect. What He had dreaded all
His life long was just at hand. The
cross, in clear-cut sharpness, was just
jn view. But He went in calmness to
the accustomed place, and for the ac-
customed purpose.

II. There is but little of this calm-
ness manifested in even the great
saints of God.—Abraham, Job, Moses,
Elijah, all were greatly troubled in
trying crises of their lives. Not so
Jesus. See His calmness in the midst
of provoking and angry men; before
Pilate, how unlike the excitement that
goes on in the world !

III. How suggestive is the phrase
as to the habits of Christ’s life !— His
great trial was to find Him in the
midst of prayer. His enemies knew
where to look for Him. Judas knew
His place and occupation. And as with
His habits of devotion, so with His


thoughtfulness and generosity, tender-
ness and pity. Is He not still the
same? Heis unchanged. The habits
of His earthly life have left their im-
press on Him for ever.— Power.


Vers. 40-46. Lessons from Geth-
semane.

I. About Christ.—1. His true
humanity. 2. His wonderful love.
3. His touching forbearance with His
disciples.

II. About sin.—1. Its exceeding
sinfulness, 2. Its terrible power. 3.
Its awful curse.

III. About temptation—1. To ex-
pect it. 2. How to conquer it by watch-
fulness and prayer.—W. Taylor.


Ver. 40. “ Enter not into temptation.”
—1. They were to be exposed to trial.
2. There was danger of the circum-
stances in which they were to be placed
serving as a temptation to forsake
Him or to deny their faith in Him.
3. The great means for their preserva-
tion was prayer.


Vers. 41-44. The Prayers in the
Garden.—W hatisthe subject of Christ’s
repeated prayer? He does not seek
deliverance from the cross. It was
from a thing worse than death to the
holy soul of the God-Man. It was
from the hour of conscious sin-bearing
and sin-becoming; from this awful
horror He shrank back.

I. The angel strengthening was the
first answer to His prayer.

II. The redoubled fervour of the
prayer was the second answer —There
was a growth of submissiveness between
the two prayers. The first prayer
was submissive, asking the boon; the
second accepts the refusal, asking only
that the Divine will be done.— Vaughan.


Vers, 41, 42. The Great Example of
Prayer.—1. The soul separated from
all others and in communion with God.
2. Reverence of manner and attitude


565


CHAP. XXII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





before God. 3. The expression of
sincere desire. 4. Resignation to the
will of God, whether He grant or deny
the request.


Ver. 41. “ Was withdrawn.” — The
word, the reluctance, as it were, with
which one tears himself away from
friends. Of course, we are not to
understand the word as if our Lord,
almost against His will, separated Him-
self from the circle of His disciples, but
simply thus, that He, following the
constraint of His agitation of soul, with
visible intensity of feeling and rapid
steps, sought the still solitude.—Van
Oosterzee.


Ver. 42. The Cup of Suffering.

I. Christ's sufferings were not purely,
nor even principally, physical.

II. Nor couli His sufferings have
risen merely through His foreknow-
ledge of death.

III. Nor were His sufferings en-
dured as an equivalent for a certain
amount of sin.

IV. His sufferings arose from His
profound sympathy with humanity,and
intense perception of man’s sin.— Hull.





“ Nevertheless.”

I. The response which may be given
to the unthwarted love of God by the
heart that is perfect towards Him is
heralded by this word.—Here, really
for Himself, and ideally for all those
who partake in Him through faith,
Christ determinedly set His will in
harmony with God’s. He made the
supreme sacrifice of self which God
accepted as the sufficient sacrifice for
us all. His will, as man, was that the
cup should pass; God’s will was that
He should drink it.

IJ, This word, again, represented a
defiance of circumstances, an appeal
from the compulsimn and the pressure
of the world and the flesh to the
right of self-determination.—The weak-
ness of His human flesh, the shrinking
from the hatred and cruelty of man,
the fear lest, as His life, so His death
might be a failure,—all these made up


566


the strong stream of temptation against
which Christ set the whole force of His
being, when He cried, “‘ Nevertheless.”
It was not merely surrender. It was
victor y.—WVicoll.


Vers. 43-44. Three Signs of the Deep
Agony of Christ.

I, A weakness, calling for immediate
and heavenly succour.

II. More earnest prayer.

III. Sweat, “(as it were great drops
of blood.”


Ver. 43. “ There appeared an angel.”
—In the temptation in the wilderness
the angels ministercd to Christ after
the conflict. Here He is sustained by
heavenly aid during the conflict—thus
showing us how much more trying was
the second experience.


“ Strengthening Him.” —God may help
us either (1) by removing the cause of
sorrow, or (2) by imparting to us fresh
strength.


Ver. 44. “ Being in an agony.” —His
delicately sensitive humanity shrinks
from death; His holy humanity from
the night of darkncss; His loving
humanity from the hatred that is
now about to reach its.most fearful
culmination. Nay, if His humanity
was of a finite nature, He might,
standing over against the burden of
the sin of millions, conceive, as we
believe, even the possibility of sink-
ing under His fearful burden. Sin
and death show themselves now to His
eye in an entirely different light than
before His incarnation, when death
stood already, it is true, before Him,
without, however, having dared to essay
any direct assault upon Himself.—Van
Oosterzee.


I. A mysterious agony.—l. His
dread of coming into contact with the
world’s evil. 2. His task of learning
obedience by the things that He suf-
fered.

II. A mighty prayer in the agony.

III. The gracious answer.— Davies.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XXII.


a i ak a ee


Terror of Death. We men, conceived
and born in sin, have an impure, hard
flesh, that is not quick to feel. The
fresher, the sounder the man, the more
he feels what is contrary to him.
Because Christ’s body was pure and
without sin, and our body is impure,
therefore we scarcely feel the terrors
of death in two degrees where Christ
felt them in ten, since He is to be the
greatest martyr and to feel the utmost
terror of death.—Luther.


Ver. 45. “Sleeping for sorrow.” —
1, The weakness of the disciples—failing
to watch with their Master. 2. The
kindly construction put upon it.


Ver. 46. “ Lest ye enter into temp-
tation.” —The temptation was now past
for Jesus; by watching and prayer He
had overcome it. The disciples, by neg-
lecting His warning, were unprepared
for the trial to which they were to be
exposed,


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 47—53.


The Arrest.—The agony (lit. “‘struggle”) in the garden of Gethsemane was
now past, and Christ had won the victory, so that now He was fortified against
the new form of temptation to which He was subjected. For still the “power
of darkness” (ver. 53), was arrayed against Him, and the tempter, who had
sought in vain to overthrow His self-possession by suggestions of coming evil,
now resorts to force and arms. The quiet of the garden and of the midnight
hour is broken in upon by the arrival of a multitude of enemies, led by one into
whom Satan had entered. All through the scene that followed the Divine
majesty and calmness of the Saviour are very conspicuous. Neither the baseness
of the act of betrayal, nor the rash conduct of one of His would-be defenders, nor
the malignant rage of His enemies, provokes Him to a hasty word. He ex-
postulates in turn with the traitor, with the disciple who drew his sword, and
with His captors.

I. An appeal to conscience.—If anything might have aroused the fiercest and
most righteous indignation, it was surely the conduct of Judas. He knew the
place where Christ was to be found, and the reason why He was accustomed to
resort thither. Yet He did not hesitate to violate the sanctity of the place of
prayer used by his Master, so bent was he upon carrying out his evil purpose.
He goes before the armed band as their leader, and as if to make sure that
Christ should not escape, even if he had to capture Him with his own hands.
And then, too, as the crowning act of baseness, he had arranged to point out the
Saviour to His captors by drawing near to Him and kissing Him. Surely we
have sin here in its last and most hateful form: when the evil purpose is dis-
guised by hypocritical pretence, and the sinner is so hardened as not even to
recognise his own baseness. There is a certain severity, mingled with tenderness,
in the expostulation addressed by Jesus to the traitor. His calling him by his
name might have reminded him of friendly, confidential intercourse in former
days. “Is it by this mark of affection, the kiss of discipleship and friendship,
that the signal is to be given to the enemy? Dost thou kiss and betray?” In
words calculated to sting and arouse the sleeping conscience, Jesus reveals to the
fallen apostle the blackness of his guilt. He calls the evil by its name and
reveals it in all its hideousness. And had not the heart of Judas been hardened,
the remonstrance of Jesus might not have been in vain. Had he, even at his last
moment, repented and asked forgiveness, we cannot doubt but that it would have
been freely extended to him. The pleading of Christ with the sinner falls in vain
on the heart that is wedded to its sin.

II. A call to patience.—Before Jesus had had time to reply to the question of
the apostles, ‘ Lord, shall we smite with the sword?” one of them, Peter, acted
on his own impulse and struck wildly at one of the crowd. Perhaps Malchus,


567


ae: a


CHAP. XXII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. |





the servant of the high priest, who received the blow, was more prominent than
his fellows in laying hands upon. Jesus; yet was he less guilty than others—less
guilty, for example, than the high priest, from whom probably he caught by
contagion the spirit of rancorous hatred against the Saviour. The high priest
veiled his hatred under courteous phrases and legal forms: the uncultured, rude
servant manifested his hatred in a rough, brutal way. Yet was the master more
guilty than the servant. Peter’s action was hasty and ill-advised. It is not for
the Church to wield the sword of justice; she is apt to strike the wrong person.
His action, too, not only endangered his own safety, but was calculated to com-
promise his Master’s cause. For it was necessary for Jesus, in order to clear
Himself from the accusations brought against Him by the Jews, to be able to
say, ‘“‘My kingdom is not of this world; if My kingdom were of this world, then
would My servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews” (John xviii. 36).
And so Christ restrained the apostle from striking another blow, and healed the
wound he had inflicted. His words prescribed patience instead of resistance.
“Suffer ye thus far”—“ allow these men to go as far as this, to bind Me and
take Me away.” How marvellous the patience shown by Him, whose next action
proved His possession of superhuman power! What a rebuke does not His sub-
mission to violence and wrong administer to us, who are so eager to resent every
petty affront! He returns good for evil, and blesses His enemies. He heals the
man who was binding His hands, and who not only asked for no benefit, but was.
even devoid of faith in Him who conferred it.

III. A rebuke of cowardice.—Christ turns from those who were merely acting
under orders, and addresses the members of the Sanhedrim, who had not thought
it beneath their dignity to be present at the arrest of their victim, and rebukes
their cowardice. Surely all this parade of soldiers and officers for the capture of
one man, who offered no resistance, was unnecessary! He was no desperate male-
factor, but one who had often taught the people the way of righteousness, in the
courts of the Temple. Had He been an evil-doer they might have arrested Him
openly, in the daylight. And even now it was not the force they brought against
Him that compelled His surrender. It was “their hour ’”’—the hour appointcd
by God for their triumph and for His submission; a greater than an earthly
power aided them, but it was “the power of darkness.” And so, even at the
time when Christ yielded to His foes, He declared plainly that He was the light,
that resistance to Him was of the essence of sin, and anticipated the triumph of
the light over darkness. This hour would pass, and the Sun of Righteousness,
which was now suffering eclipse, would shine forth in His strength.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 47—53.


Vers. 47-53. The Arrest of Jesus. Ver. 48. “‘ Judas, betrayest thou ?”—


I. The traitor’s kiss (vers. 47, 48).

II. The attempt, on the part of the
disciples, to defend Him (vers. 49-51).

III. The protest of Christ against
the treachery and cowardice of His
enemies (vers. 52, 53).


Ver. 47. “ Went before them.”—A
twofold act of treachery Judas was
guilty of. 1. He led the band to the
place where they might find Jesus.
2. He pointed Him out, so as to secure
His apprehension.


568


Every word in the sentence indicates
the depth of guilt belonging to this evil
deed.

I. Its treachery.—“ Judas, betrayest
thou?”

IT. Its malice.—“ Betrayest.”

III. Its ingratitude. The Son of
man.”


IV. Its hypocrisy.—“ With a kiss.”


“ Betrayest thou ?”— Jesus spoke ap-
pealingly to Judas, but only cast a look
upon Peter. The words were lost upon


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,


Judas: the look brought Peter to re-
pentance.


Vers. 48, 61. Two Rebukes.—These
rebukes were given by our Lord to two
disciples. Both quiet, but potent.

I. To the arch-hypocrite—A few
mild words.

II. To the denying disciple—A
look.

III. Their results——Each rebuke
was followed by repentance. But
what a difference! Heaven in the
one; hell in the other. The one
tearful ; the other tearless. The one
leading to contrition and restoration ;
the other to remorse, anguish, suicide.
—Campbell.


Ver. 49. “Shall we smite ?”—The
enigmatical warning of ver. 36 was
evidently in the minds of the disciples,
They were not sure whether or not He
intended them to use the swords they
carried.


Ver. 50. ‘ Smote a servant,”—By
this action Peter (1) endangered his
own safety, and (2) compromised the
cause of his Master, both by manifest-
ing a spirit antagonistic to His and by
giving occasion for the charge of
resisting the officers of justice being
made against Him.


Ver. 51. “Healed him.”—A mark
(1) of Christ’s power, (2) of His mercy,
even towards an enemy.

I. How readily the Saviour repaired


CHAP. XXII.





the damage caused by the mistaken
zeal of His servants !

II. How Christ blesses His enemies,
even while manifesting intensest
opposition !

IIT. Christ teaches us that in doing
good the need is the claim.— Hastings.


Vers. 52, 53. The Weapons and
Stratagems used against Christ Un-
necessary.—1. His whole previous
conduct might have made it clear to
them that He would offer no resistance.
2. He had oftentimes been within their
grasp, but they had not had courage to
seize Him.


Ver. 52. “Chief priests.”—In spite
of their dignity, they were drawn, by
motives of curiosity and malice, to
witness His arrest. The phrase “which
were come to Him” seems to imply
that they had just arrived, possibly to
receive Him into their custody the
moment He was apprehended.


Ver. 53. “ Your hour.”—1, A time
appointed by God. 2. A time strictly
limited, and short.


“This is your hour.”’—Our Lord
here distinguishes between the power
exercised over Him by men, and that
by the Lvil One; but so as to make the
“power ” which rules over them to be
that of darkness, while His own asser-
tion of this shows that all was by the
determinate counsel and fore-know


ledge of God.—A/ford.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 54—71.


Denial, Mockery, and Condemnation of the Lord.—In this section we have a
further account of our Lord’s sufferings, and a revelation of man’s sin. A
trusted friend proves faithless, the underlings of the rulers brutally ridicule His
prophetic claims, and their masters vote Him a blasphemer for asserting His
divinity and Messiahship.

I. The failure of loyalty and love in Peter’s denials.—The morning was cold,
and Peter, exhausted, sleepy, sad, and shivering, was glad to creep near the fire
in the court-yard. Its light betrayed him to a woman’s sharp eye, and her
gossiping tongue could not help blurting out her discovery. Curiosity, not
malice, moved her, and there is no reason to suppose that any harm would have
come to Peter if he had said, as he should have done, * Yes, I am His disciple.”
The day for persecuting the servants was not yet come, but for the present it was


569


CHAP. XXII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





Jesus only who was aimed at. No doubt cowardice had a share in the denials,
but there was more than that in them. Peter was worn out with fatigue,
excitement, and sorrow. He was always easily moved by surroundings, so now
he could not resist the current of opinion, and dreaded being unlike even the
menials among whom he sat. He was ashamed of his Master, and hid his
colours, not so much for fear of bodily harm as of ridicule. May he not, too,
have begun to doubt whether, after all, Jesus was what he had thought Him?
Christ prayed that Peter’s faith should not fail, or be totally eclipsed, and that
may indicate that the assault was made on his faith, and that it wavered, though
it recovered steadfastness. The sight of Jesus bound, unresisting, and evidently
at the mercy of the rulers, might well make a firmer faith stagger. We have
not to steel ourselves to bear bodily harm if we confess Christ, but many of us
have to run counter to a strong current flowing round us, and to be alone in the
midst of unsympathising companions, ready to laugh and gibe; and some of us
are tempted to waver in our convictions of Christ’s divinity, because He still
seems to stand at the bar of the wise men and leaders of opinion, and to be
treated by them as a pretender. It is a wretched thing to be persecuted out of
one’s Christianity by fire and sword, but it is worse to be laughed out of it, or
lose it because we breathe an atmosphere of unbelief. Peter slipped away to
the gateway, and there, apparently, was again attacked, first by the portress and
then by others, which occasioned the second denial, while the third took place in
the same spot about an hour afterwards. One sin makes many. The devil’s
hounds hunt in packs. Consistency requires the denier to stick to his lie, If
Peter had been less confident he would have been more safe. What business
had he thrusting himself into the palace? Over-reliance on self leads us to put
ourselves in the way of temptations it were wise to avoid. In the very flood-tide
of Peter’s oaths the cock-crow is heard, and the half-finished denial sticks in his
throat at the sound. At the same moment he sees Jesus led past him, and that
look, so full of love, reproof, and pardon, brought him back to loyalty, and saved
him from despair. The assurance of Christ’s knowledge of our sins against Him
melts the heart when the assurance of His forgiveness and tender love comes
with it. Then tears, which are wholly humble, but not wholly grief, flow.
They do not wash away the sin, but they come from the assurance that Christ’s
love, like a flood, has swept it away. They save from remorse, which has no
healing in it.

II. The rude taunts of the servants.—The mockery here comes from Jews,
and is directed against Christ’s prophetic character, while the later jeers of the
Roman soldiers made a jest of His kingship. Rude natures have to take rude
ways of expression, and the vulgar mockery meant precisely the same as more
polite and covert scorn means from more polished people—namely, rooted dis-
belief in Him. These mockers were contented to take their opinions on trust
from priests and rabbis. How often, since then, have Christ’s servants been
objects of popular odium at the suggestion of the same classes, and how often
have the ignorant people been misled, by their trust in their teachers, to hate and
persecute their true Master! Jesus is silent under all the mockery, but then, as
now, He knows who strikes Him. He will speak one day, and His speech will
be detection and condemnation. Then He was silent, as patiently enduring
shame and spitting for our sakes. Now He is silent, as long-suffering and
wooing us to repentance; but He keeps count and record of men’s revilings, and
the day comes when He whose eyes are as a flame of fire will say to every foe,
“ T know thy works.”

IlI. The formal rejection and condemnation by the council.—The ruler’s
question was put simply in order to obtain material for the condemnation
already resolved on. Our Lord’s answer falls into two parts, in the first of


570


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,  cuap. Xxtt.





which He declines to recognise the bona fides of His judges, and the competency
of the tribunal, and in the second goes beyond their question, and claims par-
ticipation in Divine glory and power. Jesus will not unfold His claims to those
who only seek to hear them in order to reject, not to examine, them. Silence is
His answer to ingrained prejudice masquerading as honest inquiry. Jesus will
gladly speak with any who will be frank with Him, and let Him search their
hearts ; but He will not unfold His mission to such as will refuse to answer His
questions. But, while He thus declines to submit Himself to that tribunal, He
will not leave them without once more asserting an even higher dignity than
that of Messiah. As a prisoner at their bar, He has nothing to say to them,
but as their King and future Judge he has something. It was fitting that the
representatives of Israel, however prejudiced, should hear at that supreme
moment the full assertion of full deity. It was fitting that Israel should
condemn itself, by treating that claim as blasphemy. It was fitting tlat Jesus
should bring about His death by His twofold claim—that made to the Sanhe-
drim, of being the Son of God, and that before Pilate, of being the King of the
Jews. The whole scene teaches us the voluntary character of Christ’s death.
It carries our thoughts forward to the time when the criminal of that morning
shall be the Judge, and the judges and we shall stand at His bar. If His
claim to be Divine was true, do we worship Him? If false, what was He? It
mirrors the principles on which He deals with men universally; He meets
hypocritical pretences of seeking the truth about Him with silence, but He is
ever ready to open His heart to the honest and docile spirits who are ready
to accept His words, and glad to open their inmost secrets to Him.—Maclaren.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 54—71.


Vers. 54-71. The Religious Process :
Christ before the Sanhedrim.

I. The denial of Peter (vers. 54-62).

II. The ill-treatment of Jesus by the
Jews (vers. 63-65).

III. The sentence of condemnation
pronounced by the high priest (vers.
66-71).


Vers. 54-60. Peter’s Fall.

T. He follows afar off—He will not
altogether forsake Christ, and yet seeks
to avoid danger by not keeping too
near to Him.

il. He takes his place among the
enemies of Christ, without avowing his
discipleship.

III. His presence of mind fails him
when danger arises.

IV. He persists in denying his
Master, though time for recollection
was given him, between each accusation
of being one of His disciples.


Causes of Peter’s Fall.
I. Self-confidence.
II. Indecision.


II. Fear of man.
IV. False shame.
V. Evil company.


Ver. 54. “ Brought Him into the high
priest's house.”—The high priest un-
consciously receives the sacrificial
Victim who is to be offered for the sin
of the world. Contrast the bli:dness
and malice of the high priest with the
clear consciousness of Jesus of the part
He was to play in the great work of
redemption, and with the meekness
with which He submitted to His
sufferings.


“ Followed afar off.”—It is scarcely
possible to form a distinct image of the
mood in which the impetuous disciple,
impelled by curiosity, anxiety, and
affection, ventures to enter the high-
priestly palace.—Van Oosterzee.


“ Afar off.’—Peter is the David of
the New Testament. He did not fall
into the same sins, but he fell, was
penitent, was forgiven, was restored.


o71


CHAP. XXII.


His sin was faithlessness, failure in
affection, ceasing to regard Christ as
first and to follow Him closely to the
last. His case illustrates a phase of
disciple-life—how one, under fear, may
get out of the range of Christ’s in-
fluence, and, while continuing a dis-
disciple, follow only “afar off.”

I. Peter followed afar off; still, he
followed.—Many had never followed
Christ, or followed only to hate and
harass Him.

II. He was too much influenced by
the feelings and conduct of others.—
And so he thought a little distance
from Christ was safer than perfect
nearness. This is often the state of
mind of those who begin deliberately
to follow Christ at a distance. It is
cowardice.

IIl. It was a sad episode in an
otherwise devoted life.—No nced to
excuse or exaggerate. It was very
natural. Without all-mastering faith
in Christ self-distrust is sure to betray
us.
IV. The only remedy is to rise and
follow again.—To begin afresh, to
come near, to keep near, at all hazards ;
to be ready for sacrifice, to be reliant
on the look, the word, the hand, the
help of our Master. All this will
keep us near, and make us faithful.—
McColl.


Ver. 56. “A certain maid.”—The
women introduced on this occasion are
the only women mentioned as taking
part with the enemies of our Lord, and
even they are not concerned in bring-
ing about His condemnation, nor any
further than to detect St. Peter. It
is remarkable that no woman is men-
tioned, throughout, as speaking against
our Lord in His life, or having a share
in His death. On the contrary, He
is anointed by a woman for His
burial, women are the last at His
grave, the first at His resurrection ;
to a woman He first appeared after
His rising from the dead; women
from Galilee ministered to His wants ;
women bewailed and lamented Him;
a heathen woman interceded for His


572


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


life with her husband, the governor :
and, above all, of a woman He was
born.— Williams.


Ver. 57. “I know Him not.”—No
excuses can be found for Peter’s guilt,
but it is only just to him to remember
the very trying circumstances in which
he stood.

I. His hopes had been overthrown;
he saw his Master the sport of cruel
foes.

II. He was subjected to special
temptation by Satan.

IIT. He felt himself alone among
enemies—one apostle had become a
traitor, and the others had forsaken
their Master.


Ver. 58. “ Another saw him.”—The
longer he continues in the company of
enemies of Christ the worse it is for
him—the more frequent do the tempta-
tions to unfaithfulness become. Flight
from temptation is often the only safe
course.


Ver. 59. “ Confidently affirmed.”—
The apostle is now overwhelmed by
proof of the charge against him. As
St. John tells us (xviii. 26) it is
a kinsman of Malchus who identifies
him as having been in the garden with
Christ.


Vers. 60-62. Peter’s Repentance.

I. His conscience awoke when the
crowing of the cock reminded him of
Christ’s prophecy.

II. He was gently reproached and
convicted of ingratitude and cowar-
dice by the look of his Master.

Ill. He is filled with godly sorrow
and penitence.


Ver. 60. “TZ know not.”—St. Luke
omits reference to the “cursing and
swearing” which accompanied this last
denial (Matt. xxvi. 74).


Vers. 61, 62. The Fall and The
Rising.—Such is the after-taste of sin.
Such is the awakening from the sleep
of the soul, to which the tempter has
successfully presented one of his bright,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP, XXII.





seductive visions. It is an example of
the process of temptation. Three
things are to be noticed: 1. The sleep.
2. The dream, 3. The awakening.

I. The state of the soul before sin.
—aA state of sleep, or of security. Not
of safety, but of imagined safety.
Peter was ignorant, rash, self-confi-
dent. Christian people are all liable
to this state of fancied strength. Itis
our chief bane.

II. The state of the soul during the
sin.—The sort of disguise under which
the offence comes. The temptation
came suddenly and repeatedly. The
apostle’s only impulse was that of self-
preservation. What a picture of
human nature! in our little timic-
ities about the world’s opinion.

III. The state of the soul after the
sin.—Christ’s prayer did not prevent
the fall, but it secured the rising. The
look of Christ, full of pity, of sorrow, of
tenderness, recalled the sinner to him-
self, and brought a flood of penitence.
If we have sinned like him, may we,
like him, bitterly lament our cowardice
and ingratitude, and hasten back to
Christ’s feet for forgiveness. Happy
these whose shameful fall has been
salutary. But to how many has there
been no return from the downward
course !— Vaughan.


Peter's Repentance, a Type of True
Sorrow.—l. Peter’s sorrow did not
arise from the fact that his guilt was
known.

II. It was net simply the suffering
of remorse.

III. It rose from the sense of Christ’s
love.

IV. It was manifest in the conquest
of self-trust.

V. It became the element of spiritual
strength.— Hull.


Ver. 61. “The Lord turned and
looked.” —O Saviour, couldst Thou find
leisure, when Thou stoodest at the bar
of that unjust and cruel judgment,
amidst all that bloody rabble of
enemies, in the sense of all their fury
and the expectation of Thine own


death, to listen unto this monitor of
Peter’s repentance, and, upon the hear-
ing of it, to cast back Thine eyes upon
Thy denying, cursing, abjuring dis.
ciple? Oh mercy beyond measure, and
beyond all the possibility of our admir-
ation, to neglect Thyself for a sinner,
to attend to the repentance of one,
when Thou wert about to lay down Thy


life for all !—Afall.


The Saviour’s Look.—What was ex:
pressed in that look of our blessed
Saviour, thought of man cannot con-
ceive, and words cannot utter. That
it spoke of all that had passed in our
Lord’s long intimacy with St. Peter,
and especially of the conversation of
that night, and that it derived a
peculiar force and meaning from the
indignities which our Lord was suffer-
ing—that it implied something of this,
we may well suppose; but what more
we cannot tell. The conciseness and
sublimity with which it is mentioned
resembles the account in Genesis of
His word being spoken, at which the
world was created. Christ looked, and
light filled the soul of Peter. The
thought of his Lord’s Divinity, which
he had believed, but had forgotten, now
rushed afresh on his mind. In the
darkness and silence of the night, his
eyes were opened to all that had passed.
— Williams.


Ver. 62. ‘“ Wept.”—The word means
rather “wept aloud” than “shed
tears.” He “went out” from the
presence of men, and after this, in the
whole history of the Passion we no
longer discover the least trace of him.


Peter and Judas : a Contrast.
I. Consider their privileges.
II. Contrast their characters.
III. Contrast their sins.—In their
origin, their growth, their results.
IV. Contrast their repentance.—
W. Taylor.


Vers. 63-65. ‘“‘ Mocked Him and
smote Him.”’—One is fain to pass
hastily over the record of the brutality


573


CHAP. XXII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


to which Jesus was exposed. Yet, in
reading it, two thoughts strike us.

I. That the insults disgraced those
who offered them, rather than Him who
bore them.

IJ. That these servants followed
their masters’ example—the rancour
which priests and elders cherished was
thus manifested by their attendants in
ruder, coarser ways. Sin ever tends
to grosser and baser forms as it passes
from mind to mind.


Vers. 63-71. Christ here an Example
to us in (1) His patience ; (2) His inno-
cence; (3) His prudence; (4) His holy
boldness.


Ver. 66. “ Art Thou the Christ ?” —
There was nothing in itself blasphemous
in claiming to be the Christ. This
claim, even if false, did not infringe
upon the honour of God. If, then, the
statements concerning His Messianic
dignity, which Jesus made, assumed a
blasphemous character in the opinion
of the Jews, it was because the title
“Son of God,” which He so often used
of Himself, expressed a higher claim
than that of Messiahship. Hence the
question here asked is merely prepara-
tory to that in ver. 70: “ Art Thou
then the Son of God?” It was only as
the first claim was completed by the
second that a capital charge against
Jesus could be constructed.—G@odet.


Vers, 67-69. The Enemies of Christ
are Not Fair Judges of His Claims.
I. They ask a question, but have





their minds already made up against
Him.

II. If confuted they do not admit
the fact, but maintain a _ sullen
silence.

III, Yet a convincing answer will
they receive when they see Him on
the throne of His power and appear at
His tribunal.


Vers. 67, 68. “Jf I tell you,” ete.—
They were neither fair-minded judges,
whom He might convince of His
innocence, nor disciples whom He
might instruct.


Ver. 69. “ Sit on the right hand,.”—
The present, with all its ignominy, is
contrasted with the glory of the future :
now a prisoner, at the mercy of men;
then to be supreme ruler of the
universe.


Ver. 70. “‘ The Son of God.”—The
Jews regarded the Messiah as Son of
God in virtue of His theocratical office ;
but they are here face to face with the
fact that Jesus claims the title as be-
longing to Him on other grounds—
those of His essential Divinity.


Ver. 71. “ What further need ?”—
The ground on which Christ was con-
demned was His own claim to be the
Son of God. Either His claim was
well-founded, or the Jews were right
in putting Him to death. To deny or
to ignore His Divinity is to side with
His murderers.





aan Ew





574


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. cmap. XXIII
$$ LS


CHAPTER XXIII.
CRITICAL NOTES.


Ver. 1. Whole multitude.—Rather, “company” (R.V.). The word is a different one from
that so often used to denote “ the crowd,” or “the mob.” It here simply means the members
of the Sanhedrim, Pilate.—His rule in Judea had been marked by many acts of harshness
and cruelty. His hatred of the people rendered it necessary for considerable adroitness to
be made use of by the Jewish rulers to get him to do as they wished. They drop the charge
of blasphemy in claiming to be the Son of God, and concoct an accusation of a political
character.

Ver. 2. We found.—This a legal term, implying “we have tried and convicted him of.”
This fellow.—Rather, “this man” (R.V.). Perverting.—Seducing, deceiving. The nation. —
Rather, “ our nation” (R.V.). Forbidding to give tribute.—This is a direct falsehood. See
xx. 20-26. Christ a King.—This is a translation of the term Christ, or Anointed One, for
Pilate’s benefit.

Ver. 3. And Pilate asked Him.—The history in the fourth Gospel casts great light on
vers. 3, 4 (see John xviii. 33-38). Jesus had been brought into the Pretorium, while His
accusers were without. Pilate examines Him, and finds that the kingdom spoken of is not
“one of this world.” Then he returns to the accusers and declares Jesus to be innocent of
the charge. Without the supplementary narrative of St. John, Pilate’s words in ver. 4 would
scarcely be intelligible. Pilate must have known well that one who had done the things
laid to the charge of Jesus would be no such object of hatred to the Sanhedrim. He may
have had some previous knowledge of the actual character of Christ’s public ministry.

Ver. 5, And they were the more fierce.—Rather, “but they were the more urgent” (R.V.);
or perhaps the words mean ‘‘they strengthened” or “ redoubled the charge.” All Jewry.—
Rather, “al] Judza” (R.V.). This is another indication of more prolonged labours in Judea
than are recorded in detail in the synoptical Gospels. From Galilee.—Perhaps this is
mentioned to provoke Pilate against Jesus, because of his quarrel with the Galileans (xiii. 1)
and enmity against their ruler (ver. 12); it serves, however, only to give Pilate an apparent
way out of the difficulty.

Ver. 7. Sent Him.—The word is a technical one, and implies transference of a case to a
court of competent jurisdiction. Also was at Jerusalem at that time.—J.c., the Passover-time.
Herod usually resided at Tiberias, but had come up to Jerusalem to the celebration of the
Passover ; Pilate, who usually resided at Czesarea, had come up to see to the maintenance of
order while the capital was crowded with pilgrims. The purpose of Pilate in sending Jesus
to be tried by Herod was to remove the responsibility of condemning an innocent person
from himself, and to conciliate the Jewish ruler At that time.—Lit., “in these days”

R.V.). :

: 8 8. Desirous to see Him.—Cf. ix. 7-9. St. Luke shows himself specially well informed
in matters concerning Herod Antipas. Joanna, the wife of Chuza, Herod’s steward (viii. 3),
was in Jerusalem at this time (xxiv. 10), and was a most faithful disciple of Jesus. She may
have supplied information concerning Herod’s relations with our Lord. Heard many things
of Him.—Omit ‘ many things”; omitted in R.V. “ Had heard concerning Him.”

Ver. 9. Answered him nothing.—“The murderer of the Baptist, who was living in open
incest, and who had no higher motive than curiosity, deserved no answer ” (Farrar).

Ver. 10. Vehemently accused Him.—Probably this refers to accusations of blasphemy,
added to those made before Pilate; the former, Herod, as a Jew, might be expected to treat
as of grave importance.

Ver. 11. Men of war.—JZ.e., the body-guard in attendance upon Herod. Set Him at nought.
—Treated as deserving of nothing but contempt. Gorgeous robe.—‘‘ The same word as in
Acts x. 30—‘ shining ’—not purple or scarlet (as in Matt. xxvii. 28; John xix. 2), but white,
in allusion to the claim to kingly dignity” (Speaker’s Commentary).

Ver. 12. Were made friends together.—Rather, ‘‘ became friends with each other” (R.V.).
At enmity.—The cause is unknown; probably it was about some question of jurisdiction.
Herod may have resented Pilate’s summary procedure in the case of the Galileans above
mentioned.

Ver. 14. Ye have brought.—Rather, “ye brought” (R.V.).

Ver. 15. For I sent you to him.—A better supported reading gives, ‘for he sent Him back
unto us” (R.V.). Is done unto Him.—R.V. has ‘‘done by Him.” A much better rendering
is suggested in The Thinker, September 1893: “ Nothing deserving death has been laid to

575


CHAP. xxmt, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





His charge.” The writer contends that the word is used as a technical term for taking pro-
ceedings against any one accused, and he points out that this view is substantiated by the
rendering in the Vulgate, not “factum ab eo,” but “actum ei,” ago, meaning bringing a
suit, raising an action, or taking proceedings, civil or criminal—against any one.

Ver. 17. For of necessity, etc.—This verse is omitted in the R.V., as insufficiently supported
by MS. authority. It may be a gloss, but one phrase in it, translated “of necessity,” is
highly idiomatic and characteristic of St. Luke’s style. It is not a mere repetition of any of
the parallel passages. In some MSS, it occurs after ver. 19. “The Gospels gre our only
authority for the existence of the custom of releasing a prisoner at this religious festival, but
it is in accordance with Roman policy” (Farrar).

Ver. 18. All at once.—R.V. “all together”; lit. “in full number.” Barabbas.—The name
is not strictly a proper name, but means “son of a [distinguished] father,” or if the reading
Barrabban, found, as Jerome says, in the Gospel according to the Hebrews, be preferred,
“son of a teacher.” In Matt. xxvii. 16 some MSS. of no great authority have “Jesus
Barabbas.” As an insurgent against Roman rule, he probably enjoyed a certain measure of
popularity in some sections of Jewish society.

Ver. 20. Willing to release Jesus.—Rather, “ desiring to release Jesus” (R.V.).

Ver, 21. But they cried.— Rather, “but they shouted ” (R.V.).

Ver. 22. Hath He done.—Rather, “ hath this man done” (R.V.).

Ver. 24. Gave sentence.—The word is a technical one, and means “ gave final sentence.”

Ver. 25. Him that for sedition, etc.—This substitution of a description for the name
Barabbas is an indication of the writer’s indignation. It is but seldom that the evangelists
display personal feeling in their narratives. Whom they had desired.—Rather, ‘“‘ whom they
had asked for.”

Ver. 26. Simon, a Cyrenian.—Rather, “of Cyrene” (R.V.). There was a colony of Jews in
Cyrene, and they had a synagogue in Jerusalem (Acts vi. 9, xi. 20). Probably he had
come up to the Passover in Jerusalem. St. Mark speaks of his two sons “ Alexander and
Rufus,” who were evidently well known in Christian society as disciples. Probably Jesus
was unable, because of being exhausted by His agony in the garden, and the scourging He
had undergone, to bear the cross. This seems to be indicated by the words “laid hold upon,”
or, as St. Mark says, “compelled”; Simon was impressed to assist in bearing the burden, which
would scarcely have been necessary if Jesus had been able to doit. Perhaps Simon showed
some sign of commiseration on meeting the procession. Coming out of the country.—This
might mean coming from work, but scarcely can have that signification here. Perhaps it
simply denotes his meeting the procession: he was on his way into the city; they were on
their way out of it. Bear it after Jesus.—Apparently assist in carrying; Simon bearing the
hinder part, Jesus the fore part.

Ver. 27. A great company.—As is usual at an execution. Women.—Not Galilean women
(cf. ver. 49), but women of Jerusalem. Their sorrow was evidently that excited by sympathy
with a condemned criminal; but, of course, some of them may have been disciples of
Jesus.

Ver. 28. Daughters of Jerusalem.—Inhabitants of a doomed city. For yourselves.—No
doubt some of them afterwards experienced the horrors of the siege.

Ver. 30. Begin to say, etc.—A quotation from Hos. x. 8. s

Ver. 31. Green tree.—J.c., “if these things are done to one who is innocent, what shall be
done to those who are guilty?” The idea of dryness suggests “ fit for burning.”

Ver. 32.—Malefactors.—Called by St. Matthew and St. Mark “robbers.” Probably they
were insurgents against Roman rule, who had been more like brigands than patriots.

Ver. 33. Calvary.—Rather, “The Skull.” The Greek word is simply “ kranion,” a rendering
of the Hebrew “Golgotha”; our A.V. adopts the Latin word for the same thing. There
is no reason for speaking of the place as a mount; it was probably a knoll of ground
somewhat like a skull in shape. The idea that it derived its name from the skulls of persons
who had been executed, lying on the ground, is erroneous. The Jews scrupulously buried
the dead.

Ver. 34, Then said Jesus.—Probably during the act of crucifixion; and the words referred
primarily to the Roman soldiers who nailed Him to the cross. St. Luke records three of the
seven sayings from the cross—vers, 34, 43, 46. This saying is strangely omitted in some very
ancient MSS., but there can be no doubt of its genuineness. Parted His raiment.—The
clothes of the criminal in most countries being appropriated by the executioners.

Ver. 35. Stood beholding.— Though the attitude tells nothing of their state of mind, there
is no reason to believe that any reaction in popular feeling had set in, or that those who
demanded His death now abstained from deriding Him. With them.—Omit these words:
omitted in R.V. If He be Christ.—Rather, “if this is the Christ of God, His chosen” (R.V.).
The word translated “ this” implies contempt.

Ver. 36. Soldiers.—Four in number (John xix. 23), with a centurion. Vinegar.—JT.c., sour
wine ; probably forming part of their midday meal.


576


= AY


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.  omap. xxttt.








Ver. 38. A superscription.—‘ A titwlus” written in black letters on a board smeared
with white gypsum. It was usual to put such a board over the head of a crucified
person. In letters of Greek, etc.—Omitted in R.V. Perhaps the words are taken from
the parallel passage in John xix. 20. This the King, etc.—The title on the cross is variously
given, probably because of the varying forms of expression in the three languages used.
One evangelist may have in his mind the Hebrew rendering, another the Greek, another the
Latin, and another may give us the general substance ofall three.

Ver. 39. One of the malefactors.—st. Matthew and St. Mark say that those crucified with
Jesus reviled Him; but they evidently speak of classes of persons who did so—those that
passed by, chief priests, scribes, elders—even the robbers ; though, of course, it is possible
that both of His companions in death at first joined in the derision, and that after a time one
of them repented of having done so. If Thou be Christ.—Rather, “ Art not Thou the Christ?”

R.V.).

: Ver. 40. Dost not thou? etc.—Rather, “ Dost thou not even fear God?” (R.V.).

Ver. 41. For we receive, etc.—Lit., “for we are receiving back things worthy of what
we did.”

Ver. 42. Into Thy kingdom.—More correctly, “in Thy kingdom ”—a consummation in the
far-distant future.

Ver. 43. To-day.—This is the emphatic word: immediate instead of far-off reward.
Paradise,—“ This is a Persian word for park, or garden ; used in LXX. of Eden (Gen. ii. 8).
In 2 Cor. xii. 4 it is used as equivalent to “the third heaven”; in Rey, ii. 7 it is the same as
the restored Eden figured in Rev. xxi., xxii. as the New Jerusalem. The language is figurative,
but no doubt in accordance with the truth concerning the unseen world” (Speakers
Commentary ).

Ver. 44. Sixth hour.—Te., midday. All the earth.—R.V. “the whole land.” This darkness
could not have keen an eclipse, as it was now (Passover) full moon.

Ver. 45. The sun was darkened.—R.V. follows the reading, “the sun’s light failing” ;
which seems more like a gloss to explain the darkness than the original text. Veil of the
Temple.—T.e., the veil that divided the Holy of Holies from the Holy Place.

Ver. 46.—Father, into Thy hands, etc.—From Ps. xxxi. 5. eave up the ghost.—None of
the evangelists use the words ‘‘He died,” but say “ He breathed forth,” or ‘gave up His
spirit.”

Yer. 47. Glorified God.—“ A notice characteristic of St. Luke (ii. 20, v. 25, vii. 16, xiii. 13,
xvii. 15, xviii. 42)” (Farrar). A righteous man.—T.c., innocent, just; and as Jesus had, in
his hearing, twice spoken of God as His Father (ver. 34, 46), he was persuaded He must be
a Son of God. .The latter is given as the saying of the centurion in St. Matthew and
St. Mark.

Ver. 48. Smote their breasts.—J.e., in token of penitence. They were now, to some extent,
repentant for the actions into which they had been goaded by the priests.

Ver. 50. A counsellor.—J.¢., a member of the Sanhedrim.

Ver. 51. Had not consented.—J.c., had absented himself, and had taken no part in the action
of the council against Jesus. Arimatheza.--Some identify this with Rama in Benjamin, or
Rama (Ramathaim) in Ephraim, the birthplace of Samuel (1 Sam.i.1). The form of the
name is more like the latter.

Ver. 52. Went unto Pilate.—An action needing some courage, especially on the part of
one in Joseph’s position, who, up to this, had not avowed the fact that he was a disciple
of Jesus.

Ver. 54, The preparation.—The ordinary designation of Friday, as on that day the Jews
prepared for the Sabbath which began at sunset. Drew on.—Lit. ‘began to dawn ”—i.e.,
the phrase properly used of the natural day is here applied to the conventional day.

Ver. 56. Returned.—J.e., to the city or to their homes init. Spices and ointments.—Z.c,
dry and liquid substances for embalming. The intention of the women was to come, after
the Sabbath was over, to complete the embalmment, which had been only partially effected


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—25.


Various Forms of Antagonism to Christ.—In the trial before the ecclesiastical
court of His nation Jesus had been condemned to death on the charge of
blasphemy in claiming to be the Son of God. He is now brought before the
civil court, in order that the sentence of death may be ratified, and is subjected
to examination both by the Roman judge and by Herod, to whom, as the ruler
over Galilee, the case was referred. A court of justice is usually an impressive
sight, and suggests to a thoughtful mind the Divine tribunal before which all
men must appear. But in this case accusers and judges are seen to be animated


PP TENE


CHAP. XXIII. H OMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


8


by malign and unworthy motives, and the forms of justice are simply used to
cloak the murder of an innocent man. We see enmity, frivolity, and injustice
in those who co-operated together to put Jesus to death.

I. The enmity of the priests——The grounds of their hatred were their dislike
of the teaching of Christ, their irritation at His correction of the abuses at
which they had connived, and their jealousy at the popularity which He enjoyed
in certain parts of the country and in certain sections of society. They felt
forced into antagonism towards Him—that they must either submit humbly to
Him or crush Him ; for He did not merely ask for toleration, but required them
to accept Him as the Messiah and the Son of God. And a like choice is now
forced upon all to whom Christ is presented; they must either yield to Him or resist
Him. He cannot be ignored. So resolute are they in their determination to
secure His death, that they are unscrupulous in selecting means for their end.
A heathen judge, they know, would probably refuse to sanction a sentence of
death on a charge of blasphemy, and therefore they proceed to accuse Him
of being a disturber of the public peace and of setting up claims to sovereignty
which must necessarily lead to insurrection against the Roman power. And
when these accusations break down, they use their influence with the people, to
stir them up to demand the death of the prisoner, in spite of the judge’s repeated
protests that he could find no fault in Him. Their conduct strikes us with the
deeper horror when we reflect that they were men who served at God’s altar,
and who should have been conspicuous examples of uprightness and compassion.
The evil-doing of a minister of religion is all the more heinous because of the
vows of consecration which rest upon him.

II. The frivolity of Herod.—Jesus was sent to Herod because, as a Galilean,
He belonged to Herod’s jurisdiction. Could there be a greater contrast between
king and subject than was here presented? The record of Herod’s life is black
with many astain. He had been a debauchee and a murderer, and his guilt
was enhanced by the fact that he sinned against the light—he had stifled the
voice of conscience, violated the precepts of the religion he professed, and resisted
and slain the messenger from God who rebuked his evil life. He was the only
man concerning whom Christ used an epithet of sheer contempt—‘“ that fox.”
He had once been susceptible to religious impressions, and for a time shown
some signs of amendment of life, in obedience to the preaching of John the
Baptist. But the sin he would not give up had seared his conscience and
hardened his heart. He had once trembled at the report of Christ’s teaching
and works, from the superstitious belief that this new prophet was the Baptist
come to life again. But all this is now past. He has now no fears in the
presence of Christ Himself, but is glad to see Him, as one of whom he has heard
somuch. He thinks of Christ as a wonder-worker, and hopes to induce Him, as
the price of His acquittal, to perform some miracle. So frivolous and debased
has he become that he looks upon Jesus as a kind of juggler or magician, who
may provide some amusement for him by performing some wonderful feat.
“Then he questioned with Him in many words ; but He answered him nothing.”
He had nothing to say to one of Herod’s temper and spirit. There were no
formal judicial proceedings conducted by the Jewish king, or Christ might have
opened His lips in defence or protest, as He had done in the presence of His
other judges. The Saviour was silent because He would not gratify the
cravings of an empty curiosity. Yet let us not imagine that mere indignation
and contempt animated our Lord in thus dealing with Herod. The silence He
maintained was the very thing most fitted to speak home to the conscience and
heart of the Jewish king. ‘Had there been a spark of conscience left in him,
those Eyes, looking him through and through, and that Divine dignity, measuring
and weighing him, would have caused his sins to rise up out of the grave and


578


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.  cuwap. Xxiu.





overwhelm him. Jesus was silent, that the voice of the dead Baptist might be
heard.” The profound significance of the silence of Jesus was evidently not
understood by Herod, or he did not wish to understand it. He affected to treat
Christ as a pretender whose claims had broken down and whose power had
deserted Him; and with mockery and contempt he dismissed Him from his
presence.

III. The injustice of Pilate——Had the Roman judge been called upon to deal
with religious questions, his task would have been a difficult one, owing to his
ignorance and inexperience, and we would sympathise with the perplexities of
his position. As it was, the path of duty should have been very plain to him.
He had found the Prisoner innocent of the charges brought against Him—
charges which were of a kind easily dealt with, as they involved merely matters
of fact and not of belief or opinion. All that he was required to do was to
order the release of a man whom, after full examination, he had found innocent
of the charges brought against Him ; and his failure to do this has rendered his
name infamous in history. He was fully aware of the evil motives that
animated the enemies of Christ, and of their hypocrisy in pretending to be
zealous for the maintenance of Roman authority and for the payment of tribute
to Cesar. Yet he allowed himself to be used as the tool of men whom he
despised, for tke gratification of an-enmity.in which he did not share. His
sole motive was to acquire a little popularity with his subjects, and he did not
consider the judicial murder of an innocent man too high a price to pay for it.
Nor would he have hesitated to do as he was asked but for the strange
impression produced upon him by the demeanour and words of Jesus. And
so he tries one way after another to escape from the perpetration of the crime
into which he was being forced he seeks to impose the responsibility of dealing
with the case upon another ; he suggests scourging as a substitute for death ; and
he proposes to grant release as an act of favour. His miserable subterfuges only
revealed his weakness and indecision to those who were resolute that their victim
should not escape out of their hands. The case of Pilate shows us how dangerous
it is to resist the voice of conscience, to what fatal errors indecision and infirmity
of purpose may expose us, and how selfish aims may blind the soul to the beauty
and majesty of Christ.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 1—25.


Vers. 1-12. Jesus before Pilate and
Herod.

I. The Jews.brought three charges
against Jesus.—All of these were care-
fully chosen to influence Pilate against
Him. Two of them were false—that
He perverted the nation, and that He
forbade to give tribute to Cesar. The
third was true in the letter, but
thereby the more treacherously false in
the spirit—that He claimed to be Christ
—a king. Pilate took up the last
only, and learned that Christ’s kingdom
was not temporal, but spiritual.

II. The mob expected this.—But
Pilate can be moved by clamour and
threats. And Pilate gladly evades re-
sponsibility by sending Jesus to Herod.


III. Herod is pleased to see Jesus.
—But his pleasure arises from vulgar
curiosity—he hopes to see some miracle
done by Him. But Jesus is silent
before Herod. . What a lesson in that!
He conversed with the ignorant Roman,
but to the well-taught Hebrew’s
questions He has nothing to say. For
Herod has thrown away exceptional
opportunities, and now what is there
but a fearful looking-for of judgment ?
Hastings.


Ver. 1. “ Led Him unto Pilate.”—
The heathen world becomes partaker
with the Jewish in the greatest
wickedness that has ever been com-
mitted. In this it appears that the


579


CHAP. XXIII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.





true light is hated as well by those
who are under the Law as by those
who are without the Law, and the
judgment (Rom. iii. 19, 20), appears
as a perfectly righteous one. But at
the same time there is also revealed
therein the grace of God, as having
appeared to all who believe, without
respect of persons (Rom. iii. 21-31),—
Van Oosterzee.


Ver. 2. Began to accuse Him.”—
Note (1) the contemptuous description
—“this fellow” or “man,” without
naming Him; (2) the affected gravity
of the accusers—‘‘ we found”’; (3) the
pretence of consulting for the best
interests of the people—“ our nation”
(R.Y.).


The Threefold Accusation.—1. His
seeking to turn the people aside from
the good road on which they and the
Romans would have them to walk.
2. Forbidding payment of tribute to
Cesar. 3. Claiming to be a king.


“Christ a King.”—The explanation
of Christ as meaning a king is a stroke
of malice. It was only by attributing
a political meaning to the title of king
that the accusation of forbidding to
pay tribute could be brought against
Him. If He were a king in the
ordinary sense of the word He must
necessarily forbid the payment of
tribute to any other but Himself.
They declare that He has done what,
according to their theory, He was
logically bound to do.


Ver. 3. “ The King of the Jews.”

I. Jesus did not look much like a
king.—He stood there, with hands
bound, and a cord round His neck.
Pilate’s question sounds like ridicule.
Yet Jesus answered, “Yes, I am a
King.” Strange answer! Where were
His throne, His crown, His sceptre,
His royal robe? Who recognised His
sway? Pilate probably looked at Him
with mingled contempt and pity.

II. But to us to-day how different
does it all appear!—Christ is on the


580


throne. In heaven He is honoured as
“King of kings.” On His head are
many crowns. All over the earth, as
well, His sway is felt.

TIT. And He was really a king
when He stood before Pilate—For
His kingdom is spiritual, a kingdom of
truth, righteousness, grace, holiness,
love. He seemed the weakest of men ;
in reality He was the grandest,
mightiest, kingliest. The real power
of the world is Christ’s power—the
kingdom whose sway is over human
hearts and lives.—J/iller.


Ver. 4. “I find no fault.’—Though
Jesus had confessed that He claimed
to be a king (ver. 3), the conversa-
tion which is recorded in John xviii.
33-38 had clearly proved to Pilate


‘that he had not to do with one who


was a rival to Cesar.


Ver. 5. “ He stirreth up the people.”
—The false accusations are a testimony
to Christ’s integrity. None’ of the
things He had actually said and done
could be brought forward as a charge
against Him.


“ To this place.”-—An allusion to the
triumphal entry of Christ into the city
a few days before.


Ver. 6. ‘* Whether the man were a
Galilean.” —Those who gave the infor-
mation to Pilate were ignorant of the
fact that Jesus was born in Bethlehem.


Ver. 7. “ Sent Him to Herod.”—Not
necessarily to relieve himself from
responsibility, but perhaps either to
obtain a favourable opinion from Herod
concerning the accused or to elicit some
further information in reference to the
case, as well as to show courtesy to the
Jewish king.


Vers. 8-12. Jesus and Herod.

I. Herod’s reception of Jesus was
characteristic—He was not abashed
or terrified. He once had been so, but
all that was past. He was “ exceed-
ing glad” to see Jesus. It was a new


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


excitement. And it was also a com-
pliment from the Roman. And chiefly
he hoped to see Jesus work a miracle.
Now was his chance to gratify his
curiosity and wonder. He put Christ
on the level of a new singer or dancer.
He expected entertainment from Him.
He addresses Him in a friendly way.
He talks of religion, and waits for no
replies. No mouth is more voluble
than that of a characterless man of
feeling.

II. Christ has nothing to say to such
a man.—Herod grew angry at His
silence, but Jesus held His peace. For
one thing the entire proceedings were
irrelevant. Jesus had been sent to
Herod to be tried, not to be made a
spectacle of. Religion to Herod was a
mere diversion. So Christ will not
stoop to please him. He has nothing
to say to such a character. There are
many to whom religion and its services
are only a form of amusement or dissi-
pation. Christ never speaks to the
soul in such surroundings. Did Jesus
miss an opportunity ? Should He have
spoken? His silence was in itself an
eloquent appeal. Christ’s silence is the
most eloquent of all appeals.

III. Did Herod understani the
meaning of Christ’s silence ?—We can-
not tell. Itis impossible tosay. Pro-
bably he did not wish to understand it.
At all events, he acted as if he did not ;
he treated it as if it were stupidity.
Jesus, he thought, was discredited, was
an impostor, a mere pretender. So he
thought, and so he said, and his satel-
lites chimed in. And they would,
doubtless, think it a great stroke of
wit for Herod to send Jesus back to
Pilate with a gorgeous robe cast over
His shoulders, probably in imitation of
the white robe worn at Rome by can-
didates for office. The suggestion was
that Jesus was a candidate for the
throne of his country, but one so
ridiculous that it would be a mistake to
treat Him with anything but contempt.
—Stalker.


Ver. 8. “‘ Hoped to have seen some
miracle.” —No petitioner, however hum-


CHAP. XXIII.


ble, ever had his hopes disappointed
when he applied to Christ for relief ;
yet Christ defeats the hopes of this
frivolous prince.


Ver. 9. “ Answered him nothing.” —
Mark (1) the wisdom, (2) the dignity,
(3) the eloquence of this silence. ‘The
shade of John could have observed
no more inviolable silence, if it had
really appeared to his murderers”
(Van Oosterzee).


Vers. 10, 11. I. The hatred of the
priests.

If. The contempt of the courtiers.
—How easily might Christ have over-
whelmed both with confusion ! Yet He
refuses to work any miracle for His
own advantage now, as in the tempta-
tion in the wilderness.


Ver. 10. “ Vehemently accused Him.”
—From ver. 15 we learn that Pilate
had commanded His accusers to appear
before Herod. Doubtless in any case
they would have gone, in order to try to
prevent their Victim’s escape from con-
demnation. The indifference mani-
fested by Herod only increased their
vehemence in accusing Him; yet, after
all, it was Herod’s disappointment, and
not their accusation, that led to fresh
ignominy being heaped upon the
Saviour.


Ver. 11. “Set Him at nought.”—
‘“‘He is despised and rejected of men.
He was despised and we esteemed Him
not.”—Isa. liii. 3.


“ Mocked Him.”—The priests accuse
the Saviour, the courtiers mock Him.
The former are animated by hatred,
the latter by contempt.


“A gorgeous rohe.”—Unconsciously
Herod did honour to Christ, as did
Pilate afterwards in the title which he
ordered to be affixed to the cross.


Ver. 12. “ Became friends together.”
—Though the coalition of Herod and
Pilate was not based upon any active


58]


CHAP. XXIII.


enmity to Christ, yet by the indecision
of the Roman judge and the indiffer-
ence of the Jewish king, the way was
prepared for the unjust sentence of
death being passed upon the Saviour.
And so their conduct was a virtual ful-
filment of the prophecy in Ps. ii. 2.
Cf. Acts iv. 27.


Vers, 13-25. “ Back to Pilate.”—
Herod's worldliness was of a frivolous
type. Pilate’s was strenuous—the
worldliness which makes self its aim
and subordinates everything to success.
The more common type. It reveals
itself in Pilate under the search-light
of Christ’s scrutiny.

I. Pilate should have released Jesus,
on receiving Him back from Herod.—
But he most unjustly threatens to
scourge Him, as a sop to the rage of
the mob, and then set Him at liberty
as a tribute to justice. A most unjust
proceeding! but characteristic of the
man. The spirit ef compromise was
characteristic of Rome. Manceuvre and
expediency were universal. It is not
true that this spirit is always and
everywhere displeasing to God?

II. He grasps at a way of escape.—
It was the custom to release a prisoner
on the Passover morning. He wel-
comes the chance of releasing Christ.
He offers Jesus to the crowd——unjustly
—for Jesus was not a criminal; and
worse, he was staking the life of an
innocent man on a guess, which might
be mistaken, as to the fancy of the mob.
He, doubtless, considered it kind.
And the offer he makes—Jesus or
Barabbas—is the essence of all the
great choices of life. very individual
has to face this decision.

III. The mob chooses Barabbas.—A
surprise, a staggering blow, to Pilate.
Jesus is left on His hands. ‘“ What
shall I do with Jesus?” He tries to
free himself of guilt. He washes His
hands theatrically. He ought to have
exerted them rather. Blood does not
come off so easily. He could not thus
abnegate responsibility and cast it upon
others. He ought to have opposed the
popular will at all risks. But this


582


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


would have meant loss to himself. The
mob gained their end. They clamoured
for Christ’s blood, and the will of
Pilate broke down before their well-
directed persistency.—Stalker.


Ver. 13. “And the people.”—Pilate
communicates his views both to the
rulers and to the assembled people, for
both were now associated together in
seeking to have a sentence of condem-
nation passed upon Jesus.


Ver. 14. Three Good Points in Pilate’s
Procedure—

I. He had carefully investigated the
case.

II. He had declared his conviction
of the innocence of Jesus.

JI!. He had sought the opinion of
one who was qualified to give a deci-
sion upon the questions at issue.


“ Perverteth the seople.”—I.e., one
who turns them from their allegiance
to Cesar.


Ver. 15. “ Nor yet Herod.”—The
phrase implies that if even Herod,
though well acquainted with the Jewish
Law, and, as the sovereign of the
accused, especially solicitous that He
might not be allowed to stir up the
people against the Romans, Herod’s
patrons—if even he could find no
matter of complaint, the case might be
looked upon as decided.


Ver. 16. “ Chastise Him and release
Him.” —Pilate hoped, by this proposal,
to effect two objects: 1. He would not
burden his own conscience by imposing
a heavier sentence. 2. He would do
something towards satisfying the
enmity of the Jews against the Saviour.
A certain measure of mercy towards
Jesus is implied in the suggestion ; but
“the tender mercies of the wicked are
cruel.”


Ver. 17. “ Must release one.”—And
what does this signify but that at
this great Feast, the true Passover,
we, to whom death is due, are let


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





go free? Christ is taken; we, who
are guilty, like Barabbas, escape,”—
Williams.


“He must release.’—Perhaps this
custom commemorated the great
national deliverance from Egypt, and
SO was appropriate at the time of the
Passover.


Ver. 18. “ Release unto us Barabbas.”
—TI.e., one who was actually a revolu-
tionary—guilty of the same kind of
crime as that of which they had accused
Jesus,


Ver. 19. “And for murder.’—In
this and in ver. 25 there is an under-
tone of indignation at the blindness
and hardness of heart which impelled
the Jews to make such a choice. Cf.
Acts iii. 14, ‘“‘ But ye denied the Holy
One and the Just, and desired a mur-
derer to be granted unto you.”


Ver. 20. “ Spake again to them.”—
The substance of his speech or exclam-
ation is not given, but may be guessed
from the words ‘desiring to release
Jesus.” The excited multitude inter-
rupted him and did not allow him to
give full expression to his desire.


Ver. 21. “ Crucify Him.”—For the
first time the terrible cry is here heard,
which, as the secret wish and thought
of the chief priests, is now by these
placed upon the people’s lips, and with
fanatical rage raised by them.—Van
Oosterzee.


Ver, 22. “ What evilhath He done?”
—It is very noteworthy that Pilate
took step after step to secure the
acquittal of Jesus. 1. He emphati-
cally and publicly announced His per-
fect innocence. 2. He sent Him to
Herod. 3. He made an offer to release
Him asa boon. 4. He tried to make
scourging take the place of crucifixion.


CHAP, XXIII.





5. He
Farrar.


Ver. 23. “And of the chief priests.”
—KEven they, unmindful of decorum,
join in the impetuous cry of the raging
people for blood.


Ver, 24. “Jt should be as they re-
quired.” —The weakness of Pilate led
him to become the confederate of those
whose hatred of Christ he did not par-
take in. His case is a striking illus-
tration of the saying, “He that is not
with Me is against Me.”


Ver. 25. Fatal Decision.

I. So ends Pilate’s weak struggle
with his conscience and with his sense
of right.—He has tried every way to
evade the issue ; then he has temporised ;
at last he has yielded. His name is pil-
loried for ever as the man who delivered
Jesus to the will of the mob. He is
known by no other act. Better a
thousand times to have remained in
obscurity.

II. He took water to wash his
hands.—In symbol he declared that he
was not responsible for Christ’s death.
It was in vain. The water did not
wash away one particle of his guilt.
On him the final responsibility rested.
No other could send Jesus to the cross.
That others urge us to sin does not take
away our guilt for that sin. No being
in the universe can compel us to do
wrong ; if, then, we do wrong, the sin
is our own.

III. The Jews took the responsi-
bility of Christ’s death.—“ His blood
be on us, and on our children!” The
self-imprecation was awfully fulfilled.
The story of the next forty years is the
terrible record of its fulfilment. The
crime was successful, but what came of
the success in the end? Sin always
brings woe. The worst of all sins is sin
against the Lord Jesus Christ.— Miller.


appealed to compassion.—


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 26—31.


Two Alleviations of Jesus’ Sufferings.


I. The strength of a man relieved His body of the burden of the cross.—
Though He bore His own cross out of the palace of Pilate, He was not able to


583


onap. xx. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:. ST. LUKE. |





carry it far. Either He sank beneath it on the road, or He was proceeding
with such slow and faltering steps that the soldiers, impatient of the delay,
recognised that the burden must be removed from His shoulders. One or two
of the soldiers might have relieved Him. Out of a spirit of: horseplay and mis-
chief they laid ho'd of a passer-by and requisitioned his services for the purpose.
To the man it must have been an extreme annoyance and indignity. Doubtless
he was bent on business of his own, which had to be deferred. His family or ©
his friends might be waiting for him, but he was turned the opposite way. To
touch the instrument of death was as revolting to him as it would be to us to
handle the hangman’s rope; perhaps more so, because it was Passover time, and
this would make him ceremonially unclean. It was a jest of the soldiers and he
was their laughing-stock. As he walked by the side of the robbers, it looked as
if he were on the way to execution himself. This is a lively image of the cross-
bearing to which the followers of Christ are called. We are wont to speak of
trouble of any kind as a cross ; and doubtless any kind of trouble may be borne
bravely in the name of Christ. But, properly speaking, the cross of Christ is
what is borne in the act of confessing Him, or for the sake of His work. When
any one makes a stand for principle, because he is a Christian, and takes the
consequences in the shape of scorn or loss, this is the cross of Christ. The
pain you may feel in speaking to another in Christ’s name, the sacrifice of
comfort or time you may make in engaging in Christian work, the self-denial
you exercise in giving of your means that the cause of Christ may spread at
home or abroad, the reproach you may have to bear in identifying yourself
with militant causes or with despised persons, because you believe they are on
Christ’s side—in such conduct lies the cross of Christ. It involves trouble,
discomfort, or sacrifice. One may fret under it, or sink under it; it is ugly,
painful, shameful often, but no disciple is without it. Our Master said, ‘“‘ He
that taketh not his cross and followeth after Me is not worthy of Me.”
Apparently this rencontre issued in Simon’s salvation and in the salvation of his
house. There can be little doubt that the connection of his family with the
Church (noted by St. Mark), was the result of this incident in the father’s life.
Is this not a significant fact, proving that nothing happens by chance? Had
Simon entered the city one hour sooner or one hour later, his after history might
have been entirely different. On the smallest circumstances the greatest results
may hinge. A chance meeting may determine the weal or woe of a life. How
much may follow when Christ is revealed to any human sonl! The salvation of
those yet unborn may be involved in it—of children and children’s children.

II. The pain of Christ's soul was cooled by the sympathy of women.—It
was, indeed, a surprising demonstration. It would hardly have been credited,
had it not there been made manifest, that Jesus had so strong a hold upon any
section of the population of Jerusalem. \In the capital He had always found
the soil very unreceptive. Yet now it turns out that He has touched the heart
of one section, at least, even of this community. It is a great testimony to the
character of Christ, on the one hand, and to that of woman on the other.
Woman’s instinct told her, however dimly she at first apprehended the truth,
that this was the Deliverer for her. Because, while Christ is the Saviour of all,
He has been specially the Saviour of woman. At His advent, her degradation
being far deeper than that of men, she needed Him more; and wherever His
gospel has travelled since then, it has been the signal for her emancipation and
redemption. His presence evokes all the tender and beautiful qualities which
are latent in her nature; and under His influence her character experiences a
transfiguration. It may be that there was no great depth in the emotion of the
daughters of Jerusalem; but this response of womanhood to Christ was a
beginning, and therein lay its significance. It was to Him a foretaste of the

584


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST.°LUKE. omar. xxut.








Even.d devotion which He was yet to receive from the womanhood of the
natu’. The sounds of sympathy flowed over His soul as gratefully as the gift
tior ary’s love enveloped His senses, when the house was filled with the odour of
Ge ointment. His words, in response to their sympathy, (1) reveal Himself—
Jiey show how completely He could forget His own sufferings in care and
_ mxiety for others; (2) they show the depth and fervour of His patriotism ;
\3) they reveal His consideration for women and children; (4) they contain an
exhortation to repentance.

The two incidents are a parable of what men and women can do for Christ
still, He needs the strength of men—the strong arm, the vigorous hand, the
shoulders that can bear the burden of His cause; He seeks from men the mind
whose originality can plan what needs to be done, the resolute will that pushes
the work on, in spite of opposition, the liberal hand that gives ungrudgingly
what is required for the progress and success of the Christian enterprise. From
women He seeks sympathy and tears. They can give the sensibility which
keeps the heart of the world from hardening ; the secret knowledge which finds
out the objects of Christian compassion, and wins their confidence; the
enthusiasm which burns like a fire at the heart of religious work. The influence
of women is subtle and remote, but it is on this account all the more powerful ;
for they sit at the very fountains, where the river of human life is springing,
and where a touch may determine its entire subsequent course.—Stalker.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 26—31.


Vers. 26-46. Outline of The Narrative.
—1l. The procession to Calvary (vers.
26-32). 2. The crucifixion (vers. 33-38).
3. The time passed upon the cross (vers.
39-46). *


Vers. 26. “On him they laid the
cross.” —The Christian’s bearing of the
cross is like that of Simon.

I. The cross is not chosen willingly,
but imposed.

II. It is best borne in a spirit of
resignation.

III. There is a reward attached to
the patient bearing of it.


Simon and Jesus.

I. The greatness of trifles : accident-
ally coming up at that moment;
catching the eye of the centurion.

II. The blessedness and honour of
helping Jesus Christ.

III The perpetual recompense and
record of the humblest Christian work.

IV. The blessed results of contact
with the suffering Christ.— Maclaren.


Simon the Cross-bearer.
I. The incident.—A very singular
one. A strange providence in Simon’s


life.


II. Simon bore Christ’s cross.—At
first by compulsion. No one was
anxious for this task. But the com-
pulsory task became to him a joy and
honour. <A type of the future power
of the cross. Compulsion was changed
into delight. The task was a brief
one, but it made his name immortal.

ILI. The lessons.—1. Let us do, in
spirit, what Simon did literally. Let
us take up our cross and follow Christ.
And let us do this willingly. 2. Christ
is our pattern Cross-Bearer. Let us
seek, in everything, to be conformed to
His image.—Hutchings.


Vers. 27-34. Prophet, Priest, and
King.—It is remarkable how, in three
following sayings, the Lord appears as
Prophet, Priest, and King: as Prophet, .
to the daughters of Jerusalem; as
Priest, interceding for forgiveness ; as
King, acknowledged by the penitent
thief, and answering his prayer.—
Alford.


Ver. 27. “Women, which bewailed.”
—St. Luke, in whose Gospel the most
of the women who stood in connection
with Jesus are described, relates to us


585


CHAP. XXIII. ‘HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


here how their compassion strewed yet
one last flower for our Lord upon His
path of thorns.—Van Oosterzee.


“‘ Tamented Him.”’—Though there
were two others led with Him to
execution, it was to Him alone that
this sympathy was shown.


Ver. 28. ‘ Weep not for Me.”—He
Himself wept over the city, and did
not weep for Himself. ;


Ver. 29. “ Blessed.” —The word intro-
duces a fearful woe. Compare for a
similar thought to that here, Hos. ix.
12-16.


“Cour us.”—The words foreding
literal fulfilment at the time oflay,
siege of Jerusalem, for the JewsWo
multitudes “hid themselves in t3-
subterranean passages
under the city.”


Ver. 31. “The green tree.” —The
green tree is Jesus, whom the Jews
deliver over to death by the hands of
the Romans, in spite of His constant
submission to pagan authority ; the dry
is the Jewish people, who, in con-
sequence of their spirit of rebellion,
will draw down upon themselves in a
proportionately greater degree the


and sewers ©


vengeance of the Romans.—Godet.
“ Say to the mountains,” etc.—It is
interesting to see how often David, who
frequently hid among the rocks of the

wilderness from Saul, calls the Lord .
His Rock (Ps. xviii. 2, 46, xlii. 9, etc.).
Those who have this defence will not
need to call on the rocks to hide them.


“ What shall be done in the dry ?”—
With these words our Lord’s teaching
closes, and His high-priestly office
begins. His first three sayings on the
cross are for others. See ver. 43;
John xix. 26, 27.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 32—49.


Three Words from the Cross.—Seven words, in all, Christ spoke from the cross ;
St. Luke records only the prayer He offered for His murderers, His promise to
the penitent, and the last cry in which He commended His spirit into the hands
of His Father.

I. “ Father, forgive them ; for they know not what they do.” Notice: 1. The
invocation. The first utterance of Jesus was a prayer, and His first word
“ Father.” Was it not an unintentional condemnation of those who had affixed
Him there? It was in the name of religion they had acted, and, in the name of
God ; but which of them was thus impregated through and through with religion ?
Which of them could pretend to a communion with God so close and habitual?
Tt is a suspicious case when, in any trial, especially an ecclesiastical one, the
condemned is obviously a better man than the judges. The word “ Father,”
further, proved that the faith of Jesus was unshaken by all through which He
had passed, and by that which He was now enduring. Great saints have been
driven, by the pressure of pain and disappointment, to challenge God’s righteous-
ness in words which it is not lawful for a man to utter. But when the fortunes
of Jesus were at the blackest He still said “Father.” 2. The petition. Our
hearts burn with indignation at the treatment to which He was subjected. The
comment of Jesus on it all was, “ Father, forgive them.” Long ago, indeed, He
had taught men, ‘‘ Love your enemies, . . . and pray for them which despitefully
use you.” And here He practised what He taught. He is the one teacher of
mankind in whom the sentiment and the act completely coincide. His doctrine
was the very highest ; too high, it often seems, for this world But He proved
that it can be realised on earth when He offered this prayer. Perhaps nothing
is more difficult than to forgive. Even saints in the Old Testament curse those
who have persecuted and wronged them, in terms of uncompromising severity.
Had Jesus followed these, who would have ventured to find fault with Him?


586





_HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. omar. xxut.
i a ee ee ee ee ee see


Even in that there might have been a revelation of God, because in the Divine
nature there is a fire of wrath against sin. But how poor would such a revela-
tion have been in comparison with the one which He now made! It told that
God is love. 3. The argument. This allows us to see further still into the
Divine depths of His love. The injured are generally alive only to their own
side of the case, and they see only those circumstances which tend to place
the conduct of the opposite party in the worst light. But at the moment when
the pain inflicted by His enemies was at the worst Jesus was seeking excuses
for their conduct. It is true of every sinner, in some measure, that he knows
not what he does. And to a true penitent, as he approaches the throne of
mercy, it 1s a great consolation to be assured that this plea will be allowed.
God knows all our weakness and blindness; men will not make allowance for it,
or even understand it, but He will understand it all, if we come to hide our
guilty head in His bosom.
_ I. “To-day shalt thou be with Me in paradise.”—There was probably malice
in the arrangement by which Jesus was hung between the two thieves. Yet
there was a Divine purpose behind the wrath of man. Jesus came to the world
to identify Himself with sinners; He had lived among them, and it was meet
that He should die among them, It gave Him, too, an opportunity of
illustrating, at the very last moment, both the magnanimity of His own
character and the nature of His mission. As the parable of the Prodigal Son
is an epitome of the whole teaching of Christ, so is the salvation of the thief on
the cross the life of Christ in miniature. There is no reason to doubt either
that this thief was a great sinner or that he was suddenly changed. And
therefore his example will always be an encouragement to the worst of sinners
when they repent. It is common for penitents to be afraid to come to God,
because their sins have been too great to be forgiven; but those who are
encouraging them can point to cases like Manasseh, and Mary Magdalene, and
this, and assure them that the mercy which sufficed for these is sufficient for all :
“The blood of Jesus Christ, God’s Son, cleanseth us from all sin.” How
complete the revolution was in the penitent is shown by his own words. St.
Paul, in one place, sums up Christianity in two things: repentance towards God
and faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. And both of these we see in this penitent’s
words. It is worth noting that it was not by words that Jesus converted this
man. He did not address the penitent thief at all till the thief spoke to Him.
The work of conviction was done before He uttered a word. Yet it was His
work. It was by the impression of His patience, His innocence, His peace, and
His magnanimity, that Jesus converted the man. Yet His words, when He
did speak, added immensely to the impression. He accepted the homage of His
petitioner ; He spoke of the world unseen as of a place native and familiar.
He gave him to understand that He possessed as much influence there as he
attributed to Him. This great sinner laid on Christ the weight of his soul, the
weight of his sins, the weight of his eternity ; and Christ accepted the burden.
III. “ Father, into Thy hands I commend My spirit.’—1. The final words


of the dying Saviour was a prayer. Alt was not by chance that this was soy—


for the currents within Him were all flowing Godward. While prayer is
appropriate for all times, there are occasions when it is singularly appropriate
—at the close of day, in moments of mortal peril, at the Communion Table, and
before death. On this last occasion it is more in its place than anywhere else.
Then we are, perforce, parting with all that is earthly. How natural to lay hold
of what alone we can keep hold of! And this is what prayer does; for it lays
hold of God. Yet, natural as prayer is at that time, it is only so to those
who have learned to pray before. It had long been to Jesus the language of
life, and it was only the bias of the life asserting itself in death when, as He


587


-”


- i— =


CHAP. XXIII. ‘HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


breathed His last, He turned to God. 2. The last word of the dying Saviour
was a quotation from Scripture. If prayer is natural to the lips of the dying,
so is Scripture, In the most sacred moments and transactions of life there is no
language like that of the Bible. Especially is this the case in everything
connected with death. In this supreme moment Jesus turned to the Psalms.
This is undoubtedly the most precious of all the books of the Old Testament.
It is a book penned as with the life-blood of its author; it is the record of
humanity’s profoundest sorrows and sublimest ecstasies ; it is the most perfect
expression which has ever been given to experience ; it has been the vade-mecum _
of all the saints; and to know and to love it is one of the best signs of
spirituality. 3. It was about His spirit that the dying Saviour prayed. Dying
persons are sometimes much taken up with their bodies, or with their worldly
concerns. Nor did Jesus altogether refrain from bestowing attention on these
things, for one of his sayings on the cross had reference to His bodily necessities,
and another td His mother’s future comfort. But His supreme concern was
His spirit, to the interests of which He devoted His final prayer. He placed it
in the hands of God. There it was safe, Strong and secure are the hands of the
Eternal. They are soft and loving too. With what a passion of tenderness
must they have received thespirit of Jesus. 4. His last word revealed His view —
of death. 'The word used by Jesus in commending His spirit to God implies that

He was giving it away in the hope of finding it again. He was making ©
a deposit in a safe place, to which, after the crisis of death was over, He —
would come and recover it (cf. 2 Tim. i. 12). Death is a disruption of tho

parts of which human nature is composed. But Jesus was looking forward to a —
reunion of the se, arated parts, when they would again find each other, and the
integrity of the personal life be restored. His dying word proves that He
believed for Himsi lf what He taught to others. Not only, however, has He, by ©
His teaching, brought life and immortality to light ; He is Himself the guarantee —
of the doctrine; for He is our immortal life. ‘“ Because I live,” He has said, —
“ye shall live also.”—Stalker.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 32—49.


Ver. 32. “Two others.”—Probably Christ Crucified.
these had been former associates of I. There they crucified Him.


Barabbas, in whose place Jesus was
crucified. They were, as it were,
assigned as subjects to “the King of
the Jews,” in order to mock His claims.
Yet one of them did actually become
His subject. God added fresh glory to
His Son by causing the wrath of men
to turn to His praise.


Ver. 33. ‘* One on the right hand.”—
The very cross was the tribunal of
Christ, for the Judge was placed in the
middle ; one thief, who believed, was
set free; the other, who reviled, was
condemned: which signified what He
was already about to do with the quick
and dead, being about to set some on
His right hand, and some on the left.”
—Hoad.


588


II. There they crucified Him.
III. There they crucified Him.
IV. There they crucified Him.—
Young.


The Three Crosses.

I. We shall look at the two crosses
upon which the malefactors suffered.—
1. We consider the crucifixion of the
malefactors as the protest of human
society against rebellion, in the vindica-
tion of its own life, and of the sacred-
ness of tts own laws. This was a terrible
punishment, even to malefactors, who
were evidently men of the lowest type.
They were looked upon as the recog-
nised enemies of human society. The
worst punisiment civilisation could in-
flict upon, and the most terrible weapon


HOMILETIC CUOMMEWTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XXIt
ee ee a ee Coe Nn ee ek Fe a OS en,


it could use toward, those who, by their
desperate conduct, had forfeited exis-
tence, was the cross. We know of
what type these malefactors were—
not. thieves, as the A.V. gives it,
but robbers or brigands; men who
never considered aught binding in their
war with their fellows. These men
belonged to that terrible class which
becomes the pest of oppressive govern-
ments or ill-regulated human com-
munities, just as epidemics are the
outcome of bad sanitation, or the neg-
lect of the first laws of health. These
belonged to a class of men who repre-
sent all the desperation of which
grinding poverty is capable, and all
the degradation which irresponsibility
can produce. Thus in these two
crosses-—losing sight for the present of
the great central Cross—we have
human society’s vindication of its own
life and its own laws. 2. We also find
here the triumph of justice over rule and
rebellious force. This is so far gratify-
ing. Thus the crosses upon which the
malefactors were crucified were the
safety of society and the vindication of
law. In those crosses we see the due
reward of human criminality, the last
weapons that society, and the justice of
the community, could use. Justice,
having failed to restore, can only
destroy. Justice can do no more,
Thus in these two cases we have the
triumph of human society and human
government over men who otherwise
would lay the earth waste, and make
countries a devastation.

II. We next view the central cross,
upon which Christ died.—That cross
taught a very different lesson from that
which was taught by the other crosses.
The other crosses revealed the criminal-
ity of those who suffered, but (1) That
central cross revealed the sinfulness and
criminality of those who crucified the
Innocent One. 2. This cross bears a
relationship with everyman. Since He
who died upon it died not asa criminal,
not even as one who was falsely con-
demned, or as a martyr only, but as
one who was vindicated by His own
judge, who found “no fault in Him,”





and vindicated by the very man who
betrayed Him, and who exclaimed, “ I
have betrayed innocent blood.” One
who did no crime against man— yea, no
sin against God: “He did no sin,
neither was guile found in His mouth.”
3. This, too, was a death which He
voluntarily accepted, though He had the
power to escape it. It was not the
infliction of death upon one who could
not withstand the power that inflicted
it. It was the death of One who be-
forehand said, and gave this as the
clue to His disciples of the nature of
His Cross and passion, “I lay down
My life, that I might take it again.”
I accept, then, that central Cross, as
telling of sin; but as telling of it in
a very different way from the other
crosses. 4. In the Cross of Christ I find
the greatest condemnation of sin. I find
there the greatest and most awful
revelation of the possibilities of human
sinfulness. 5. But it also tells of more
than that. As the Cross was the con-
demnation of man and the revelation
of human guilt, so was it the revelation
of a Divine love that triumphed over all
the guilt, ingratitude, and hatred, of men
in a sacrifice that knew of no reserve,
even the death of the Lord’s Anointed
One.

IIT. And now let us look at the re-
lationship between that cross and the
two other crosses.—There was one
man who died impenitent—one man
who sank deeper and deeper into the
iniquity in which he had already sunk
so low, and defied every sacred influence;
one, moreover, who was not overcome
by those things that overcame the
centurion who presided over the execu-
tion; and, finally, one who was not
touched by the protest of that fellow-
sufferer who, though as sinful as himself,
could no longer resist, but pleaded with
him in the earnestness of a fresh convic-
tion—pleaded in tones which quivered
alike with the agony of suffering and
with the earnestness of a new belief,
but died an impenitent and hardened
sinner. There was another cross, upon
which was to be seen the penitent
one, who at first found expression in


589


CHAP. XXIII.


“HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





the blasphemy which came from both
malefactors, but who at length paused
as he felt the drawing power of Him
who died on that central Cross, and
then at every risk became the first
vindicator of that great Sufferer in the
presence of the chief priests and scribes
who mocked, and an angry multitude
who beat like a furious storm around
those crosses. He became the first to
rebuke blasphemy in the presence of
the Cross, and: then in the additional
light that comes to every man who acts
up to the light that he has already
received, turned to the crucified Christ
and exclaimed, “‘ Lord, remember me
when Thov comest in Thy kingdom.”
Thus, there are exhibited here two
typical attitudes towards Jesus Christ.
Now, the world to-day is represented
by the one or the other—the impeni-
tent, who is still untouched; and the
penitent, who breaks down in the
presence of the Cross. There is no
third class.— Davies.


Ver. 34. “ Father.” — With this
name both the first and the last
(seventh) saying upon the cross opens.


“ Father, forgive.” —A model prayer.

I. God addressed as Father.

II. Forgiveness of sin the chiefest
benefit to be asked for.

III. Inspired by love, even for
enemies.


“ Know not what they do.”—This
suggests a motive for forgiveness—that
of pity—and not the ground of forgive-
ness. Ignorance may be a palliation
of guilt, but does not remove it, or else
no prayer for forgiveness would be
needed.





Ignorance is (1) a plea for forgive-
ness ; (2) yet is culpable and needs for-
giveness.


The First Word.
I. Sin needs forgiveness.
II. Forgiveness is obtainable.
III. The great Intercessor pleads
for it.—Jreland.


590


I. His first word was no cry of pain.

II. His first word pleads for His
murderers.

III. His first word was the begin-
ning of an intercession that is still
going on.

IV. His first word teaches us a
great lesson on Christian forgiveness.
—WMiller.


Ignorance in Doing Wrong.—“ Father,
forgive them; they know not what
they do.” These words, so full of
pathos and Christian spirit, are the
words of our Christ while He was being
fastened to the cross, or while in agony
upon it. They breathe the noble spirit
of love to man, even to bitterest
enemies, whose cruel acts spoke the
hatred of their hearts. “ Forgive
them!” How deep must have been
the love of that noble heart! ‘They
know not what they do.” How clear
was the spiritual vision of that great
soul! That heart knew sorrow, but
not hatred. That soul saw the right,
and knew that no temporal eclipse
could put wrong on the everlasting .
throne. It has been well said that
“the brave only know how to forgive.”
The power of forgiving flows only from
a strength and greatness of soul. These
words may apply to the people—the
unthinking mass, easily led for good or
bad. They may apply to the obedient
tools of power—the Roman soldiers—
those who were His immediate cruci-
fiers. Or Pilate may have been most
prominent in Jesus’ mind,—poor, weak
creature, with the semblance of great-
ness, but without the real thing. His
outward exterior belied the weak soul
within. Perhaps it is Caiaphas who
needs the prayer—the man who ought
to speak the word of truth and justice ;
the really strong man, with a fixed
purpose, and with means to attain that
purpose. Jesus meant all. All were
men in error and sin. But did not
these, one and all, know what they
were doing? How far the people
knew it is difficult to say. They gave
little time to any careful thought over
the matter. Their leaders demanded


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.  cuwarv. xxuu.


a ee ee


the life of this Jesus. Right or wrong,
they followed their leaders, Small
aims, little policies, poor, superficial
reasons, satisfied them. The imme-
diate present was all they saw. The
Roman soldiers were trained to obey :
this was their first duty. Not for
them to reason why, but to do. They
were, as are all soldiers, mere instru-
ments of higher powers. They were
the brute and blind means by which the
higher powers maintained themselves.
But, for all this prayer, these people
and soldiers knew better than they
acted ; they did not live up to what little
Divine light they had. They must
stand in judgment, and receive their
well-merited stripes. Pilate did know
what he was doing. He knew he was
twisting, in his weakness, the Roman
law (which had some bit of justice in
it) to please the Jews, whose governor
he was. He trembled before the cry
of the priests: “‘If thou let this man
go, thou art not Cesar’s friend.” He
sought outside, not inside, approval.
He thought more of public opinion,
of the opinion of the great, than of the
opinion he could have of himself. He
sacrificed moral integrity on the altar
of power. Let Pilate be Ceesar’s friend
at all cost, though to be so he violated
Cesar’s law. Pilate thus far knew
what he was doing, He was thinking
of his own hold on the governorship of
Judea. Those in power know what
they are doing. We need waste no
pity on them. They know that the
one thought is not the benefit of man
or country, but how to maintain them-
selves in powerful places. There is no
need to ransack history—to tell of the
deeds of tyrants, of their trampling
down by their soldiers the mass of
human kind, of their courts and judg-
ments. History is full until it flows
over with examples. We must get
power, we must hold on to power, by
all means. Let God and man, and
country and justice, and truth and
integrity, go. Let all that is held to
be principle be crucified. You cannot
pray, “Forgive them: they know not
what they do.” They do know, And


thatis the worst of it. Caiaphas and the
hierarchy knew what they were doing.
This gentle rabbi, Jesus, who would
get at the spirit under the ceremony,
who laid so little stress on form, who
would have men come direct to God as
children, was really a destroyer of the


_Temple worship and of priestly power.


He represented the new, larger, freer
thought; they, the old, outgrown
thought. He stood for progress, they
for stagnation. They were wise men ;
they would use the enactments of men
to thwart the laws of God. If they
did not enforce these ordinances, the
Temple would go, the service would go,
the people would no longer worship the
God of their fathers, Moses would be
dishonoured, the prophets despised, and
holy Judaism, purchased at fearful
cost, would be a thing forgotten. Let,
therefore, this young man be silenced,
and, if it must be, by death. Let the
old crush this destroying new. They
knew well what they were doing. In
the same sense the men who, all along
our trail of blood called history, have
sent their fellows to death, knew what
they were doing. They knew what
they were doing, or, to be more exact,
they thought they knew. But did
they know, after all? Let us see. In
the broad sweep of the question, did
they know? Of course, the blind mass
did not know. Nor do they know now ;
and, in their ignorance, they commit
crime and do acts of folly. Those who
do know suffer through the ignorance
of the ignorant. When one stops and
thinks that he is the product of his
age—his age with all its blindness,
folly, and sin ; when he thinks that his
soul and its everlasting destiny is being
moulded by his surroundings, and that
his surroundings include the besotted,
the knaves, the brutish, and the brutal,
—he may bestir himself to improve
these surroundings, to make better his
age. He feels the great solemnity of
the prayer of Jesus when applied to
these darkened masses. ‘“ Father,
forgive them; they know not what
they do.” They know not the real
nature of sin or the majesty of Divine


591


¥


#ap.xxm. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE,





justice. Nor did the soldiers know
what they were doing. ‘They thought
they were carrying out the law, whereas
they were the blind instruments of
cruelty and injustice. It is a sad
picture, this yielding up of will and
moral responsibility to a supposed
superior. It is a most dangerous
thing, and it has ever, in the end,
proved a terrible thing to the weak.
It is something to make one pause
when one really takes in the thought
of thousands, hundreds of thousands,
of men yielding up to another will
their wills and ,consciences. It gives
food for reflection when these thou-
sands practically say, “Think for me.
Be responsible to humanity and God
for me. I will act. I will dye my
hands in blood, guilty and innocent.
Only be thou responsible.” They did
not know that, no matter what may
be the customs and ordinances of
nations, no man can shift to another
his responsibility to man and God.
Pilate—did he really know what he
was doing? In one way, yes; but, in
. adeeper way, no. He fancied he was
upholding Roman power. The majesty


of human law asserted itself in him. -


He thought that human ordinances were
final. He knew not that at the back
of these arose, as clouds of threatening
darkness and as clouds ,of approving
light, the everlasting principles of
justice. Pilate was a lawyer, and
most naturally confounded the judg-
ments of men with the wisdom of God.
He thought that to apply human
ordinances was tne only way to order
and good government. He forgot, or
never knew, that government is a
means, not an end. In the interest
of his earthly empire he was blinded to
the deeper interest of the kingdom of
God. He saw the Roman army, the
Roman power, the Roman law. He
did not see higher powers and Diviner
principles than had then or have now
found their way into human ordinances.
Poor, blinded man. And Caiaphas!
Oh, we pity him! His name and
memory have suffered. His deed has
brought down upon the heads of noble


592


“with it.


men, pure women, and innocentchildren
the curses and cruelties of the ignorant
and bigoted. Poor priest, of a once
great religion, the one who was to lead
to hope, to faith, to duty, leads to hate,
death, and destruction. He fancied
that religion was a thing of the outer
man, not the living principle of the
soul. He did not see that God can
uphold His own cause. He needs no
man’s crime to assist Him. He called
for the death of one greater than the
Temple, greater than all the Temple’s
ritual, greater than Moses,—a new
man, with a new, large word from the
God in heaven and the God in the ©
human soul. He knew not what he
did. When we think of Pilate and
Caiaphas, the men in power, on whose
will the lives of their fellows depended ;
when we think of their dense ignorance;
—we pity our humanity, and them
Men find it a most difficult
lesson to learn that you may slay men,
but you cannot thus take the life of
God out of those deep, fundamental
principles on which all life rests, and
by which all life is sustained,—those
fundamentals that make thought
possible, that regulate the moral uni-
verse. These are as eternal as God is
eternal. Men may come, men may go;
but these abide for ever. So runs the
law of God, Oh, how real, then, the
prayer, “ Father, forgive them; they
know not what they do”! These men,
one and all—people, soldiers, governor
and priests—knew and did not know.
They knew better than they lived up
to, but they were ignorant of the great
fact that God’s laws are eternal.
Their ignorance is their excuse. It is
also their crime. God pities man’s
ignorance, but God’s law punishes that
same ignorarice. We do not know.
Let Him forgive. But we ought to
know. Ignorance is often our own
fault as well as our only excuse. But,
ignorant or wise, there is mercy.
Beneath and above the blindness of
the people, the submissive obedience of
the soldiers, the folly of the governor,
and the bigotry of the priest, is the
Divine pity. Oh, the mighty heart


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XXIII.





which, with its flowing blood, cried out
for this forgiveness to its enemies !
From it we may gather, not all its
grandeur, but a small portion of its
power of love to man.— Walkley.


The Calmness and Justice of Christ
upon the Cross.— Dying is just a part of
living—sometimes a long part, often
a hard part. With Christ, life and
death were all of a piece—simple and
calm. Even on the cross He took up
things in order, and gently. His first
word was about His enemies.

I. Forgiveness is His first thought
' in death.—The ruling thought of His
mission, men’s need of it, and how they
could have it.

IJ. Pain shakes the sense of
justice.—Christ suffered agony un-
speakable. But His sense of justice
was unafiected. He judged as scrupu-
lously as He will from His white
throne. He apportioned degrees of
guilt.

III. The men who nailed Him had
little knowledge of Him.—They were
nearly as much instruments, we might
say, as the nails they hammered. But
even the smallest knowledge of Christ
brings responsibility. How much more
afull knowledge! With what measure
shall those be judged who claim a true
and just acquaintance with Christ 1—


Nicoll.


The Unselfish Christ.—His voice is
heard—not of anger or resentment, but
of pleading intercession.

I. He finds an excuse for those who
pierced Him.—The most glorious
instance of a Divine unselfishness—-of
an absolute self-sacrifice. His self-
sacrifice rises into the sublimer region
of a literal self-forgetfulness : enough,
surely, of itself, to explain how Jesus
Christ, coming to minister to all the
diseases of humanity, has a right to
undertake the treatment and cure of
this particular disease of selfishness.

II. How does He heal us of this
malady of selfishness?—Is not the
question half answered in the asking?
fle was unselfishness, Selfishness and


22


He cannot co-exist. In the heavenly
glory He still forgets Himself in the
sorrows of His “‘ brethren.”

III. To see Him, to be united to
Him, to be one with Him—this is to
be a Christian.—This is to be like Him
in His unselfishness. When Christ
came to bear our sins, He not only took
away by His cross the mid-wall of guilt
between each man and his God; He also
took away the mid-wall of selfishness
between each man and his brother. He
made that possible in all cases to
Christian love which was impossible
before in any case to the natural.
Selfishness is done away with by the in-
troduction of a new self which embraces
and comprehends us all.—Vaughan.


The Forgiveness of the Cross.—I. One
thing is not said here, nor anywhere
else, by the Saviour.—There is no con-
fession of sin, and no cry for personal
forgiveness. He neither did, nor could,
pray for His own forgiveness.- He did
pray for the pardon of others.

II. We are taught here the simple
and primary duty of the forgiveness of
injuries.—Christ seems to be almost
more exacting in relation to forgiveness
than in relation to purity.

III. A limit is affixed to Christ’s
prayer.—Who come within the scope
of the word, within the embrace of
this appeal? The prayer included the
executioners and the Jewish chiefs
and rulers. And perhaps it reaches
out to a wider area. But there is no
charter of universalism in the prayer
—no assurance that all sin will be re-
mitted and every sinner forgiven. No
doubt, however, ignorance lessens the
guilt of sin, but it does not obliterate
it. If the sinner could always say
boldly, “I knew not,” then there would
have been no need for this intercession
of the Mediator.—A lexander.


Vers. 34, 43, 46. Luke's Record of
the Words from the Cross—I. The
beauty of forgiving tenderness.

TI. The beauty of pardoning power.

III. The beauty of perfect peace
—Ibid.

593


cHAP. xxi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





Ver. 35. “ Cast lots.” — Lots would be
cast for the division among the four
soldiers of the robe, the turban, the
girdle, and the sandals of Jesus, and
then again for disposing of His tunic
which, as the other gospels tell us, was
of some.special value.


“ He saved others.”-—This may be
ironical, or it is a recognition of His
miracles of mercy, to taunt Him with
a supposed loss of His power just when
He needed it most for Himself. His
very mercy is used in mockery.


“The chosen of God.’—The epithet
describes Christ as appointed before-
hand by God for the realisation of His
plans for Israel and for the world.
Cf. ix. 35.


Vers. 37, 38. ‘The soldiers also
mocked Him,” etc.—In deriding the
claim of Christ to be a king, probably
both the soldiers, who offered Him a
mock homage, and Pilate, who drew up
the title upon the cross, desired rather
to give expression to their contempt for
the Jewish people than to insult the
Saviour.


Vers. 39-43. The Haperience of the
Malefactor.

I. As a convert.—1l. The previous
character of the penitent enhances the
greatness of his conversion. 2. The
unlikelihood of his conversion in the
special circumstances of the case. 3.
The suddenness with which it was
produced. 4, The completeness and
maturity by which it was marked. 5.
The scantiness of the means by which
it was effected.

II. As a witness.

Til. As a suppliant.—Cairns.


The Penitent and Christ.—I. The
penitent (1) humbly acknowledges his
guilt ; (2) eagerly seeks for salvation ;
and (3) courageously confesses His
Saviour.

II. The Saviour (1) pardons the
guilt; (2) hears the prayer ; and (3) be-

"B94


stows a reward far in excess of the
penitent’s hopes or expectations,


Despair and Faith—Compare the
despairing cry “Save Thyself and us”
with the humble petition, “ Lord,
remember me.”


Abundant Teaching of This in Ad-
vent.—We have here (1) a most wonder-
ful illustration of the glory and grace of
the Saviour ; (2) a striking example of
the efficacy of prayer; (3) an antidote
to despair ; (4) a proof of nearness and
reality of the spiritual world.


Encouragement and Warning.

I. The case of the penitent thief
shows that conversion is possible, even
at the last hour.

II. The case of the impenitent thief
shows the danger of postponing con-
version to the last hour.


All the Elements of Genuine Conver-
sion Present.—Brief as the utterance
of the penitent thief was, yet there
is nothing lacking to it that belongs
to the unalterable requirements of a
genuine conversion: sense of guilt,
confession of sin, simple faith, active
love, supplicating hope—all these fruits
of the tree of the new life we see here
ripen during a few moments.—Van
Oosterzee.


No Encouragement to Delay Repent-
ance.—His case affords no encourage-
ment to any one to put off repentance
to a death-bed. Our faith cannot come
up to that of this penitent, for our
condition is very different from his. We
have seen Christ’s glorious resurrection
and ascension into heaven. We have
received the Holy Ghost from heaven.
He had none of these benefits. He saw
Christ deserted by His disciples and
dying on the cross, and yet He confessed
Him as a King, and prayed to Him as
his Lord.— Wordsworth.


A Witness for Christ Raised Up.—
This is a comfortable symbol and ex.
ample for all Christendom, that God


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


will never let faith in Christ, and the
confession of His name, go down. Ifthe
disciples as a body, and those who were
otherwise related to Jesus, confess not
and lose their faith, deny Him in
fear, are offended, and forsake Him-—
a malefactor or murderer must come
forward to confess Him, to preach Him
to others, and teach all men who He is,
and what consolation all may find in
Him.— Luther.


Vers. 40-43. 1. The penitent male-
factor.—1l. His expostulation with his
companion in suffering. 2. His con-
fession of guilt. 3. His recognition of
Christ’s imnocence. 4. The faith,
humility, and earnestness, manifested
in his prayer to Christ.

II. The gracious Redeemer.—1. He
has sympathy for others in the midst
of His own dire sufferings. 2. He
anticipates entrance upon a state of
blessedness. 3. He is conscious of power
to open the gate of Paradise to others,
4, He gives far more than was asked
from Him.


Ver. 40. ‘ Dost not thou fear God ?”—
The thought of the Divine justice be-
fore which he was so shortly to appear
might well cause him to refrain from
mocking his  fellow-sufferer: the
thoughtless crowd were under no such
restraint.


Ver. 41. “Hath done nothing a-
miss.”—Even had the robber said
nothing more than this, yet he would
awaken our deepest astonishment, that
God—in a moment wherein literally all
voices are raised against Jesus, and not
a friendly word is heard in His favour—
causes a witness for the spotless inno-
cence of the Saviour to appear on one
of the crosses beside Him.—Van
Oosterzee.


Vers. 42, 43. The Absolution of the
Cross.

I. The assurance.—There is absolute
certainty in it. Christ’s especial utter-
ance is, not “I think,” but “I say.”


CHAP. XXIII


II. The promise.—It is twofold:
1. A gracious promise of the abridg-
ment of suffering. 2. The better part.
More than the penitent thief thought
of or asked for. Not pcssibly, in some
remote future and vaguely, but verily,
to-day, and close to Himself.

III. The revelation.—This is one of
Luke’s words of revelation, unveiling.
It is the great dictwm probans for the
rest of the saints in Paradise. To say
“m heaven” would be inaccurate. Oh
the preciousness of the hope which
enfolds our dead in Christ, ever since
the dying Lord said to the dying peni-
tent “to-day in Paradise”! What
speed, what rest, what companionship !
—Alexander.


“ With Me in Paradise.”

I. What did the robber expect ?—
That they two would die. That the
long trance would come; that the
wrong would be righted at last; and
that when it was, Jesus would be
Lord. And then, “ Have a thought
of me.”

II. What was the answer ?—-“ When
IT go to My kingdom, thou shalt keep
Me company, and that before the setting
of the sun.” The prayer was great, but
the answer was greater still. We may
suppose that the robber did not under-
stand much of the word “ Paradise,”
but he understood the word ‘ with Me,”
and it was enough. If the prayer was
like a river, the answer was as a great
sea.—Vicoll.


T. The word of the dying thief.
If. The word of the dying Lord.—
Ireland.


Ver. 42. The Dying Thief.

J. We see here an illustration of
the cross, in its power of drawing men
to itself.

II. We have here the cross, as
pointing to and foretelling the
kingdom.

III. Here is the cross as revealing
and opening the true Paradise.—
Maclaren. :


595


CHAP. xxi. ~HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





The Penitent Thief.

I. What he thought of himself.
II. What he thought of Christ.
III. What Christ thought of him.


Ver. 43. “ To-day.’—The penitent
thief could scarcely have expected
death on that day, for those crucified
often lingered several days upon the
cross. The breaking of the legs of the
two who suffered with Christ secured
the fulfilment of this prophecy and
promise. Thus the enemies of Christ
unconsciously brought about the fulfil-
ment of Christ’s words.


I. A place in Paradise.

II. The presence of Christ with Him
in Paradise.

III. An entrance with Him into
Paradise that very day.


Ver. 44. “ There was a darkness,” etc.
—There is evidently something extra-
ordinary in these phenomena, whether
their exceptional character is to be
ascribed to a supernatural cause, or
smply to a providential coincidence.
It is impossible to ignore the profound
relation which exists, on the one hand,
between man and nature, and, on the
other, between humanity and Christ.
For man is the soul of the world, as
Christ is the soul of humanity.—
Godet.


Ver. 45. “ The veil of the temple was
rent.”—1. This was a type of the
violent rending of Christ’s body on the
cross (Heb. x. 20). 2. It typified our
Lord’s own entrance into heaven
(Heb. ix. 24). 3. It intimated that
the ceremonies of the Law were
abolished. 4. That the distinction
between Jew and Gentile was at an
end. 5, That there was freedom of
access to the throne of grace. 6. That
Christ had opened up, by His death, an
entrance into heaven for all His
followers (Heb. ix. 7).—Foote.

The Temple no longer the Abode of
God.—Was not this sign meant to
show that the Temple was no longer
the abode of God? As the high priest


596


rent his robe in the presence of a great
scandal, so God rent the veil which
covers the Holy of MHolies, where
formerly He had manifested Himself.
It implied a desecration of the most
holy place, and consequently of the
Temple, with its courts and altar and
sacrifices. The Temple is profaned,
abolished by God Himself. The efficacy
of sacrifice has henceforth passed to
another blood, another altar, and a
new order of priesthood. This fact
is implied in the declaration of Jesus:
“Slay Me, and you will thereby have
destroyed this Temple.”—Godet.


Yer. 46. Last Words.
I. edeemer was


done.—His previous word, “It is
finished ” marked its completion. Now
He is ready to return to His Father.
Before Him lies the mystery of death.

II. Here we see His calm, trustful
faith.—The terrible struggle is over,
and He is at perfect peace. His use
of the word “ Father” shows that His
soul has recovered its serenity. The
darkness is gone. The Father's face
beams upon His in loving approval.

III. A picture of Christian dying.—
It was but a breathing of the spirit
into the hands of the heavenly Father.
It is natural to regard death as
a strange experience. What is it?
Where shall we be when we escape
from the body? Will it be dark or
light? Shall we be alone or accom-
panied? Here comes this word of our
Lord, and we learn that the soul, when
it leaves the body, passes at once into
the Father’s hands. Surely that is
enough for us to know.’ We shall be
perfectly and eternally safe if we are
in our Father’s keeping. If we think
thus of death, it will have no terrors
for us.—Miller.


The Peace of the Cross.

I, The view of death taken by the
Lord Jesus.—Not fate : irresistible and
irrevocable necessity. Not impersonal
absorption into the universal life, or
positivist immortality of a subjective
character. His death comes as from


.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. cHAP. XXIII.


a Father’s love. He has the assurance
of life in definite personality, the true
life of the spirit after the body has
gore down into the grave. It is free,
spontaneous, unhesitating surrender.
Tne deposit must be safe that is lodged
with such a Depository.

IT. The use to be made of Scripture
fluring the approach of death.—One
chief employment of Scripture is for
the dying. Scripture is not only a
rule of life. How much of it is of
use for the spirit in dying!

III. This word supplies an answer
to an objection not seldom made to
the Atonement.—How the Atonement
effects its object we are not told. But
this last word attests how willingly
Jesus died. There was no reluctance,


no repugnance, no shrinking, no
compulsion. His dying word shows
how true was His own repeated


declaration, “I lay down My life.”—-
Alexander.


I. The work of the Dying One.

II. The attitude of the Dying One.
1, Making satisfaction for sin. 2. Alone
with the Father.

III. The spirit of the Dying One.—
1. Voluntary surrender. 2. Obedient
love and holy peace. .

IV. Our interest in the death and
dying word of*Jesus.—A lesson (1) for
dying, (2) for living. —Jreland.


“‘ Into Thy hands.”—The Father re-
ceives the spirit of Jesus ; Jesus receives
the spirits of the faithful (Acts vii. 59).

“T commend My spirit.”—At the
moment when He is about to lose
self-consciousness, and feels that His
spirit is passing away, He commits it
in trust to His Father.


Vers. 47-49. The Effects Produced
upon Spectators by the Death of Christ.


—1l. Upon the Roman _ centurion.
2. Upon the people. 3. Upon His ad-
herents.


Ver. 47. “A righteous man.”—More
than mere innocence of the charge on


which He suffered is implied in this
testimony. Jesus had claimed to be
the Son of God, and if He were
righteous He must be more than man.
Hence the form in which St. Luke
gives this testimony is in virtual agree-
ment with that in which it is reported
by St. Matthew and St. Mark: “ Truly
this was the Son of God.”


Ver. 48. “ That sight.”—They came,
from motives of curiosity, to look on
that spectacle, but they depart with
feelings of awe and alarm.


“ Smote their breasts.’—As the ex-
clamation of the centurion is an
anticipation of the conversion of the
pagan world, so also the consternation
which seizes upon the Jews, who
witness this scene, is an anticipation
of the penitence and final conversion
of that nation (Zech. xii, 10-14),—
Godet.


Ver. 49. “ All His acquaintance.” —
In what mood they.now stood there,
after they were now no longer hindered
by the scoffings of the people from
coming near, may be better felt than
described. With the deepest sorrow
over this irrevocable loss, which was
not yet softened by the joyful hope
of the resurrection, there is united
melancholy joy that now at last the
agonising conflict is ended, and the
heart-felt longing to render now the
last honours to the inaminate corpse.—
Van Oosterzee.


The Ministering Women.

T. These were the earliest ofa great
and noble army of Christian women,
attached to Christ by deep personal
love, following and ministering unto
Him.

II. Woman has always beengrateful,
to Christ, and has served Him with
great devotion.

III. There is a field everywhere for
woman’s ministry.

IV. Let every woman imitate this
company, by following Christ.— Miller.


597


cHAP. xxi. WOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





MAIN HOMILETIOS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 50—56.


The Last Offices of Love.—With the crucifixion of Christ the rage of His
enemies was spent; they had done their worst, and retire into the background,
while His friends and disciples draw near, to show their love by taking reverent
care of His lifeless body. Not only do His known and accredited followers come
forward at this hour, but also some from unexpected quarters, who had been
disciples secretly, have now the courage of their convictions and manifest
openly their affection for Him who had been put to such an ignominious death.
One of these was Joseph of Arimathza, a member of the Sanhedrim itself, a man
of wealth, of well-known probity and piety, who had taken no part in the
proceedings against Jesus. At the moment when the cause of Christ is at its
lowest ebb this hidden friend comes forth, constrained by love of Him, and gives
honourable interment to the body of his Master.

I. Love towards Christ gives courage.—Joseph had much to risk by coming
forward at this time to confess his love for Christ; he exposed himself to the
enmity of the Sanhedrim, and to the penalty of excommunication by the
ecclesiastical authorities of his nation—with all that it implied of loss of station,
separation from kindred, and from the society of his fellows. The fear of this
had already restrained him from confessing himself to be a disciple of Jesus ; but
now love raises him above fear. It was the violence of the enemies of Christ
that urged him to religious decision ; it reached a point at which he felt himself
bound to make a stand, and openly to identify himself with the hated and
persecuted cause. Thus does religious persecution overreach itself ; it cows the
timid and half-hearted, but it rouses up others to cast in their lot with what
they know to be the side of God and truth. He went in boldly to Pilate and
asked for the body of Jesus.

II. This love inspires deeds of devotion.—Joseph did all that love could
suggest as possible to be done. He took down the body from the cross, wrapped
it in a linen cloth with costly spices, and laid it in his own new tomb. He did
not employ his servants to do this work, but did it with his own hands. Love
could not be satisfied with less than this. The tomb was one which he had had
excavated for himself. Though he belonged to a city at a distance from
. Jerusalem, he wished, like many of his nation, to be buried in the most sacred
spot in the land, and hence had made preparations beforehand against the day
of his death. But now he gives up with great generosity, this highly valued
property, and consecrates it to be the tomb of Jesus. We note from this that
rich men have ways of serving Christ which are inaccessible to their poorer
brethren. Joseph’s rank, and dignity, and wealth, doubtless disposed Pilate to
listen to his petition. ‘The Roman judge would probably have refused to accede
to a like petition, if it had been presented by some poor and obscure disciple.
Another might have had all Joseph’s love and devotion to the Master, and yet
have been unable to provide an equally suitable place of burial for Him.

III. The love of one towards Christ stirs up the like feeling in others.—We
learn from the fourth Gospel that Nicodemus, too, came forward to assist in the
work of burial, and brought “a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about a hundred
pound weight,” and here we read that the women which came from Galilee, when
they saw what was being done, made preparations for bringing fresh spices and
ointments as soon as the Sabbath was past. The example of one loyal, loving
disciple prompted others to imitation. They would not be behindhand in
honouring the Master. What had been done in the way of anointing was
amply sufficient for the purpose; but they would not be satisfied with merely


598


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XXIII.


ee el i ban Se i ee eis Be eee


being spectators of the piety of others,
honour to Him.


, they must themselves assist in rendering
“To what purpose is this waste?” a cold-hearted, utilitarian


world might ask ; but every loving heart knows that nothing is wasted which is


given out of love to Christ.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 50—bé6.


Ver. 50. “A good man and a just.”
—St. Luke names the more compre-
hensive quality first; for every good
man is also just, while not all just men
are good.


“A good man, and a just.”—Each
evangelist describes Joseph in his own
way. St. Luke’s words correspond to
the Greek ideal of character (kadds
kayaOds): St. Mark speaks of him as
“an honourable counsellor ” — the


Roman ideal: St. Matthew as “a rich .


man ”—the Jewish ideal.—@odet.


Ver. 51. “ The counsel and deed.”—
J.e., be had not consented to the sen-
tence passed on Jesus, nor to the shame-
ful artifices by which the Roman judge
had been urged into ratifying the
sentence.


Ver. 52. Joseph of Arimathea.

I. Joseph had been a secret disciple
of Christ for some time already.

II. Now he throws away his timid-
ity, and comes out boldly as a friend
of Jesus.

III. True love for Christ cannot
always keep hid.

IV. We must ever be grateful that
Joseph gave Jesus such noble burial.

V. Yet, after all, his love blossomed
out too late.— He ministered, not to this
living, but to the dead Christ. He
discipleship was incomplete.— Miller.


Ver. 53. The Sepulchre.

I. Christ touched life at every
point.—He began at infancy and ended
at the grave. There is no path on
which His holy footprints are not seen.
Why should we dread the grave, since
Jesus has lain in it?


Il. He lay in a borrowed grave.—
His friends provided it. Another mark
of His deep humiliation.

III. How hopeless the prospect
seemed !—Jesus was buried; the dis-
ciples were scattered. The grave
seemed to be the tomb of all their
hopes. And yet it was simply the
lowly gateway to honour and glory.
So no hopes perish when a Christian
is buried—just beyond is glory.—
Lbid.


Ver. 54. “The Sabbath drew on.”—
What different feelings would fill the
minds (1) of those who had slain Jesus ;
(2) of those who were His disciples, on
this day of rest. For Him it was a
day of rest and peace indeed.


Ver. 55. “ Beheld the sepulchre.”—
I.e., they followed those who carried
Jesus to the grave, and took notice of
the place, with the intention of return-
ing after the Sabbath was over to com-
plete the embalming which had been
hastily begun. Though Christ had
foretold His resurrection, yet, as the
words of the penitent thief imply, a
glorious reappearance of the Saviour
after death was expected, at least by
some of His followers, but not the
rising again of the body which was laid
in the tomb.


Ver. 56. “ Rested the Sabbath day.” —
These words reveal the pious and
humble fidelity of these Jewish women
to the law of the Sabbath. It may
be said that this Sabbath was the last
of the Old Covenant, which came to a
close with the death of Christ. It
was scrupulously respected by all those
who, unconsciously, were about to in-
augurate the New.—Godet.


599


er


onap. xxtv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


—————— nn


Pe


CHAPTER XXIV.
CRITICAL NOTES.


VeR. 1. Very early in the morning.—Rather, “at early dawn” (R.V.); lit. “deep dawn.”
And certain others with them.—Omit these words; omitted in R.V. Probably a harmonistic
insertion. y

Ver. 4. Two men.—J.e., men in appearance. Shining garments.—Rather, “dazzling apparel”
(R.V.); the word “ shining” literally meaning “ flashing.”

Ver. 5. The living.—The ground of the rebuke lies in the designation applied to
our Lord, “the Living One” (absolutely)—He who hath life in Himself (John v. 26),
and of whom it is elsewhere said, that God raised Him up; “having loosed the pains
of death, because it was not possible that He should be holden of it.”—Speaker’s
Commentary.

Ver. 6. Yet in Galilee.—These were women from Galilee to whom the angels spoke (see
chap. xxiii. 55).

Ver. 7. Sinful men.—The Gentiles (chap. xviii. 32).

Ver. 11. Idle tales.—R.V. “idle talk.”

Ver, 12. Then arose Peter, etc.—This verse is omitted by one of the great uncial MSS., D.,
but is no doubt genuine. Departed, wondering in Himself—Rather, ‘“‘ departed to his home,
wondering,” etc. The change arises from connecting the phrase translated “in himself” with
“ departed” and not with “wondering,” and rendering it by “ to his home.”

Ver. 13. Two of them.—It is evident from ver, 33 that neither of them were apostles. The
name of one of them is given in ver. 18, Cleopas (i.e., an abbreviation of Cleopatros), a
different name from Cleopas of John xix. 25. Conjectures as to the name of the other are
futile. Went.—Rather, “were going” (R.V.). Emmaus.—Mentioned in Josephus, BWJ.,
VII. vi. 6. Omit “about”; omitted in R.V.

Ver. 14. They talked.—Rather, “ communed” (R.V.),; the same word as in ver. 15,

Ver. 15. Reasoned.—Rather, “ questioned together ” (R.V.).

Ver. 16. Their eyes were holden.—A certain change had passed over Jesus, so that He was
not instantly recognised in all cases by the disciples after His resurrection (see ver. 37 ;
Matt. xxviii. 17; John xx. 14, xxi. 4). In the present instance St. Mark refers to this in
saying that Heappeared to these two disciples “in another form.” St. Luke, however, speaks
here of a subjective impediment to recognition in the disciples themselves: perhaps their
absorptionein grief. A supernatural restraint may possibly be indicated: cf. ver. 31.

Ver. 17. What manner ? etc.—Lit., “What words are these that ye exchange one with
another?” As ye walk and are sad.—A better reading is, “and they stood still, looking sad”
R.V.).

: Ver. 18. Art thou only? etc.—Rather, “Dost thou alone sojourn in Jerusalem?” (R.V.)
or “Dost thou sojourn alone in Jerusalem?” (R.V. margin). ‘‘Cleopas thought that the
supposed stranger was one of the numerous persons who had come up to sojourn at
Jerusalem during the period of the paschal feast, and expressed his surprise at his
being there without having heard of the death of Jesus of Nazareth; he assumes that
no other person could have been in Jerusalem at the time without hearing of it”
(Speaker's Commentary).

Ver. 19. A prophet, etc.—See a similar description in Acts ii. 22.

Ver, 20. Our rulers.—This shows that the speakers were Jews. Delivered him.—JZ.e., to
Pilate.

Ver. 21. We trusted.—Rather, “we hoped” (R.V); ‘‘a word of weakened trust, and
shrinking from the avowal that they ‘believed’ this” (A/ford). Is the third day.—The
expression in the original is peculiar, and might be translated, ‘“ He is now in the third day,
since,” etc. The reference, of course, is to the prophecy about rising again on the third day.

Ver. 22. Yea, and certain women.—R.V. “moreover.” The phrase used implies, “ Certainly,
thus much has happened, that,” etc. Made us astonished.—R.V. “amazed us.”

Ver. 24. Certain of them, etc.—This refers to the apostles; to the visit of Peter and John
to the sepulchre, though St. Luke has in his narrative only mentioned Peter (ver. 12).

Ver. 25. O fools—Rather, “O foolish men” (R.V.); the word means unintelltyent,
Defects both of understanding and of heart accounted for their unbelief.


600


wy


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. CHAP. XXIV.
A


Ver, 26. Ought not Christ !—Rather, “ behoved it not the Christ ?” (R.V.). “ The sufferings
were the appointed way by which Christ should enter into His glory ” (Alford).

Ver. 27. Beginning at.—T.e., taking His arguments from, Taking up the words of one
sacred writer after another, he deduced from them in turn certain great principles ; basing
what He taught upon their testimony. In all the scriptures.—The general tenor of the Old-
Testament Scriptures, types, Law, and prophecies, led up to Christ.

Ver. 28. Made as though, etc.—There was no dissimulation, for He would have
gone further, if they had not constrained Him to abide with them. His having joined
eee on the road was no pledge that He would remain an unlimited time in their
society.

Ver. 29. Abide with us.—J.c., in the same quarters with us. It is not implied that
the home of either of the disciples was in Emmaus ; indeed, from Christ’s assuming the
position of master of the household, it would seem probable that the resting place was
an inn. To tarry.—Rather, “to abide” (R.V.); the same word as in the earlier part of
the verse.

Ver. 30. Sat at meat.—Rather, as in other places, “reclined at meat.” Took bread, etc.—
No reference to any sacramental rite. These disciples could not have been reminded
by His action at the last supper, for neither of them was then present. But they
may have witnessed similar actions at common meals with the disciples and at the
miraculous feeding of the multitudes. Perhaps they recognised the prints of the nails in
His hands.

Ver, 32. Did not our hearts ? etc.—Rather, “ Was not our heart burning within us” (R.V.).
Talked with us.—Rather “to us” (R.V.).

Ver. 33. Rose up the same hour.—“They have now no fear of the night-journey from which
they had so lately dissuaded their unknown companion” (Bengel), Found the eleven.—With
the exception of Thomas, if this appearance of Jesus be the same as that recorded in John
xx. 19.

Ver. 34. Appeared to Simon.—J.e¢., to Simon Peter. No details are given of this appearance,
but it is mentioned again in 1 Cor. xv. 5. Probably at this interview between Jesus and
Peter, the sin of his threefold denial was formally forgiven.

Ver. 35. In breaking of bread.—Rather, “in the breaking of bread” (R.V.),

Ver. 36. Jesus Himself—Rather, “ He Himself” (R.V.). Stood in the midst.—A sudden
appearance, corresponding to the disappearance in ver. 31. St. John (xx. 19) says that “ the
doors were shut.” Peace be unto you.—The ordinary Jewish salutation, but having special
significance in the mouth of our Lord. Cf, John xiv. 27.

Ver. 37. Terrified.— On account of His sudden appearance, and the likeness to one whom
they knew to have been dead” (d/ford). A spirit.—/.e., a ghost or spectre.

Ver, 38. Thoughts.— Rather, “‘ reasonings” (R.V.), or “ disputing.”

Ver. 39. My hands, etc.—Probably as evidence both of His corporeity and of His
identity. The latter was proved by the marks of the nails. Sometimes those crucified
had their feet ted to the cross: from this it is evident that the feet of Christ had
been nailed to the cross. Handle me.—St. John uses the same word in the same con-
nection (1 John i. 1). Flesh and bones.—From the omission of “blood,” some have
argued that this was absent in His resurrection body, as being the seat of animal life.
But this is doubtful.

Ver. 40. Some ancient authorities omit this verse; but it is, no doubt, genuine. It is not
an interpolation from John xx. 27.

Ver. 41. Believed not for joy.—A very natural touch. Any meat.—Rather, “anything to
eat.”

Ver. 42. Fish.—Fish was brought in great quantities to Jerusalem at the principal
festivals. Honeycomb.—Curiously enough these words are omitted from the most important
uncial MSS. They are, however, of great antiquity, and are found in nearly all the cursive
MSS. and in some of the uncials. It is difficult to understand how they could have been
inserted if they had not been genuine. This proof of the resurrection by eating with the
disciples is referred to by St. Peter (Acts x. 41).

Ver. 44. These are the words.—/.c., “this is the meaning of the words.” Probably in
vers. 44-49 St. Luke gives a summary of Christ’s discourses during the time between the
Resurrection and the Ascension. Law of Moses, etc.—Perhaps here we have a reference to
the Jewish division of the books of the Old Testament—i.e., into the Pentateuch, the
Prophets (Joshua, Judges, four books of Kings, and the Prophets, except Daniel), and the
Hagiographa.

Ver. 45. Then opened.—Cf. ver. 27.

Ver. 46. And thus it behoved.—Omit these words; omitted in R.V.; probably an explan-
atory note. 4

Ver. 48. These things.—J.e¢., His death and resurrection. ;

Ver, 49. The promise of My Father.—The allusion is to Old-Testament prophecies and


601


_ omar. xxiv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


to the discourses in John xiv.-xvi. Tarry ye.—Lit. “sit ye down.” City of Jerusalem,—
Rather, “the city” (R.V.). Endued.—Rather, “clothed” (R.V.). Cf. Judges vi. 34, where
the same figure is used in the original.

Ver. 50. Led them out.—J.e., either from the house in which they were, or from the city.
As far as Bethany.— Not quite to the village itself, but over the brow of the Mount of
Olives, where it descends on Bethany; see Acts i. 12” (A/ford). “ On the wild uplands which
immediately overhang the village, He finally withdrew from the eyes of His disciples, in
a seclusion which, perhaps, could nowhere else be found so near the stir of a mighty city;
the long ridge of Olivet screening those hills, and those hills the village beneath them, from
all sound or sight of the city behind; the view opening only on the wide waste of desert-
rocks and ever-cescending valleys, into the Cepths of the distant Jordan and its mysterious
lake. At this point the last interview took place. ‘He led them out as far as Bethany ;’
and they ‘returned’ probably by the direct road over the summit of Mount Olivet. The
appropriateness of the real scene presents a singular contrast to the inappropriateness of
that fixed by a later fancy, ‘seeking for a sign,’ on the broad top of the mountain, out
of sight of Bethany, and in full sight of Jerusalem, and thus in equal contradiction to the
letter and the spirit of the gospel narrative” (Stanley, Sinai and Palestine). Lift up his
hands.—Rather, “lifted up His hands” (R.V.), “lift” being archaic. The attitude was that
of prayer and benediction.

Ver. 51. Was parted from them.—Rather, “ parted from them ” (R.V.); the verb is not in
the passive. Carried up.— Not by an angel or by a cloud, but absolutely and without
reference to any particular agent. We must imagine our Saviour slowly rising above His
disciples, with His hands still raised in the attitude of blessing, until a cloud conceals
Him from the eyes of His followers.”—Speaker’s Commentary.

Ver. 52. Worshipped Him.—This can only mean here the adoration which is offered toa
Divine Being. With great joy. The joy of the disciples in consequence of their Master’s
exaltation, which was a pledge of the victory of His cause, already fulfilled the saying of
Jesus, ‘If ye loved Me ye would rejoice, because I said, 1 go unto the Father, for My Father ~
is greater than I (John xiv. 28)” (Godet). “A prelude to Pentecost ” (Bengel). Amen.—
Omit this word ; omitted in R.V. ; probably a liturgical addition.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 1—12


The Empty Tomb.—None of the evangelists describe the rising of Jesus from
the dead, but all of them assign it to an hour early in the morning of the first
day of the week, before the visit of the women to the tomb where He had lain.
They came to the place as the day began to dawn, but Jesus had already teft the
tomb. The rising of the Sun of Righteousness anticipated the dawn of the
natural day. Three classes of persons are here mentioned as having relationship
with Christ, each possessing special characteristics—the women, the angels, and
the apostles.

I. The love of the women.—<As soon as the Sabbath was past and the darkness
of the night was about to give way to the coming day, the band of holy women
assembled together and set out for the tomb, carrying the spices with which they
proposed to anoint the body of their Lord. Love to Him made them regardless
of their own comfort, and generous in their gifts to Him, and drew them together
into holy fellowship one with another. Bountiful provision had been made by
others already for embalming the body of Jesus, but they will not be satisfied
unless they are allowed to join in showing this last mark of affection for Him.
It is the motive that animates us that gives value to the offerings we make to
God or the services we seek to render to our fellows. Love to Christ is the one
strong emotion that distinguishes these women all through the incident here
recorded, but in the course of the strange experience through which they passed
many other emotions and feelings rose to the surface. On their way to the tomb
they were anxious about being able to carry through the work on which they
were bent. The stone that sealed the tomb was large, and they wondered who
would roll it away for them. Yet, after all, the obstacle existed only in their


602


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.  cuap. xxiv.
ee er Oe


imaginations, for when they reached the tomb the stone was rolled away. In
like manner many of the obstacles that our imaginations conjure up as likely to
hinder our service of Christ or of our fellows disappear of themselves if we press
on resolutely in the path of duty. Feelings of surprise, perplexity, and fear
filled their minds when they came to the tomb and found it open and empty, and
had a vision of angels; but these feelings were succeeded by great joy as they
realised the fact that He whose lifeless body they had come to embalm had risen
from the dead, in accordance with the prophetic words He had spoken in Galilee,
but which they had been unable to understand. Love to Jesus kept alive a
spark of faith within their hearts, and they gradually attained to that spirituality
of mind which enabled them to grasp spiritual truths and to understand the deep
significance both of Christ’s death and of His resurrection. In obedience to a
very natural impulse they hastened to convey the news of the resurrection to
their fellow-disciples. Yet, as often afterwards in the experience of those who
proclaim the gospel, their message did not win immediate credence; the faith
which filled their hearts did not find entrance to those of others, and the tidings
they brought seemed as idle tales. In their disappointment the words of the
prophet may well have recurred to their minds, “ Lord, who hath believed our
report ?”

Tr. The kindly ministrations of the angels.—As angels heralded the birth of
the Saviour, so was it fitting that they should herald His rising from the dead.
On the one occasion their message was that He who was Lord of all had deigned
to assume our nature and appear in fashion as a man; now they proclaim Him
as the conqueror of death, and as having entered into a glorified existence and
delivered from the weaknesses and limitations of the condition which he had for
a time accepted. They appear as guardians of the tomb where He had lain, and
reveal, by their words and manner, their deep interest in the mystery of the
redemption of the human race by the sufferings and death of their Divine Lord.
They can scarcely understand the slowness of these disciples in comprehending
the great fact of the resurrection, and their words are almost a reproof—* How
could it be thought that the Living One could remain among the dead, or could
be long holden of the bands of death?” Very beautiful and tender is the way
in which the minds of the disciples are gradually prepared to receive the assurance
that Christ had indeed risen. Had He appeared to them at once in living form,
as they journeyed to the tomb, or had He presented Himself to them at the
instant they stood by it and found it empty, the sudden shock of wonder and
joy might have been too great for them; but in His love He caused the truth to
distil slowly into their minds. First, the sight of the empty tomb prepared
them for some great event that had happened, and then the message of the
angel filled their hearts with wonder, joy, and hope. It is as we are able to
bear it that spiritual truth is communicated to us.

III. The unbelief of the apostles.—Blameworthy as was the reception which
the apostles gave to the first tidings of the resurrection, their unbelief shows us
that nothing but the actual fact of Christ’s having risen from the dead could
have produced the change in them which they subsequently underwent. Men
whose minds were so unprepared for the event were not likely to have been the
subjects of hallucination. Their doubt tends to “the more confirmation of our
faith.” One indication of incredulity is that the apostles did not go at once and
in a body to verify the reports which the women had brought them. St. Luke
speaks merely of St. Peter as setting out to visit the tomb, while the fourth
svangelist tells us that he himself, was the only one who accompanied him. The
intensity of feeling which animated him is indicated in his “‘ running ” to the tomb.
Me who had sinned so grievously against his Master is not afraid at the thought of
the possibility of meeting Him, for his mind is cleansed and strengthened, and his


603°


cHAP. XxIv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


love quickened, by the genuineness of his repentance. He saw that the tomb was
empty, and that the grave-clothes were carefully folded up and laid aside. It
cannot be that enemies have violated the sanctity of the grave and taken away
the body. Can it be after all that the tidings the women brought are true, and
that these signs of deliberation and care indicate that the Lord, come to life
again, has divested Himself of the habiliments of the grave, as no longer fit for
Him? Yet a little while and the wonder which this sight has aroused will be
dissolved in joy, as the penitent apostle again beholds the face of his Master.
The last time he saw Jesus was at the moment when he was strenuously denying
that He knew the Man ;—then “Jesus turned and looked on Peter.” The
circumstances and emotions of this first interview between the disciple and
the Lord after the resurrection are not revealed to us; they are a secret, known
only to them. Holy reticence concerning the most sacred moments of our lives
is not inconsistent with full and open testimony to the Saviour.


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 1—12.


Vers. 1-3. I. The love and devotion
manifested by these holy women.—
(1) In their visiting the tomb at early
dawn ; and (2) in the preparations they
had made for embalming the body of
their Lord.

II. Their surprise and distress at
finding the tomb open and the body
of the Lord Jesus no longer in it.—
That which should have given them
encouragement and hope was only a
ground of anxiety and sorrow.


Ver. 4. “ Much perplexed.” —Parallel
between the announcement of the
Nativity and that of the Resurrection.
1. On both occasions heavenly visitants
speak words of encouragement and
hope to anxious, expectant souls.
2. On both occasions attendant cir-
cumstances are related at length, but
a veil of mystery hangs over the
beginning of the Incarnation and of
the Resurrection of the Lord.


“ Two men.’—The supposed dis-
crepancies in the number of the
angels seen near the sepulchre of
Jesus are effectively dealt with in
the well-known words of Lessing:
“The evangelists do not count the
angels. The whole: grave, the whole
region round about the grave, was
invisibly swarming with angels. There
were not only two angels, like a pair
of grenadiers who are left behind in
front of the quarters of the departed


604


general ; there were millions of them.
They appeared, not always one and the .
same, not always the same two; some-
times this one appears, sometimes that ;
sometimes at this place, sometimes at
that; sometimes alone, sometimes in
company; sometimes they said this,
sometimes they said that.”


Vers. 5, 6. The Living not Among
the Dead—l. A gentle remonstrance.
2. The announcement of a fact.


Ver. 5. “ The living.”"—The Living
One and the Cause of life, for He said,
*T am the Resurrection and the Life”
(John xi. 25).


The Living Sought Among the Dead.
—Who comes under these words of
rebuke, and does this now 2

I. It is done, in the worst sense,
by those whom Scripture calls “the
children of this world.”

II. The same question has its ©
application to formalism in religion.

III. We approach more nearly to
its first meaning when we speak of
its bearing upon the case of doubters.

IV. Upon those Christians who
never advance beyond the cross and
the grave into the clear light and full
glory of a risen Saviour.— Vaughan.


Ver. 6. “Js risen.”—The Resur-
rection is (1) a restoration of th>


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XXIV.


‘ eR aa rr Le ee


broken bond between soul and body ;
(2) a continuation of the previous life
(cf. ver. 39); and (3) a glorification of
the former existence.


Ver, 7. “ Sinful men.”—According
to Jewish phraseology the Gentiles are
denoted by this epithet. The sins of
the Jews themselves are recalled by the
word “ delivered.”


Ver. 8. “They remembered His


words.”-—By which we are taught.


that, though they had made little
proficiency in the doctrine of Christ,
still, it was not lost, but was choked


with their return from it. Then thcir
hearts so heavy with sorrow; now
“anointed with the oil of gladness
above their fellows.”


Ver, 10. “And other women.’—
Among them was Salome, the mother
of James and John (Mark xvi. 1), and
perhaps also Susanna, mentioned by
St. Luke in connection with Joanna
in viii. 3.


Ver. 11. “ They believed them not.”
—The verb is in the imperfect and
implies persistent incredulity. “They
disbelieved them.”—Farrar.


up, until in due time it yielded fruit.


—Calvin. Ver. 12. “ Wondering.”—The sight


which produecd merely wonder, in the
case of St. Peter, produced belief in the
case of St. John (John xx. 8).


Ver. 9. “Told all these things.”—
Compare their journey to the sepulchre


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 13—43.


The Eyes of the Understanding Opened.—Jesus appeared in the morning first
of all to Mary of Magdala the second appearance was vouchsafed to Peter.
Then, in the course of the day, He appeared to the two brethren who journeyed to
Emmaus, and in the evening to the eleven apostles—or rather, to the ten. In the
two last of these cases we notice a difference in the order of procedure followed
by Jesus. In the one case He opened the eyes of the understanding first, and
the eyes of the body second ; in the »ther He reversed this order.

I. The eyes of the understanding opened.—In thus varying the order of
revelation Jesus was but adapting His procedure to the different circumstances
of the persons with whom he had to deal. The two friends who journeyed to
Emmaus did not notice any resemblance between the stranger who joined their
company and their beloved Lord of whom they had been thinking and speaking.
“Their eyes were holden, that they should not know Him.” The main cause of
this, we believe, was sheer heaviness of heart. Sorrow made them unobserving.
They were so engrossed with their own sad thoughts that they had no eyes for
outward things. They did not take the trouble to look who it was that had come
up with them ; it would have made no difference though the stranger had been
their own father. It is obvious how men in such a mood must be dealt with.
They can get outward vision only by getting the inward eye first opened. The
diseased mind must be healed, that they may be able to lcok at what is
before them and see it as it is. On this principle Jesus proceeded with the two
brethren. He accommodated Himself to their humour, and led them on from
despair to hope ; and then the outward senses recovered their perceptive power,
and told who the stranger was. “ You have heard,” He said in effect, “a rumour
that He who was crucified three days ago is risen. You regard this rumour as
an incredible story. But why should you? You believe Jesus to be the
Christ. If He was the Christ, His rising again was to be expected as much as
the passion, for both alike are foretold in the Scriptures, which ye believe to be

; 695


CHAP. xxIv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





the Word of God.” These thoughts having taken bold of their minds, the hearts
of the two brethren began to burn with the kindling power of a new truth ; the
day-dawn of hope breaks on their spirit; they wake up as from an oppressive
dream ; they look outward, and, lo! the Man who has been discoursing to them
is Jesus Himself.

Il. The eyes of the body opened.—With the ten the case was different.
When Jesus appeared in the midst of them they were struck at once with the
resemblance to their deceased Master. They had been listening to the story of
Cleopas and his companion, and were in a more observing mood. But they
would not believe that what they saw really was Jesus. They were terrified
and aftrighted, and supposed that they had seen a spirit—the ghost or spectre of
the Crucified. The first thing to be done in this case, therefore, manifestly, was to
allay the fear awakened, and to convince the terrified disciples that the Being who
had suddenly appeared was no ghost, but a Man ; the very Man He seemed to be,
even Jesus Himself. Not till that has been done can any discourse be profitably
held concerning the teaching of the Old Testament on the subject of Messiah’s
earthly history. To that task, accordingly, Jesus forthwith addressed Himself,
and only when it was successfully accomplished did He proceed to expound the
true Messianic theory. Something analogous to the difference in the experience
of the two and of the ten disciples, in connection with belief in the resurrection,
may be found in the ways by which different Christians now are brought to faith.
The evidences of Christianity are divisible into two great categories, the external
and the internal; the one drawn from outward historical facts, the other from
the adaptation of the gospel to man’s nature and needs. Both sorts of evidence
are necessary to a perfect faith, just as both sorts of vision, the outward and the
inward, were necessary to make the disciples thorough believers in the fact of
the Resurrection. But some begin with the one, some with the other. Some
are convinced first that the gospel story is true, and then, perhaps long after,
waken up to a sense of the importance and preciousness of the things which it
relates. Others, again, are, like Cleopas and his companion, so engrossed with
their own thoughts as to be incapable of appreciating or seeing facts, requiring
first to have the eyes of their understanding enlightened to see the beauty and the
worthiness of the truth as it isin Jesus. They may at one time have had a kind
of traditional faith in the facts as sufficiently well attested. But they have lost
that faith—it may be, not without regret. They are sceptics, and yet they are
sad because they are so, and feel that it was better with them when, like others,
they believed. Yet, though they attempt it, they cannot restore their faith by
a study of mere external evidences. They read books dealing in such evidences,
but they are not much impressed by them. Their eyes are holden, and they
know not Christ coming to them in that outward way. But He reveals Himself
to them in another manner. By hidden discourse with their spirits, He conveys
into their minds a powerful sense of the moral grandeur of the Christian faith,
making them feel that, true or not, it is at least worthy to be true. Then their
hearts begin to burn; they hope that what is so beautiful may turn out to be
all objectively true; the question of the external evidences assumes a new
interest to their minds ; they inquire, they read, they look, and, lo! they see Jesus
revived, a true historical person for them—risen out of the grave of doubt to live
for evermore the sun of their souls, more precious for the temporary loss
coming—

“ Apparelled in more precious habit,


More moving, more delicate, and full of life,
Into the eye and prospect of their soul ”—


+han ever He did before they doubted.—Bruce.
606


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XXIV.


ee ee Se ee tS ee ee


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 13—43.


Vers. 13-32. Zhe Unrecognised
Presence: a Narrative with a T'ypical
Value.

I. Christ draws near while they
talk of holy things.

Ii. He draws them out by His
inquiries.

iI. He draws out the meaning of
Scripture.

IV. He draws out their invitation.

V. Then He goes in to tarry.—Sits
at meat, He blesses and breaks and
gives the bread.

VI. Two forms of revelation.—1. He
makes their hearts burn. 2. He
makes Himself known in breaking
bread.


The Journey to Emmaus.
I. The way.

Il. Christ with us by the way.

Ill. Christ opening the Scriptures
to us by the way.

IV. Our hearts burning in us in the
company of Jesus.—l. The kind.
2. The degree. 3. The effects of this
emotion.—Arnoé.


The Journey to Emmaus.

I. Two sad travellers on the way to
Emmaus.—1. The afternoon journey.
2. The sympathising Companion. 3.
‘The willing Teacher. 4. The risen
Lord.

II. Two glad travellers on the way
to Jerusalem.—1. A rapid, eager, im-
patient return. 2. Glad and joyful
hearts. 3. A journey to convey glad
news to others.— W. Taylor.


These Two Men Types of Disciples in
Calamity.—If these two men are types
of disciples suddenly visited by calamity,
the Saviour’s dealings with them
are manifestations of His permanent
method of comforting such as they.

I. He first brings them in a human
way to open their hearts to Him.
This is, however homely, really always
the first step to comfort.


II. Then comes the light of His
Divine instruction.

III. A still greater comfort was in
store for them—the discovery of the
Lord Himself.

IV. There are two lessons from this
story: 1. One as to experience. The
“burning” heart had been a token of
His presence with them all the way.
The real signs of the Divine life are
within. 2. One as to service. After
vision comes work. Worship is
followed by service to their brethren.
Christ in the heart, then the heart in
Christ’s work.— Macleod.


Ver. 13. “That same day.”—They
left. the city, probably, between three
and four o’clock in the afternoon, as
they arrived at Emmaus (six and a
half miles) before sunset.


Ver. 14. “They talked together.” —
In the verse following they are spoken
of as “reasoning,” so that we may
conclude that they were not altogether
of one mind on some of the questions
that engaged their attention. As the
one of them named Cleopas in the
ensuing dialogue speaks in a tone of
deep melancholy and despair, it is
probable that his companion was in-
clined to a somewhat more hopeful
view of matters.


Ver. 15. “Jesus Himself drew near.”
—-A fulfilment of the promise, ‘‘ Where
two or three are gathered together in
My name, there am I in the midst of
them” (Matt. xviii. 20).


I. Jesus draws near when His
friends speak of Him.

Ii. How much we miss when we
meet if we fail to speak of Christ !

III. What a blessing every hour of
conversation would be if we would
only talk together of Christ and His
kingdom !— Miller.


Ver. 16. “ Their eyes were holden.” —
When Jesus in temptation holds our


607


ear ee ial
Waites le “a


cuar. xxiv, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





eyes, so that the soul neither can nor
may recognise, that is good, for soon
will joy, light, a: d comfort, follow ; but
when the sinner holds his own eyes,
and will not recognise Jesus, that is
evil, for he incurs danger of eternal
blindness and darkness.—Starke.


Ver. 17. The Sadness of The Two
Disciples—1. The sadness of bereave-
ment. 2. Sadness caused by mental
perplexity. 3. Sadness of a shattered
career. In our modern world, too,
nominal disciples are to be found vexed
by almost the same kind of sadness.
There is (1) the sadness of mental
perplexity; (2) the sadness of con-
science; (3) that which arises from the
want of an object in life. Christ
draws near to them (1) in His Church ;
(2) in His Scriptures; (3) in His
sacraments.—Liddon.


“ Sad.”—The sadness was an indica-
tion (1) of unbelief, but also (2) of love.
They parted very reluctantly with their
faith in Him for whose memory they
cherished so strong an affection. The
unbelief which is conjoined with sadness
is likely to be transformed into faith,
while that which is devoid of regret or
sorrow is likely to undergo no change
for the better.


Ver. 18. “ Hast not known.’—So
absorbed are they in grief that they
take for granted that every one else
must be fully acquainted with the
events that have occasioned it.


Vers. 19-24. Causes of The Disciples’
Despondency :—

I. The memory of the holy and
beneficent life of Jesus so sadly
brought to an end by His ignominious
death.

II. The defeat of the hopes of
redemption through Him which they
had cherished.

III. The perplexing nature of the
reports which had reached their ears.
All that they certainly knew being
that the tomb was empty, but that no
one had seen Christ.


608


Vers. 25-27. I. Rebuke (ver. 25).
IT. Instruction (vers. 26, 27).


Ver. 25. “O fools and. slow of heart.”
—Folly in the state of their minds ;
slowness in the state of their affections.


Ver. 26. “And to enter into His
glory.”—What had seemed to them
incompatil's with the glory of the
Messiah was psecisely the appointed
way thereto. The Lord does not mean
that He is already entered into His
glory, but speaks as one who has come
so near to His glory as that He sees
already the suffering behind Him.—
Van Oosterzee.


The Need of a Suffering Saviour.

I. It was necessary that Christ
should suffer, in order to His work of
salvation.

II. In order to the exercise of
sympathy with us.

III. To fit Him for His office of
sovereignty.— Ker.


Ver. 27. “The things concerning
Himself.”—Doubtless He began with
the prot-evangelium (Gen. iii. 15): the
Seed of the woman who would inflict
a deadly wound on the serpent, yet be
Himself wounded. Then there were
the types of the brazen serpent
(Numb. xxi. 9; John iii. 14), and the
paschal lamb (Exod. xii. 46; John
xix. 36). Nor can we doubt that
Isa. lili, was the central prophecy
which he expounded. Add to these the
psalms of the Crucifixion (ef. ver. 44),
the 22nd (Matt. xxvii. 46; Mark
xv. 24) and the 40th (Heb. x. 5); then,
further, Dan. ix. 26, and the book of
Jonah, and Zech. xii. 10, xiii. 7.


Types of Christ.—The likeness of
the promised Mediator is conspicuous
throughout the Sacred Volume; as
in a picture, moving along the line of
history in one or other of His destined
offices—the dispenser of blessings, in
Joseph; the inspired interpreter of
truth, in Moses; the conqueror, in
Joshua ; the active preacher, in Samuel ;
the suffering combatant, in David:


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP, XXIV.


i


and, in Solomon, the triumphant and
glorious king.— Newman.


The Testimony of the Scriptures to
Christ.—In studying the Scriptures for
Himself He had found Himself in them
everywhere (John v. 39, 40). He had
now only to let this light which filled
His heart ray forth from Him.—Godet.


Ver. 28. “ He made as though.”—
The reasons for this were (1) that this
was in accordance with the assumed
character of a stranger under which
they had hitherto known Him, and
(2) that, having enlightened their minds,
He would make trial of their affections.

‘Our blessed Saviour pretended that
He would pass forth beyond Emmaus ;
but if He intended not to do it, yet He
did no injury to the two disciples, for
whose good it was that He intended to
make this offer; and neither did He
prevaricate the strictness of simplicity
and sincerity, because they were per-
sons with whom He had made no
contracts, to whom He had passed no
obligation, and in the nature of the
thing it is proper and natural, by an
offer, to give an occasion to another to
do a good action, and, in case it
succeeds not, then to do what we
intended not; and so the offer was
conditional ” (J. Taylor).


Ver. 29. “ They constrained Him.”
—Consider on how many occasions
besides the present it is intimated that
constraint is necessary on the part of
those who would secure the abiding
presence of Christ. ‘“ Pass not away,
I pray Thee, from Thy servant,” was
the respectful language of the patri-
arch Abraham (Gen. xviii. 3); and, “I
will not let Thee go, except Thou bless
me,” was the earnest exclamation of
the patriarch Jacob (ibid., xxxii. 26).
“Depart not hence, I pray Thee, until
I come unto Thee, and bring forth my
present, and set it before Thee,” said
Gideon to the angel (Judges vi. 18).
“‘T pray Thee, let us detain Thee” was
the entreaty of Manoah and his wife
(ibed. xiii. 15).— Burgon.


RR


Entertaining Strangers.—They had
not been ‘forgetful to entertain
strangers” (Heb. xiii. 2), and they
found a reward in being privileged to
entertain the Son of God unawares.


“ Abide with us.”

I. But for this request, Jesus would
have passed on.—He loves to be con-
strained. .

IT. We have so little of Christ’s
fellowship, because we do not ask for
it.—If we wanted more we would get it.

ITI. If we were truly to desire
Christ to abide with us always, He
would never go away.—WMiller.


Our Need of Christ in Later Life.—
The words of the text may suggest to us
our special necd of the presence and the
power of Christ in the different, and
particularly in the later, periods of our
life. We begin with—

I. Our special need of Christ in the
midday of life.—When we have to say
of ourselves that it is “towards noon,”
or when it is the early afternoon with
us; when we are in the midst of life,
when the burden of its cares, and its
anxieties, and its responsibilities, rests
upon us; when we are feeling most of
its strain and stress ;—then there are
two peculiar perils besetting us. 1. That
of over-confidence. We are tempted to
speak thus to ourselves : “ Tam through
the heats and excitements of youth; I
have met and mastered its temptations
(toimpurity, intemperance, irreverence,
etc.) ; I may relax a little now, I may
trust myself now, I may give the reins
to inclination now”; and then comes
indulgence, which begins by being
occasional and harmless, and may end
by being habitual and harmful. Then
comes declension, and, it may be, even
downfall. 2. Absorption. The claims
of the business, of the household, of
friendship; invitations to various
gratifications, each of which is innocent,
but which, in their aggregate, are
seriously taxing ;—these are so urgent
and imperative, so present and power-
ful, that they absorb; they absorb
time, strength, energy; so much so


609


_ CHAP, XXIV,


Sas


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





that too little is left for worship, for
communion, for the direct service of
Christ ; and the soul is starved, Christ-
ian character is weakened ; we are in
serious peril of “losing those things
which we have wrought” (2 John 8).
There is, therefore, abundant need for
us to make an earnest and continual
appeal to our Divine Lord, to address
Him thus: “ Abide with us, O Master,
for it is noontide with us; uphold us
by Thy power in the way of heavenly
wisdom and holy service ; so help us to
abide with Thee that we shall never
become lax and careless, but shall
always watch unto prayer ; so aid and
influence us that we shall not let this
world wind its silken cords around us,
but that we shall always give the
strength and wealth of our hearts and
lives to Thee. Be Thou ever near us,
to shelter and support us, or our spirits
will be bent under the burden and
scorched by the heat of the day.”

II. Our special neea of Christ in the
late afternoon of life.—There comes
a time when our life has passed its
meridian, and when the sun is sinking
in the sky; it is late afternoon with us.
Our powers are not what they were,
physical or mental. We cannot walk
or work as long, or so well, as we could ;
we cannot think as hard, or remember
as easily, or sustain our attention, as
long as we once could; we are falling
behind those whom we were once
before—our sons and daughters can
do many things better than we can.
Peculiar perils belong to this hour of
life. 1. That of pride or of vanity, of
refusing to acknowledge to ourselves or
to admit to others the waning of our
power. 2. That of envy, a disposition
to disparage the work of those who are
younger and stronger than ourselves, to
depreciate their work, or, at any rate,
to withhold the admiration and delight
which a more generous spirit would
cherish in what they are and in what
they do. Here is special need for look-
ing up and praying, “ Lord, abide with
us, for it is toward evening ; we are not
what we were, and we need Thy
abounding grace that we may be true


610


enough and humble enough to recog-
nise that our days and powers are
failing—in order that we may be able
to welcome those who are coming up,
to honour and to love them, and to
work heartily and happily with them,
to say with joy, like Thy servant John,
‘They must increase, but we must de-
crease’ ” (see John iti. 29, 30).

IIT. Our special need of Christ in
the late evening of life.—‘“The day
is far spent.” This is that (1) we have
been privileged to witness. We have
known those who have gone through all
the hours of the day, and have gone
down into the night of death. Their
health failed them; the infirmities of
age overtook and imprisoned them ;
life lost its charm for them, its worth
to them; their treasures were taken
from them ; nothing was left, of this
world’s giving, in their hands: only the
future beyond the grave remained to
them. What they needed was a Divine
Friend whose hand they could hold as
they took their last steps on earth, and
as they entered the “silent land.”
“ Abide with us,” they had reason to
say, and (in some language did say)
“for the day is far spent”; let us
know and feel that Thou art near.
And their Divine Lord did not fail
them ; He was with them at the end,
andunto the end; and in their “ glorious
Leader’s” presence they went down
with tranquil, if not triumphant, spirit
into the darkness of death, to awake in
the bright and glad morning of immor-
tality. (2) The hour will come—and it
will arrive sooner than we think—when
we also shall have occasion to say, “ the
day is far spent” ; when we shall have
had our earthly heritage, shall have
played our part, shall have nothing
more to look for as citizens of the
present time. Well, indeed, will it be
for us if then we have some resources
of which time has no power to rob us—
which are imperishable and unfailing ;
well, indeed, if we can then look up
confidently to a Divine Saviour, and
say, ‘‘ Lord, abide with us, for the day
is far spent; our friends have fallen
from us, or gone beyond us; but be


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XXIV.


eee


Thou ever with us, that we may have
fellowship with Thee. Earth has no
enjoyment for us; but speak Thou
Thine own peace to our souls [John
xiv. 27|; we have no prospects this
side the grave, but let us hear Thy
voice, speaking of the many mansions
in the Father’s house, and we shall be
at rest.” “They constrained Him. . .
and He went in.” Our Lord will need
but slight constraining on our part.
Let us only wisely accept Him in the
earlier years, and be loyal to Him
through all the periods of our life, and
He will not withdraw Himself from us at
the last ; having “ loved His own,” He
will ‘‘ love them to the end” ; He will—


“ Meet us in the valley
When heart and flesh shall fail,
And softly, safely, iead us on,
Until within the veil.”’
Clarkson.


The Evening Prayer of Christ's
Friends.—Some of the feelings which
must have been in the hearts of those
who presented it.

I. Grateful interest in a spiritual
benefactor.

II. A desire to have such conversa-
tion continued.

III. The presentiment of something
more than they had yet seen or heard.

Circumstances in which this request
may be offered by us :—

I. It is suitable to the whole earthly
life of every Christian.

II. It is suitable to those who are
suffering under some special despond-
ency of spirit.

III. It is suitable to those who are
approaching the evening of life.—<Ker.


Ver. 30. ‘Took bread,” etc.—The
position of superiority which Jesus had
assumed in the rebuke He had ad-
ministered and in His exposition of the
Scriptures, authorises Him to act as
the head of the household. Though
nominally a guest of the disciples, He
becomes their host and they become
His guests.


Ver. 31. “ Their eyes were opened.”
But before this the eyes of their under-


standings had been opened. Christ did
not reveal Himself until He had
effected the principal object of His
appearing to them at all.


“ Vanished out of their sight.”—The
expression is a peculiarly strong one,
implying a sudden and supernatural
disappearance. His body was now
approaching its glorified condition, and
obeyed more freely than before the
will of His Spirit. Moreover, we must
recollect that, properly speaking, Jesus
was already no longer, with them
(ver. 44), and that the marvel lay
rather in His appearance than in His
disappearance.—Godet.


Ver. 32. The Emmaus Journey a
Type of Christian Experience.

I. The pilgrimage of sadness.—
Darkness comes because of (1) the trial
of doubt and unbelief; (2) the trial of
solitude and bereavement; (3) that
of backsliding and repentance.

II. Light and gladness return when
(1) we seek this blessing in company ;
(2) when we seek it through the Scrip-
tures ; and (3) when we seek it at the
Communion Table.—Cairns.


The Emmaus Road.

I. This question suggests the diffi-
culty which we commonly have in
understanding the real importance of
many incidents in our lives at the
time of their occurrence.

II. Religious emotion is a precious
gift of God.—Only it should always be
made to lead to something; it ik a
means, not an end.

III. The duty of making an active
effort to understand truth as it is pre-


sented to us.—ZLiddon.


“ Did not our hearts burn ?”—The
heart of the genuine believer, who has
communion with Christ, burns with
joy, with hope, with longing, and with
love.


“ While He opened.”—It is a good
sign for their inner growth that at


611


CHAP. XXIV.


this moment it is not the breaking of
bread, but the opening of the Scrip-
tures, which now stands before the eye
of their memory.—Van Oosterzee.


Burning Hearts——The cause and
the effect of successful Christian
work.

I. The cause—the burning heart of
the teacher.—Spiritual intercourse
with Jesus Himself will give it.

II. The result—the burning heart
of the taught.—The fire will com-
municate itself to the hearts of those
we teach.—Stock. ’


Ver. 34. “ Appeared to Simon.”

I. A proof of Christ’s love.—1. In
the implied forgiveness of his heinous
sin. 2. In appearing to him first of
all the apostles. 3. In appearing to
him without any witness,

II. A special boon to Peter in
banishing his doubts and fears, and
in absolving him from guilt.

IIT. Welcome news to the disciples
of Emmaus.—1. It confirmed their
faith. 2, It restored Peter to their
fellowship. 3. It prepared them to
expect fresh revelations of the Risen
Lord.


Ver. 36. ‘ He Himself stood.” —With
this word begins the evening appear-
ance, which we unhesitatingly venture
to name the crown of all Hisappearances
on the Resurrection-day. Till now He
has satisfied individual needs, but now
He comes into the united circle, into
the first Church of His own.—Van
Oosterzee.


The Salutation of the Resurrection.
I. Peace: the storm is over.
II. Peace: old associations are to be
revived.
IIT. Peace: the prospect will never
be darkened.


Ver. 37. “ Terrified.”—The evening
hour, fear of the Jews, and anxieties
concerning their own future, may well


612


“HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST, LUKE.


have tended to increase the feelings of
surprise and alarm occasioned by the
sudden appearance of Christ and the


supernatural character of His entering ©


into the room where they were.


Seis.


:
:


Ver. 38. “ Arise in your hearts ?”— —


How gentle is the rebuke !
speaks of the ‘‘ thoughts” or question-
ings arising, as it were, of themselves
in the hearts of the apostles, as doubts
and perplexities for which they were
not fully responsible. The heart is not
under our control; but out of a pure
heart, which is strong in faith, no such
perplexities and gainsaying thoughts
can rise.


Ver. 39. “‘ Behold My hands,” ete.

I, The identity of Him who appeared
to them with Him whom they had
known.

II. The reality of the appearance.


“ Handle Me and see.”—1. An en-
couragement for the timid. 2. A
direction for the perplexed.

I. Our Lord’s indulgent treatment
of mistakes and imperfections in re-
ligious belief.

II. His sanction of the principle of
inquiry into the foundations of our
religious belief.

III. The direction which our Lord
purposely gave to the thoughts of His
perplexed disciples.— Liddon.


Ver. 40. “ He shewed them His hands
and His feet.” —Not merely as the signs
of His crucifixion, for the identification
of His body, did the Saviour show His
wounds, but manifestly as signs of
victory, proofs of His triumph over
death. Moreover, therefore—and this
is properly the deepest sense of His
entering salutation —as the signs
of peace, the peace of the sacrificial
death, of the completed atonement.—
Stier.


Ver. 41. “ Believed not for joy.”—
It was doubtless belief that He had
really risen that filled their hearts


Jesus —


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE. cmap. xxiv.





with joy ; yet the excess of joy hindered culty they experience in believing to
their faith. It seemed too good news the excess of their joy” (Godet).
to be true.

“As St. Luke had excused the sleep- Ver. 43. “ Did eat before them.”—
ing of the apostles in Gethsemane, on Not because He had need of food for
the ground of their being overcome by the body, but because they had need of
sorrow, so here he attributes the diffi- faith for the soul.


MAIN HOMILETICS OF THE PARAGRAPH.—Verses 44—53.


The Church Below, the Lord Above.—These closing verses of the Gospel are a
summary of all our Lord’s instructions during the forty days before the
Ascension. The Gospel reaches its climax in the Resurrection. The space
between it and the Ascension, as well as the Ascension itself, are but the results
of the Resurrection manifested in act, and as a kind of border-land between the
two halves of our Lord’s activity, are even more properly narrated as the founda-
tion of “all that Jesus” continued “to do and teach” since then, than as the
crown of His earthly ministry.

I. The teachings of the forty days (vers. 44-49).—1. First was taught Christ's
relation to the Old Testament. He recalled His former declarations, which had
sounded so enigmatical then, and were so clear now. The teaching here
summarised bore both upon His dignity and office as the Christ and the Fulfiller
of the Old-Testament revelation, and on the inmost purpose and contents of
that revelation as in all its parts pointing onward to Him. Law, Prophets, and
‘Psalms make up the whole Hebrew Scriptures. So Jesus saw Himself in all
the sundry times and divers manners of the older Word of God. The fact of
prediction of Him as Messiah, and of His death and resurrection as being the
very heart of the Old Testament, is attested by His own authority, which cannot
be waived aside as of no moment in the controversies now raging as to these
books. Nor can we understand the significance of the Old Testament by dint of
learning only. There must be a moral and spiritual preparation ; Jesus must
open our minds, that we may understand the Scriptures. 2. Instruction in the
universal blessings flowing from His death and resurrection. If any gross idea of
outward dominion, secured by the sword, lingered in the disciples’ minds, this
teaching would end them, unfolding, as it did, the sublime prospect of a universal
monarchy, of which the instrument was the proclamation of the Cross and
Resurrection, and of which the blessings were repentance and the remission of sin.
_ The weapon seems feeble, but it is mighty, because it is in His name, “ based on
His revealed character and nature, wielded by His authority, and in dependence
on His might, and in a very real sense as representing Himself. 3. The personal
duty of the disciples. ‘Ye are witnesses of these things.” For the first disciples
that was true ina way that it cannot befor us. Andit issignificant of much that
the office was declared by Jesus to be that of witnesses ; for witness implies “ fact.”
Not theories nor principles, nor speculations, nor dogmas, still less imaginations
and fancies, had they to speak. The gospel is a veracious record of things that
actually happened, and is established, not by argument, but by testimony. In
a sense, each generation of Christians has the same office and responsibility.
We cannot say we have seen, but we can say we have felt. Every man who has
himself tasted that the Lord is gracious, is able, and therefore bound, to proclaim
Him to others. The Church, in all its members, is Christ’s witness. 4. The gift
of the needful qualifications, ‘The promise of My Father” is that Holy Spirit
which is the last of all the Father’s promised gifts, of which He had spoken so
abundantly in the last discourses in the upper room, and which, according to


613


cHap. xxIv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.





St. John, He had breathed upon them when He rose.
is our fitness for the office of witnessing.

II. The departure—Did the disciples know, like Elisha, that “the Lord
would take away their Master from their head that day”? At all events He
knew, and the knowledge would breathe peculiar tenderness and urgency over
His unrecorded words. “He lifted up His hands and blessed them.” Like the
high priest when he had finished his service, He lifted up His hands over the
congregation to give the blessing. The hands which had been pierced with
nails, the arms which had been stretched out upon the cross, were spread above the
bowed heads of the little group, and dropped gifts which fulfilled His benediction.
His whole work is summed up, and His whole heart revealed, in that last
attitude and act. Sweet, and ever to be remembered, are the last looks of our
dear ones. Jesus would have this remembrance of Him stamped deepest on all
our hearts. In the act of blessing, our Lord withdrew a step or two, and then,
possibly, with arms still liftedin benediction, “‘ was carried up into heaven.” The
word employed implies a slow, continuous motion, which we cannot but contrast
with the whirlwind which swept Elijah to heaven. The mortal needed to be
lifted by an external and forcible agency from his native earth. But Jesus was
going to His own home, and needed no aid to raise Him thither, whence it had
needed the strong compulsion of His infinite love to bring Him down. The
Ascension witnesses to the completeness of His sacrifice, to its acceptance by the
Father, to the presence within the veil of our all-powerful Intercessor, to the
elevation to supreme authority of the Man who is our Brother. The eternal
Word ascended where He had been from before the beginning, but the manhood
is new to the throne of the universe. Where He is, there shall also His
servants be; and as He is, so shall they, too, become. The disciples showed us
how we should think of the Ascension, when they worshipped Him, thus declaring
Him to be the Son of God, and then turned all the more joyfully to their homely
tasks, and drowned the pain of parting in the flood of joy which poured over
their spirits. They made all life worship, every place a temple, and every act
and word adoration.— Vaclaren.


The possession of that gift


SUGGESTIVE COMMENTS ON VERSES 44—53.


Vers. 44-49. The Last Instructions.

I. He recalls His earlier teaching,
and causes them to understand the
fulfilment He had effected of the
prophecies of the Old Testament.

II. He gives directions for the
future, and promises help to enable
them to accomplish their task.


human spirit and power over it; and
(2) that the interpretations of the
Old Testament given by the apostles
have the direct sanction of Christ.


“That they might understand the
scriptures.” —The Word of God by
itself is not sufficient; for our due


Ver. 44. “ While I was yet with you.”
—The expression is worthy of notice,
for it proves that Jesus felt that His
departure was already accomplished.
He was no longer with them otherwise
than exceptionally. His abode was
elsewhere.—Grodet.


Vers. 45. “ Opened their understand-
ing.” — This teaches us (1) that
Christ has immediate access to the


614


understanding of it we need the
illumination of the Spirit.


Vers. 46,47. The Substance of Christ-
ian preaching.

I. Good tidings founded upon the
work of the Saviour—His sufferings
and His resurrection.

II. The duty of repentance.

III. The privilege of the remission
of sins,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


CHAP. XXIV.


ee


_ Ver. 46. “ To suffer and to rise.” —
Here, as everywhere, suffering and
glory are inseparably connected.


Ver. 47. “ Beyinning at Jerusalem.”
—1l. Jerusalem was the centre of the
then existing kingdom of God. 2. It
contained the worst of sinners—those
who had insulted and crucified the
Saviour.


Ver. 48. “ Ye are witnesses.” —That
which renders testimony valuable is its
being given by witnesses who are
(1) possessed of full information ;
(2) who are sincere in character; and
(3) who are sober-minded. In all
these points the apostles were admir-
ably qualified for their office as
witnesses, and their willingness to seal
their testimony with their blood shows
us how firmly convinced they were of
the truths they taught.


Ver. 49. “ The promise of the Father.”
—The gift of the Spirit as bestowed on
the day of Pentecost. This gift pro-
mised in Isa. xliv. 3; Jer. xxxi. 33;
Ezek. xxxvi. 27; Joel ii. 28.


An Equipment of Power.

I. The Lord’s servants must be men
of power.

TT. An equipment of power is pro-


vided.—1. It is power. 2. It is
power from on high. 3. It is not
developed out of ourselves. 4. Nor is


it obtained by connection with the
world.

III. Power is to be waited for.—
Roberts.


Ministerial Power.—Some of those
powers of the Spirit which experience
teaches us to be of most avail in meet-
ing the exigencies of ministerial life in
our time.

I. The power of holiness
II. The power of knowledge.

III. The power of a single aim.

IV. The power of sympathy.

V. The power of the Divine com-
mission.— Vaughan.


Vers. 50-53. The Ascension.

I. The identity of the crucified and
risen Saviour.

II. We, too, must ascend, to be
judged, to stand before the throne.

III. The goal of the Church’s hope
is the return of the ascended Christ.—
Markby.


Christ’s Departure.

I. He ascended by His own power
and His own will.

» II. He alone left behind Him a
finished work.

III. He ascended to begin the
second work.—That of intercession—
distinct from the work on earth, but
yet of one piece with it, and serving to
accomplish the same great end.

IV. By His Spirit, He still works in
the world.

V. He has marked a way for us into
heaven,—A track of light goes through
the darkness into the very heart of
heaven.—Jicoll.


The Ascension.

J. The gospel is all fact.—All our
gospel mysteries, are, in their basis and
substance, facts. The Christian year
is a commemoration of facts. The As-
cension is an event, a historical fact.

II. It is something more.—It is not
mere history; it is a life. Like each
gospel fact, it presupposes or else pre-
dicts every other. ‘The Ascension
presupposes the Incarnation, and pre-
dicts the Advent. The Ascension says:
1, Your home is not here. Yonder is
your rest and your home. Home is a
presence more than a place. Where
Christ is, is the soul’s true home.
2. Seek Him yonder, correct all that
is superstitious and carnal in your
religion.— Vaughan.


Ver. 50. Christ's Last Hours on
Earth.
I. The last meeting.
If. The last journey.
III. The last promise.
IV. The last blessing.
V. The last glimpse.—W. Taylor.


615


HAP. XXIV, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: ST. LUKE.


—_——--


“ He lifted up His hands.”—As a
father, who is about to leave his children,
gathers them together once more,
speaks to them, and then raises his
hands to bless them, so, at the moment
of re-entering into the invisible world,
Jesus imposes a benediction upon the
head of His apostles which will remain
upon the whole Church until His
return.—(odet,





Ver. 51. “ While He blessed them.”—
As Elijah left his mantle with Elisha,
by whom he was seen when taken up,
so Christ, at His ascension, left a bless-
ing with His apostles and with His
Church.— Wordsworth.


“Carried up into heaven.”—By His
resurrection He had taken up again
His human life which He had voiun-
tarily given up to death; by His
ascension He resumes His celestial life,
His life in the form of God (Phil. ii. 6),
which He had laid aside on becoming
incarnate in human form. And in
the new condition in which His
exaltation places Him, His human life
is so interpenetrated by His Divine
life that it becomes the adequate and
eternal manifestation of it. “TI see,”
said the dying Stephen, “the Son of
Man standing at the right hand of
God” (Acts vii. 56). “The fulness
of the Godhead dwells in Him in a
bodily form ” (Col. ii. 9).—@odet.


The Parting Blessing.—The Saviour’s
life had been one of continual blessing.
And here we have the last impression
left on the apostles’ minds of their
Lord’s feeling towards them. His
last thoughts were with them, His last
energies were for them.

I. This thought is the inheritance
of the Church.—The “while” bound
Christ and the Church together, in the


616


power of a last impression, for the rest
of their earthly lives. His ascent on
high does not sever Him in blessing
from us.

II. But besides connection there is
activity.—The ascended Christ is a
blessing Christ, unchanged by His
exaltation. He uses His exaltation
for the benefit of His friends. |

III. The thought we should have
of the other world is, therefore, one of
joy.—To the Christian the unseen
must ever be a place of blessing. The
place whither Jesus went must par-
take of His aspect in entering it. The
disciples knew, from their Master's
teaching, something of the awfulness of
the other world. But now He leaves
them something better to think of.
He is to bless from heaven. It was to
be henceforth a place in which they
had the dearest interest. He blessed
in ascending, and if so, what but
blessing could they look for from that
other sphere ?—Power.


Ver. 52. “ They worshipped Him.” —
No one can reasonably doubt that this
worship was offered to Him as a Divine
being. St. Luke only uses this word
in another place in his gospel (iv. 7, 8),
and there it is used in the sense of
rendering the honour due to God alone.
In the Acts it is employed in the same
sense (vil. 43, viii. 27, xxiv. 11,
x. 2b, 20).


Ver. 53. “Jn the Temple.”—The
narrative of St. Luke begins in the
Temple and ends in the Temple.


“ Praising and blessing God.”—The
two essential elements of worship.

I. Adoration.—Acknowledgment of
the Divine perfections.

IT. Thanksgiving for all the benefits
He has bestowed.


INDEX.


{Nore: C. = Comment; H. = Homily ; N. = Note.]


ABEL to Zacharias, C. 325
Abide with us, H. 609
Able, not be, C. 375
Abraham, as He spake... . to, C. 38
God of, etc., H. 531
to our father, C. 89
Abraham’s bosom, C. 459
Absence of censoriousness, N. 297
Absolution, H. 146
of the cross, H. 595
Abused wealth the rich man’s ruin, H. 454
Abyss, the, C. 232
Acceptable year of the Lord, H. 114, 118
Acceptance and rejection of Divine message,
Hoi
Accidents not judgments, H. 358
Accumulated guilt, N. 326
Accusation, a terrible, N. 314
refuted, true explanation given, H. 314
threefold, H. 580
Accuse Him, began to, C. 580
Accused, C. 443
Acknowledgment, open, necessity for, N. 238
Acquaintance, all His, C. 597
Action, heartiness in, H. 538
Activity and contemplation, N. 297
Adam, the son of God, C. 101
Added, all these things shall be, C. 212
unto you, C. 345
yet this above all, C. 95
Address, preparatory, H. 432
Adorned, C. 539
Advent, spiritually-minded first hear of, N. 52
Adversary, avenge me of mine, C. 485
Adversaries, Saviour and His, H. 378
Advocate, Judge becomes, N. 298
A-dying, she lay, H. 237
Afar off, C. 571
Affinity, spiritual, the closest of all, N, 225
Afraid, being, C. 228
they were sore, C. 52
Afterward, C. 469
Age, childhood, youth, and,.N. 220
Agony, being in an, H. and C. 566
of Christ, three signs of the deep, H. 566
Aid to faith and patience, H. 260


Alarm and perplexity, N, 227
All these have I kept, C, 494
things, C. 16
are clean unto you, C. 324
waiting for Him, H. 237
we have left, C. 495
Alleviations, two, of Jesus’ sufferings, H. 583
Alms, give, C. 324
Already kindled, C. 353
Altar, on the right side of the, C. 21
Alternations of mood, N. 194
Alternative, a third, N. 203
Always to pray, H. 484
Amazed, they were all, C. 124
Ambassadors of Christ, disciples are, N. 283
Amber, flies in, N. 85
Ambitious guest, H. 388 '
Among us, CO. 15
Ample equipment, N. 246
And they said unto Him, C. 511
Angel, an, C. 20
came in, C. 26
there appeared an, C. 566
Angels, carried by, C. 459
charge, He shall give His, C. 113
joy in the presence of the, H. 413
the herald, sing, H. 51
worship of, N. 56
Angels’ song, H. 56
Angelic declaration, a chosen vessel and an,
H, 24
doxology, N. 56
Anger, Divine, leprosy a symbol of, N. 139
righteous, N. 88
Angry, N. 395
Anna the prophetess, H. 72
Annunciation, beauty of narrative of, N. 29
Anointed Me, He hath, C. 117
Another came, C. 510
man’s, that which is, C. 449; H. 450
saw him, C. 572
world, memory in, H. 460
Answer, could not, C. 386
of Christ’s prayer, burden and, H. 98
to Peter’s question, N. 350
to prayer, N. 260


617


INDEX.





Answer to the question as to inheriting
eternal life, N. 297
wonderful, strange prayer and, H. 135
Answers to prayer, N. 140
Answered them, C. 386
nothing, C. 581
prayer, H. 233
Antagonism to Christ, various forms of,
H. 577
Anthropomorphism, N. 524
Anxiety, freedom from, N. 282
Anxieties of love, H. 40
Anxious about earth or earnest about the
kingdom, H. 342, 344
Apostles, C. 168
authority of, N. 334
characteristics of, N. 169
choice of the, H. 165; N. 167
divinely chosen, N. 167
little is heard of, afterwards, H. 168
rejecting preaching of, N. 333
training of, N. 136
Apostolic office, the, H. 169
Appear, should immediately, H. 509
Appeared to Simon, H. 612
Appetite, gratification for higher aim than,
N. 110
Appropriate offering, N. 62
Arbitrator of property, higher office than,
N. 337
Argument, illustration, and precept, H. 344
strong, N. 484
Arguments, three, against fear, H. 332
Arimathza, Joseph of, H. 599
Armour, Christian’s, N. 232
Arms, then took he Him up in his, C. 63
Arose, He, C. 227
Arrest, the, H. 567, 568
Arrogant claim, H. 429
Artists and poets, theme for, N. 202
As He was wont, C. 565
Ascension, the, H. 615
Asceticism commended, N. 73
mere, weakness of, H. 86
Ashamed of Christ, N. 258
Ask them not again, C. 175
Asking apparently in vain, H. 311
seeking, knocking, N. 311
Asleep, He fell, C. 227
Aspirants, three, H. 270
Aspirations, national, N. 42
Associates left behind, N. 434
Assurance of salvation, H. 69
Astonished, C. 77
Attachment and detachment, N. 345
Attendance, church, N. 116
Attentive, very, C. 516
Attraction and repulsion of Christ, N. 133
Audience, in the, of all the people, C. 533
Authoritative summons, N. 190
Authority and power, C. 245
Divine, Christ’s consciousness of, N. 148
I also am a man set under, O. 185
of Scriptures, N. 162
question of, H. 519, 520
voice of, N. 228


618


Avarice, warning against, N. 338
Avenge me of mine adversary, O. 485
Awoke Him, they, H. 227

Axe is laid unto the root, C. 89


BABE leaped in her womb, C, 33
Bad and good fruit, H. 176
beginning; disastrous close, H. 400
Bank, the, C. 511
Baptized, when all the people were, C. 97
Baptism and at Transfiguration, Christ’s
prayer at, N. 98
of John, the, C. 520
of repentance, N. 87
the Temptation in relation to the, N. 106
with water, fire, and the Spirit, N. 93
Baptist’s message, H. 87
Barabbas, release unto us, ©. 583
Barren fig tree, H. 361
Bartimeus, H. 497, 499
Be it unto me according to Thy word, C. 31
Beam, literal and figurative, N. 176
Bearing one another’s buzdens, H. 144
Beauty of narrative of Annunciation, N. 29
Beauties of Bethlehem, hidden, H. 57
Beckoned, C. 133
unto them, C. 24
Bed, two men shall be in one bed, C. 479
Beelzebub, through, C. 314
Before God, C. 19
thee, C. 433
Began to cast out, C. 516
to speak unto the people, C, 195
Beggar died, C. 459
Beggar’s escort, the, H. 459
Begin not, C. 89
with shame, C. 389
Beginning, bad; disastrous close, H. 400
of Christian worship, N. 57
Behold, C. 557
My hands, etc., H. 612
Believed not for joy, C. 612
them not, C. 605
Believer’s faith confirmed, N. 18
Believers, relation of, to written word, H. 10
Believest not, thou, C. 24
Believing, confessing associated with, N.
239
Beloved son, my, I will send, C. 524
thou art My, C. 100, 101
Benedictus, fervour of the, N. 42
the, N. 41
Benefactors, C. 558
Beneficence a passport to heaven, N. 443
Besetting sins of religious leaders and
teachers, H. 322, 325
Beside all this, C. 460
Besought Him for her, C, 124
instantly, C. 184
that He would come, C. 237
to depart, C. 233
Best to be offered to Christ, H. 552
robe, H. and C. 436
Bethlehem, hidden beauties of, H. 57
Joseph also went up to, CO. 50
let us now go even unto, C. 57


INDEX,





Betrayed, ye shall be, C. 542
Betrayest thou? C. 568
Better for him, it were, C. 466
Beware of the scribes, C. 534
Bewildered, unconscious, and voluntary
sinner, N, 411
Bidding, at Thy, C. 133
Bier, touched the, C. 190
Bigotry and exclusiveness, N. 266
Birds and flowers, N. 344
Blasphemy, N. 145, 146
Blasphemies, speaketh, C. 145
Blessed, H. 350; C. 586
are the eyes, etc., C. 288
art thou, C. 33
be the Lord God of Israel, C. 42
be ye poor, C. 172
is he, C. 195
is he that shall eat bread, C. 392
is she that believed, C, 34
them, C, 252
while He, C. 616
Blessedness of faithful, H. 348
of the Virgin, N. 71
Blessing and praising God, H. 616
parting, H. 616
Blessings, eternal, lost only with our con-
sent, N. 380
of Christ’s first coming, H. 45
won by centurion, N. 184
Blind, lame, and halt, C. 395
leaders of blind, H. 176
Blood . . . mingled with their sacrifices,
C. 36


. 360
Body, healing of, pledge of healing of soul,
H. 124


is, wheresoever the, C. 479
Book of life, H. 287
Borders of the kingdom, on the, H. 504
Born of women, C. 196
Both righteous, C. 19
Bound up his wounds, H. 294
Bounty of men, Messiah living on the,
N. 212
Bowed together, C. 367
Boyhood of Jesus, N. 75
Branches, lodged in the, CO. 371
Bread alone, not live by, C. 109
blessed is he that shall eat, C. 392
daily, give us day by day our, C. 308
fish, eggs, N. 311
from heaven, H. 248
to eat, C. 385
took, etce., C. 611
Breasts, smote their, C. 597
Brethren, five, N. 460
His mother and His, C. 223, 224
love of the, and of one’s neighbour,
H, 294
Bribe, great, offered to Christ, N. 111
Bridegroom, Jesus the, N. 156
Bright and dark side, parables have a, N. 218
Bring hither and slay, C. 511
Bringer of light, Christ the, N. 221
Brother, if thy, C. 466
prodigal and his, H, 420


Brothers, two, H. 426
Brought up. where He had been, OC. 116
Builder, the wise and foolish, H. 178
Building and fighting, H. 400
Bulk, increase of, and change of character,
N. 370

Burden and answer of Christ’s prayer, H. 98
Burdens, bearing one another’s, H. 144
Buried, and was, C. 459
Burning hearts, H. 612
Bushels and lamps, H. 321
Business, My Father’s, H. 78; C. 79
Busy Christ, the, H. 167
But now, C. 562

one thing is needful, C. 298


C@sAR and God, H. 526, 529
Augustus, decree from, C. 50
render unto, C. 529

Ceesar’s unconscious obedience to God, N. 50

Calamity, disciples in, H. 607

Call not, C. 389
of God, how the, is received, H. 216
of Matthew, H. 149
to repentance, H. 84

Calmness and justice of Christ upon the

cross, H. 593
Christ’s, N. 228
of Jesus, H. 565

Came to himself, C. 482
upon Him, H. 520

Candle, when he hath lighted a, C. 221

Canticle of Elisabeth, N. 33

Capernaum, OC. 283
came down to, C. 122
entered into, C. 183
sabbath in, H. 120

Carelessness, H. 350

Cares, H. 345

Carrion and vultures, H. 479

Cast him out, C. 524
lots, C. 594
Thyself down, C. 112

Cause of unbelief, secret, H. 319

Causes of Peter’s fall, H. 571

Celebration, private, N. 97

Censoriousness, absence of, N. 297

Centurion, blessings won by, N. 184
faith of, H. 181, 182

Certain man, a, C. 292

before Him, there was a, CO, 385
priest, a, C. 293

Chaff, C. 94

Chains, bound with, C. 232

Chance a nickname, N. 292
by, C. 292

Change of feeling, N. 432
permanent, N. 372
sudden, for the better, N. 459
the place of riches, N. 341

Character, a noble, H. 367
and life, holy, definition of, N. 19
change of, and increase of bulk, N. 37¢
mixed elements of, N. 134
money a test of, N. 338
test of, N. 293


619


INDEX,


a


Character, the worldly, H. B39
three types of: enthusiasm, reluctance,
compromise, H. 273
true preparation for coming of the king-
dom is, H. 508
types of, not necessarily permanent,
N, 221
unlovely, H. 437
Characteristic conduct of the sisters, Martha
and Mary, N. 298
scene, H. 169
Chastise Him and release Him, C. 582
Chastisements, signal, H. 360
Chickens, hen and, H. 380
Chief priests, and of the, C. 583
and scribes sought, the, C. 528
the, H. 516; C. 569
Child, and thou, C. 44
circumcising the, C, 59
Jesus, the, N. 75
sleeping, awakened, H. 234
them that are with, C. 543
this, C. 266
Children and Christ, H. 492
at play, N. 197, 198
examples to us, N. 493
humility of, a pattern, H. 493
of God, C. 531
of the Highest, C. 175
resemblance to, N. 493
turn the hearts of the fathers to the,


C. 23
Childhood, youth, and age, N. 220
Choice, great importance of this, N. 168
of the twelve, H. 165; N. 167
Chosen of God, C. 594
vessel, and an angelic declaration, H, 24
Christ a King, C. 580
an Example, H. 574
an occasion of stumbling, N. 195
and of man, Divine Sonship of, H. 96
and old age, H. 65
and the children, H. 492
and the sabbath, N. 386
antagonism to, various forms of, H. 577
art Thou the? ‘C. 574
ashamed of, N. 258
before the Sanhedrim : religious process,
H. 571
best to be offered to, H. 552
confession and denial of, N. 333
crucified, H. 588
death of, effects produced upon spectators
by, H. 597
defending His disciples, N. 298
demanding hatred, N. 399
desire to be like, N. 304
disciples are ambassadors of, N. 283
disposition which, approves, H. 266
Divine, confessed, H. 253
nature of, H. 533
eating with sinners, N. 408
enemies of, not fair judges of His claims,
H. 574


Example as worshipper, N. 117
to teachers, H. 116


620


Christ, eye of, H. 537

faith’s approach to, H. 238

four classes of men described in their
relation to, H. 177

great bribe offered to, N. 111

Holy Spirit testifies to, H. 59

humanity of, N. 46

implies His own sinlessness, N, 312

in society, N. 406

in solitude, N. 125

in the manger, N. 50

is our Example in all things, N. 109

Light of the world, H. 45

makes, Divinity implied by the claims,
N. 39:


meekness and courage of, H. 268

moved by the sight of suffering, N. nee

need of, in later life, H. 609

penitent and, H. 594, 595

power of, N. 187

prayers of, H. 142

purpose of the Temptation in relation to,
H. 107


questions put to, N. 290

reply of, H. 531

repulsion and attraction of, N. 133

Ruler of our lives, N. 131

strange passage in life of, N. 106

strengthens faith of His disciples, N, 496

teaching how to pray, H. 302

tears of, over indifference of men, H. 515

testimony of the Scriptures to, N. 609

the Bringer of light, N, 221

the busy, H. 167

the Conqueror of Satan, H. 315

the great Counsellor, N. 194

the Lord, C. 55

three signs of the deep agony of, H. 566

to remain, strong plea for, N. 134

types of, N. 608

unrecorded labours of, H. 283

unselfish, H. 593

upon the cross, calmness and justice of,
H. 593

wants followers, H. 273

weapons and stratagems used against, un-
necessary, N. 569

whether he were the, C. 92

why she came to, N. 202

witness for, raised up, N. 594

Christ’s actual and active ministry, vivid

glimpse of, H. 121

bearing in relation to ingratitude, H, 472

calmness, N. 228

claim to forgive, and its attestations,
H. 142, 144

college, first studies i in, H. 130

coring ee effects produced by,


ae - N. 354
consciousness of Divine authority, N. 148
daily life, H. 122
departure, H. 615
first and His last visit to temple, N. 533
coming, blessings of, H. 45
flock, H. 345


INDEX.





Christ’s friends, evening prayer of, H. 611
greatness, testimony to, N. 50
humiliation, ‘purpose of, N, 51
joy in finding lost, N. 412
last hours on earth, H. 615
law of love, H. 174
life, silent years of, N. 81
love, claims of, N, 401 ©
miracles emblematical, N. 195
“musts,” N. 505
omnipotence, N. 140
Pharisees’ sabbath and, H. 160, 162
pity, special appeal to, N. 190
power and wisdom, N, 321
prayerfulness, N. 98
presence a source of safety, N. 229
redeeming work, Ae baie of, N. 295
second coming, N . 348
sympathy for sinners, H. 408
teaching on wealth, H. 446
temptations, H. 558
testimony to Himself, N. 79
traders, H. 509
treatment of women, N. 367
union with our nature, N. 140
use of Scripture, H. 109
word to wealthy ruler, H, 493
work, John’s misconception of, N. 194

Christian experience, Emmaus journey a type

of, H. 611
legal, N. 511
preaching, substance of, H, 614
prudence, H. 442, 444
use of leisure, H. 251
worship, beginning of, N. 57

Christian’s armour, N, 232
duty as man to man, H. 175
journey, H. 256
points in which worldly men often sur-

pass, H. 446
priestly service, N. 44

Christmas sermon, first, H. 52

Church attendance, N. 116
below, Lord above, H. 613
laying foundation-stone of the, N. 168
rulers in the, warning to, N. 351

Circumcising the Child, C. 59

Circumcision of our Lord, H. 60

Circumstances, favourable, H. 494

City and village, throughout every, C, 212

of Galilee, C. 26

Cities, other, H. 126

Citizen, C. 431

Claim, arrogant, H. 429

Claims of Christ’s love, N. 401

Classes of hearers, different, H, 217
of men, two, H. 317
two contrasted, H. 37

Clean, be: be silent, H. 137
be thou, C. 140
make me, H. 139

Clear guidance in Scripture, N. 113

Climbed up, C. 505

Clouse, disastrous; bad beginning, H. 400

Closed door, the, N. 376
the book, C. 117


Clothe you, C. 345
Cloud, fearing as they entered into the,
H. 262


Cock shall not crow, etc., C. 560
Coin, lost sheep and lost, H. 404, 408, 412
College, Christ’s, first studies in, H. 130
Come, I cannot, C. 395
nigh unto you, is, C, 283
till He, H. 506
Comfort, two grounds of, H. 497
Coming of the kingdom, H. 474, 476 ; N. 475
true preparation for, is character,
H. 508
Command this stone, C. 108
Commandments, two great, H. 291
Commended, C, 446
Commission of the twelve,
temporary, N. 245
Communion of saints with each other and
with God, H. 31
Compassion and power, H. 183
courage and, H. 376
had, C. 189, 294
Compassionate father, H. 434
heart, mouth, feet, and hands, N. 191
Lord of life, 1H, 187, 189
Compel, C. 395
Complaint, a parent's, H. 77
Complaints, two, N. 437
Complementary sayings, two, N. 266
Compromise, reluctance, enthusiasm: three
types of character, H. 273
Conceive, thou shalt, C. 27
Conceived, before He was, C. 60
Condemnation of the Lord, denial, mockery,
and, H. 569
Condition of humanity, N. 427
Conditions of importunate prayer, H. 486
Confessing associated with believing, N.
239


H. 245


Confession and denial of Christ, N. 333
disciple’s, Master’s prayer, H. 255
no, of shortcoming, N, 437
of faith, H. 499
penitential, H. 435
Confidently affirmed, C. 572
Conflict, the, N. 352
Conformity, outward, and inward unity, N.
266


Congregation, small, N. 73

Conqueror of Satan, Christ the, H. 315

Consecration, complete, of being to God,
H. 30


of family to God, N. 61

of renewed powers, H. 125

to office of Redeemer, N. 99
Consent, with one, C. 394
Consolation of Israel, waiting for the, C. 52

received your, C. 173

threefold, H. 542
Consoler, Divine, H. 189
Constrained Him, they, C. 609
Contemplation, activity and, N. 297
Continue in prayer,
Contrast, a, N. 309

great, N. 264


621


INDEX.





Contrast, threefold, H. 368
Contrasts, H. 340
Contrasted classes, two, H. 37
destinies, H. 457
Contrition, imperfect, and God’s response to
it, N, 434 i
Contumacy, different degrees of, H. 394
Conversation after Supper, H. 560
broken off, N. 563
Conversion, evidences of, H. 506
of world, H. 370
of Zacchzeus, H. 504
Corn, plucked ears of, C. 162
Correcting faults of others, H, 176
Counsel and deed, C. 599
and warning, words of, H. 555
of God, rejected the, C. 196
Counsels, spiritual, N. 389
to disciples, H. 464
Counsellor, Christ the great, N, 194
Counter-prayer, prayer and, H. 559
Counteth the cost, C. 400
Country, in his own, C. 119
Courage and compassion, H. 376
and meekness of Christ, H. 268
lion-like, lamb-like patience, N. 379
Course of the gospel, N. 332
Courtesy, H. 282
Cousins, her neighbours and, C. 40
Covenant, unholy, H. 548
Cover us, C. 585
Covetousness, H. 337; N. 338
cure for, H. 343
Cowardice of sinners, N. 247
Craftiness, perceived their, C. 528
Cried, He, C. 219
Crisis, dangerous, H. 560
in ministry of Jesus, N. 167
serious, for some, N. 348
Critical nature of the time, N. 352
Cross, absolution of the, H. 595
and crown, N. 266
Christ upon the, calmness and justice of,
. 593


first word on, H. 590
forgiveness of the, H. 593
His, C. 256, 400
no, no crown, H. 256
on him they laid, H. 585
peace of the, H. 596
three words from the, H. 586
words from the, Luke’s record of the,
H. 593
Crosses, three, H. 588
Cross-bearer, Simon the, H. 585
Cross-bearing, three reasons for, H. 257
Crowd, fickle, N. 398
Crown, cross and, N. 266
no cross, no, H. 256
Crucified, Christ, H. 588
Crucify Him! C. 583
Cry day and night, C. 486
Culpable pride, N, 407
Cumber the ground, C. 364
Cup of suffering, H. 566
this, C. 555


622


Cup, took the, C. 554
Cure, delayed, H. 147

for covetousness, H. 343 ©
Cut it down, C. 364


DAILY life, Christ’s, H. 122
Danger, ever-recurring forms of, N. 394
of starving soul, N. 108
unconsciousness of, H, 560
Dangerous crisis, H. 560
Dark and bright side, parables have a, N. 218
Darkness, there was a, C. 596
Daughter, dead, H. 239
David, city of, C. 55
house of, C. 26
hopes connected with, N. 101
throne of His father, C. 27
Day by day our daily bread, give us, C. 308
Days desired and not seen, H. 476
not many, C. 430
Dayspring from on high, C. 45
Dead are raised, now that the, C. 531
daughter, H. 239
living sought among the, H. 604
. . . lost, C. 436
raising the; healing the sick, H. 183
the three miracles of raising the, N. 192
Death and sleep, N. 190
leprosy and, N. 139
Lord of life and, N. 191
of Christ, effects produced upon spectators
by, H. 597
preparation for, N. 69, 261
Simeon’s view of, N. 65
terror of, N. 567
Decease, C, 261
spake of His, C, 261
Deceived, that ye be not, H. 541
Decision, H. 316
fatal, H. 583
Declaration, angelic, a chosen vessel and an,
H. 24


of forgiveness, N. 145
Decree from Czsar Augustus, C. 50
Deeper truths unveiled, N. 533
Deepest thing in man’s heart, N. 134
Defence of disciples, N. 153

servant’s, N. 510
Definition of holy character and life, N. 19
Degradation, N. 431
Degrees, different, of contumacy, H, 394
Delayed cure, H. 147
Deliberation, due, want of, H. 400
Deliver us from evil, C. 308
Delivered out of the hand of our enemies,

C, 44


unto me (Satan), C. 111
Demon’s return, parable of the, H. 317
Demons, Lord of, H. 229
Demoniac in synagogue, H. 122
Denial and confession of Christ, N. 333
mockery, and condemnation of the Lord,
H. 569
Deny himself .. . take up his cross, C. 256
Depart ... for I am... sinful, H. 133;
N. 134


INDEX,
cece Sect el el


Depart from me, C, 134
hence, C. 378
Departed, when He, C. 295
Departure, Christ’s, H. 615
new, N. 174
Dependence, willing, N. 81
Derided Him, C. 456
Desert, flower in the, N. 539
place, a, C. 251
preacher, N. 86
Deserts, was in the, C. 46
Desire and opportunity, N. 308
to be like Christ, N. 304
with, etc., H. 553
Desired, C. 560
to see Him, C. 247
Desolate, C. 380
Despair and faith, N. 594
Despondency, disciples’, causes of the, H.
608


Destinies, contrasted, H. 457
Destroy us, art Thou come to? C. 123
Detachment and attachment, N. 345
Devil, then cometh the, C. 220
threw him down, the, C. 264
Devils, a certain man which had, C, 231
Devotion, same kind of, still possible, N, 213
to God and acceptance of His gifts, H.
306
Difference between spirit of Old Testament
and of New, N. 195
between the two genealogies, N. 101
Different classes of hearers, H. 217
Dig about it, etc., C. 364
Dignity and humility, N. 204
Disastrous close ; bad beginning, H. 400
Disciple’s confession, Master’s prayer, H.
55


Disciples are ambassadors of Christ, N, 283
Christ defending His, N. 298
strengthens faith of His, N. 496
counsels to, H. 464
defence of, N. 153
encouraged, H. 330
grateful, H. 210
in calamity, H. 607
joy of, and joy of their Lord, H. 284
new stage in life of, N. 304
sign given to the, H. 551
thorough-going, H. 396
three, H. 273
Thy, eat and drink, C. 155
wonder of, N. 228
would-be, H. 272, 274
Disciples’ despondency, causes of the, H. 608
prayer, H. 467
request, H. 304
Discipleship, requisites for, H. 256
Discontent, misplaced, N. 336
Discouragement, N. 485
Discourtesy, Simon’s, explanation of, N. 205
Disinterested kindness, N. 389
Disobedient, grateful but, N. 141
the, to the wisdom of the just, C. 23
Disposition which Christ approves, H. 266
Dispositions, secret, discovered, N. 388


Dissatisfaction, H. 429
Distinguishing mark
prayer, N. 304
Diverse reception of word, H. 217
Dives and Lazarus, H. 457
Divided against himself, C. 31
heart, a, N. 350
Divine and human estimates, H. 539
union of, N. 228
anger, leprosy a symbol of, N. 139
ee Christ’s consciousness of,
. 148


of God’s children,


Boy, growth in wisdom of, H. 81

Christ confessed, H. 253

Consoler, H. 189

joy over repenting sinners, H. 413

ga acceptance and rejection of,
5 il


nature of Christ, H. 533
object-lessons, H. 554
patience, N. 90
procedure, different modes of, N. 460
providence, H. 333
root of human pedigree, N. 101
Sonship of Christ and of man, H. 96
idea of, N. 80
eee implied by the claims Christ makes,
. 398


Division, gospel an occasion of, H. 353
Do this, C, 185
Do to inherit ? C. 290
Doctors, in the midst of the, C. 76
of the Law and Pharisees sitting by,
C. 144
Doctrine and miracles, N. 245
Dogs came, C. 459
Doom, selfishness and its, H. 458
Door, hath shut to the, C. 375
the closed, N. 376
Dost not thou fear God? C. 595
Doubtful mind, of, C. 345
Doubts and fears, N. 239
Dove, like a, C. 100
Doxology, angelic, N. 56
Drink, I will not, C. 554
Dropsical, healing of, H. 383; N. 385
Drunk, eaten and, in Thy presence, H. 376
Dry places, seeking rest, C. 318
what shall be done in the ? C. 586
Dumb, it was, C. 314
spirit, the, H. 313
Dust, shake off the, C. 246
Dutiful servant, H. 467
Duty, Christian’s, as man to man, H. 175
fidelity to, H. 95
of hospitality and neighbourliness, N. 309
our first, N. 109
Dwarfs, spiritual, H. 505
Dying thief, H. 595


EARLY in the morning, came, C. 544

Earnest about kingdom or anxious about
earth, H. 342

Earnestness, secret of the Saviour’s, H. 353

Earth, anxious about, or earnest about the
kingdom, H. 342, 344


623


INDEX.





Earth, Christ’s last hours on, H. 615
power on, C. 148
Earthly affairs, entanglement in, N. 478
and heavenly rewards, N. 390
Easier, whether is? C. 148
Eat before them, did, C. 613
that ye may, etc., H. 559
Eaten and drunk in Thy presence, H:; 376
Edification, N. 17
Education of Jesus, N. 75
Effects, different, produced by Christ’s
coming, N. 348
Efficacy of prayer, H. 308
Eggs, fish, bread, N. 311
Eight days were accomplished, when, C. 60
Elders of the Jews, sent the, C. 184
Elias, Moses and, C. 260
spirit and power of, C, 23
Elias’ spirit, N. 269
Elijah and Elisha, N. 119
had appeared, C. 247
Elisabeth, canticle of, N. 33
thy cousin, C. 29
thy wife, shall bear thee a son, C, 21
Zacharias, John, N. 43
Elisha and Elijah, N. 119
Embassy, an, H. 510
Emblem, fit, H. 393 .
Emmaus, journey to, H. 607, 611
Empty tomb, H. 602, 604
Enclosed garden, flower from an, N. 80
Encouragement and warning, H. 376, 594
no, to delay repentance, N. 594
Endurance and humility, N. 469
Enemies, delivered out of the hand of our,


C. 44
love your, OC. 173
of Christ not fair judges of His claims,
H. 574
saved from our, C. 43
Entanglement in earthly affairs, N. 478
Enter in and dwell there, C. 318
the kingdom, how to, H. 490; N. 493
Entered into thy house, I, C. 204
Entertaining strangers, N. 609
Enthusiasm, reluctance, compromise: three
types of character, H. 273
Enticements and threats, N. 114
Entire self-sacrifice, need of, N. 401
Entreated him shamefully, C. 524
Entry, triumphal, of Jesus into Jerusulem,
13


Epitome of gospel, H. 406
of history of Jesus, N. 116
Equipment, ample, N. 246
of power, H. 615
Era, new, H. 457
Escort, the beggar’s, H, 459
Estate, low, C. 36
Estimates, human and Divine, H. 539
Eternal blessings lost only with our consent,
N. 380
interests, mismanagement of, H. 445
life a gift, N. 470
answer to the question as to inheriting,
N. 297


624


Eternal life, to inherit, C. 290
Even thou, C. 515
Evening prayer of Christ’s friends, H. 611
Ever-recurring forms of danger, N. 394
Every-day life, our, N. 90
Evidences of conversion, H. 506
Evil, being, C. 312

spirit, outcry of, N. 123

. .. temptation, C. 308

tidings, lesson of, H. 359
Evils to be anticipated, N. 542,

two, to be avoided, N. 246
Evil-doers, punishment of, H. 350
Example, Christian, H. 574

is our, in all things, N. 109

of prayer, the great, H. 565
Exclamation, a woman’s, H. 320
Exclusiveness and bigotry, N. 266
Excuse, to make, C, 394
Excuses, feeble, H. 392

for inhumanity, H. 293

frivolous, N. 394
Exemplary prayer, N. 139
Exhortation and warning, H. 375

to humility, H. 387
Experience alone can cure, N. 429

Christian, Emmaus journey a type of,

H. 611

of malefactor, H. 594

religious, five phases of, N. 429
Explanation, true, given, accusation refuted,

H. 314
Extra service, parable of, H. 469
spirit of, H. 465

Eye, light of the body is the, C. 322

of Christ, H. 537
Eyes, blessed are the, etc., C. 288

of all fastened on Him, C. 118

of the understanding opened, H. 605

were holden, their, C. 607, 611
Hye-witnesses and ministers of Word, C. 15


FAILINGS, our, render us much more un-
profitable, N. 470
Failure a proof of want of faith, N. 132
Fain, would, C. 431
Faint, to, C, 484
Faith and despair, N. 594
and fear, H. 225
and grace, N. 429
and hope, Simeon’s, H. 63
and humility of Mary, N. 30
and love, mysteries revealed to, N. 533
and obedience, hindrances to, H. 394
and patience, aid to, H. 260
believer’s, confirmed, N. 18
confession of, H. 499
even weak, effectual, N. 227
feeble, power of, H. 238
from presumption, how to distinguish,
N. 112


getting in and giving out, N. 466
hath saved thee, thy, C. 206 .

if ye had, C. 467

imperfect, effectual, N. 184
importunate, N. 310


INDEX,





Faith, increase our, H. 467
loss of, N. 194
mingied with superstition, N. 288
nature of, N. 186
of centurion, H. 181, 182
of os disciples, Christ strengthens, N.
power in proportion to, N. 245
of, H. 263
prayer and, N. 467
seen in works, H. 145
shall He find ? C, 486
should be a preservative from terror,
N, 228
spontaneous and intense, H. 186
the root, H. 220
their, N. 145
thy, C. 239, 474, 500
timid, rewarded and confirmed, H. 235
two forms of, H. 237
want of, failure a proof of, N. 132
where is your? C, 228
Faith’s approach to Christ, H. 238
Faithful and wise, H. 350
blessedness of, H. 348
he that is, C. 447
Faithfulness, N. 448
Faithless and perverse generation, C, 264
Fall, Peter’s, H. 571
False and true riches, H. 341
guides, warning against, H. 532
humility excluded, N. 389
prophets, ©. 173
prudence, N. 317
Fame, C. i116 ;
Family, consecration of, to God, N. 61
Jesus in the, H. 296
joy, vindication of, H. 436
one, N. 224
Famine, a mighty, C. 430
the grievous, H. 431
Fan, whose, is in His hand, C. 93
Far country, C. 430
went into a, C. 524
Far-sightedness, spiritual, commended, N.
446


Fatal decision, H. 583
innocent but, N. 393
Fate of two prayers, N. 490
Fates, two houses and their, N. 178
Father Abraham, C. 460
and Son, knowledge of, H. 288
compassionate, H. 434
forgive, H. and C. 590
going to the, H. 421
our, which art in heaven, C, 307
Father’s business, My, H. 78; C. 79
condescension and kindness, N. 437
house, send him to my, C. 460
Fathers, did their, C. 172
promised to our, C. 43
turn the hearts of the, to the children,
C. 23
Fault, I find no, C. 580
often condemned in New Testament, a,
N. 339


Faults, more perilous, N. 437
of others, correcting, H. 176
three, of Martha, H. 297
rebuked, N. 266
two great, H. 354
Favour, found, C. 27
in, with God and man, C. 81
Favourable circumstances, H. 494
Fear, C. 191
came on all, C. 40
faith and, H. 225
fell upon him, C. 21
for, etc., C. 543
Him, that, C. 36
not, C. 21, 26, 239; H. 345
place of, in the gospel, N. 332
repentance of, and of love, N. 435
taken with great, C. 233
three arguments against, H. 332
whom ye shall, C. 333
without, C, 44
Fears and doubts, N. 239
Feared thee, I, C. 510
to ask Him, C. 264
Fearing as they entered into the cloud,
H. 262


Feast, Jesus at, H. 387
of Unleavened Bread, CO. 549
refused, H. 390
richest, H. 436
Feasts, lowest seats at, N. 387
Feeble excuses, H. 392
faith, power of, H. 238
Feeling, change of, N. 432
Feet, stood at His, weeping, C. 202
Fell down, C. 472
on his face, C. 139
Fellowship with our weakness and sinfulness,
N. 97
Fervour of the Benedictus, N. 42
Fever, great, C. 124
rebuked the, C. 124
Few that be saved, H. 372; C. 374
Fickle crowd, N. 398 z
Fidelity and its reward, H. 558
to duty, H. 95
Field, was in the, C. 437
Fields, sent him into his, C. 431
Fifties, by, C. 251
Fig tree, C. 544
barren, H. 361, 363
Fighting and building, H. 400
with God, self-assertion a mode of, N.
401
Figurative and literal beam, N. 176
Filled, that my house may be, ©. 396
the hungry, He hath, C. 37
with the Holy Ghost, even from his
mother’s womb, C. 23
Finger of God, with the, C. 315
Fingers, touch with one of your, N. 325
Finish, was not able to, C. 400
Fire, gospel a, H. 352
it rained, C. 477
on the earth, C. 352
the Spirit’s, H. 92


88 625


INDEX.





Fire, unquenchable, ©. 94
water, and the Spirit, baptism with, N.
93


Fireside ministry, H. 282
First and last, N. 324
Christmas sermon, H. 52
coming, blessings of Christ’s, H. 45
duty, our, N. 109
gospel preaching, H. 51
pilgrim-journey of Jesus, N. 75
recorded prayer of Christ, and its answer,
N. 98, 99
studies in Christ’s college, H. 130
temptation, H. 108
which shall be last, C. 376
word at the Supper, H. 553
on cross, H. 590
words of Jesua, N. 79
First-born Son, she brought forth her, C. 50
Fish, eggs, bread, N. 311
Fishes, a great multitude of, C. 133
Fisherman and shepherd, N. 135
Five brethren, N. 460
cities, over, C. 510
gained, C. 510
hundred pence and . . . fifty, C. 204
kindly actions, N. 367
phases of religious experience, N. 429
portraits of our blessed Lord, H. 118
Flattery of world, no, in Scripture, N. 312
Flesh, all, C. 87
Flies in amber, N. 85
Flock, Christ’s, H. 345
keeping watch over their, C. 52
Flower from an enclosed garden, N,. 80
in the desert, N. 539
Flowers and birds, N. 344
Follies of wise, H. 444
Follow Me, C. 150
Followed afar off, C, 571
Him, C. 500
Follower, true, H. 274
Folly, fourfold, H. 340
Fool, the rich, H. 334, 336, 338
thou, H. 340
Fool’s fourfold mistake, H. 337
Fools and slow of heart, C. 608
Foolish and wise hearers, the, H. 177, 178
For ever, C. 28
Forbad him, we, C. 266
Force and persuasion, N. 395
Forgave them both, frankly, C. 204
Forgive, Christ’s claim to, and its attes-
tations, H, 142, 144
him, C. 466
. we also forgive, C. 308
Forgiveness and love, N. 201; H. 205
cause and measure of love, H. 201
declaration of, N. 145
greater, greater love, N. 201
motives for, H. and N. 466
of sin and remission of penalty, N. 145
of the cross, H. 593
Forgiveth sins also, who is this that? C.
206


Forsaketh not, C. 401
626


Forsook all, C. 136
Found as He had said, C. 552
even as He had said, C. 514
it, C. 411
there are not, C, 474
Foundation-stone of the Church, laying,
N. 168
Four classes of men, N. 217
described in their relation to Christ,
Hole
names, N, 85
Fourfold folly, H. 340
mistake, fool’s, H. 337
Fowls of the air, C, 218
Fox, that, C. 379
Fragments, C. 252
Freedom from anxiety, N. 282
Friend, etc., C. 389
Friends, became, together, C. 581
make to yourselves, C. 447
relations, rich neighbours, N. 389
Frivolous, excuses, N, 394
Fruit, give him of the, C. 524
good and bad, H. 176
sought, H. and C. 364
Fruits, bring forth, C. 89
my, C. 339
worthy of repentance, N. 89
Fruitless seeking, H. 375
Fulfilled in your ears, C, 118
until it be, C, 553
Fulfilment of petition, Hallowed be Thy


Name, N. 307
of prophecies, H. 369
Full, C. 173


Future of the kingdom, H. 368
past and, H. 561
present and, N. 156
and past, N. 308


GABRIEL, Iam... thou shalt be mute, C. 24
Gadarene missionary, H. 233
Gadarenes, country of the, C. 231
Galilean, whether the man were a, C. 580
Galileans, sinners above all the, C. 360
Galilee, a city of, C. 26
and Samaria, N. 471
returned into, C. 73
synagogues of, C, 127
Garden, enclosed, flower from an, N. 80
prayers in the, H. 565
Garment, a piece of a new, C. 156
sword and, H. 562
Garments and wine-skins, H. 156
Gate, the strait, H. 374
Genealogies, difference between two, N. 101
General character of Lord’s Prayer, N. 307
Generation, faithless and perverse, C. 264
this, C. 325
this, shall not pass, C. 544
Gentiles, delivered unto the, C. 497
light to lighten the, C. 70
Genuine love, mark of, N. 296
Gethsemane, H. 565
Gift, eternal life a, N. 470
Gifts, N. 539


INDEX,





Gifts, devotion to God and acceptance of His,
H. 306


Give me, C. 429
people time, H. 269
to every man, C. 174
us, etc., C. 308
ye them to eat, C. 251
Giving and receiving, pleasure of, N. 298
God’s, N. 312
Glad, were, C. 550
Glimpse, vivid, of Christ’s actual and active
ministry, H. 121
Glorified God, they, C. 148
Glorifying and praising God, C. 59
Glory, His own, C. 257
of the Lord, C. 52
to God in the highest, C. 55, 56 ©
Gnashing of teeth, weeping and, H. 376
Go and do thou likewise, C. 295
forth, C. 220
not after them, C. 477
show yourselves, C. 472
ye and tell, etc., C. 379
God, a personal, N. 307
all sins are against, N. 146
alone, worsbip due to, N. 112
and Cesar, H. 526, 529
and man, H. 306
service of, H. 291
before, C. 19
blesses whom He will, N. 119
Czesar’s unconscious obedience to, N. 50
communion of saints with each other and
with, H. 31
complete consecration of being to, H. 30
consecration of family to, N. 61
devotion to, and acceptance of His gifts,
H. 306


fighting ‘with, self-assertion a mode of,
N. 401


glory to, in the highest, C. 55, 56

how, appears to the timid mind, N. 310

how the call of, is received, H. 216

humility pleasing to, N. 186

is able, C. 89

judgment of men and of, H. 456

kingdom of, H. 369

labourers sent forth by, N. 168

love of, judgment and the, N. 324

my Saviour, C. 36

nature of true service of, N. 44

no word of, shall be devoid of power,
C. 29


of Abraham, etc., H. 531

of the living, H. 531

praising, C. 55
and blessing, H. 616; C. 59

repayment by, N. 389

rich towards, N. 341

Son of, C, 28

thanks to, N. 42

use the world for, N. 443

what we owe to, H. 443

God’s children, prayer distinguishing mark

of, N. 304

faithful steward, H. 449


God’s giving, N. 312
love for lost, H. 408
for Lie two types of sinners and,
. 427


power and goodness, N. 233

purpose, unbelief a thwarting, H. 196

response to it, imperfect contrition and,
N.


son, not worthy to be called, H. 424
thoughts towards us, definite revelation
of, N. 429
will, submission of our will to, N. 307
Godhead, triune nature of, N. 99
Godliness, riches without, N. 340
Golden rule, the, H. 175
Good and bad fruit, H. 176
comfort, be of, C. 206
do, C. 174
for us to be here, H. 261
ground, other fell on, C. 219
man and a just, C. 599
none is, save One, C. 494
opportunities, N. 292
part, that, H. and C. 298
points, three, in Pilate’s procedure, H. 582
preacher, H. 86
Samaritan, H. 292
tidings of great joy, H. 54
preached, C. 94
unity of kingdom of, N. 412
Goods, thou hast much, C. 340
Goodman of the house, C. 552
Goodness and power, God’s, N, 233
Gorgeous robe, C. 581
Gospel a fire, H. 352
an occasion of division, H. 353
course of the, N. 332
epitome of, H. 406
Law and, N. 494
morning hymn of, H. 38
place of fear in the, N. 332
preaching, first, H. 51
rejection of, H. 526
Scripture, orderliness of, N. 17
to the poor, N. 118
Gospels, notices of women in the, N. 213
testimony to truthfulness of, N. 142
Grace and faith, N. 429
of meditation, H. 58
wisdom, and strength, growth in, H. 73
Gracious character of kingdom, N. 393
words, N. 119
Graciousness and severity, N, 198
Grateful, but disobedient, N. 141
disciples, H. 210
Gratification of appetite, higher aims than,
N. 110


Gratitude and ingratitude, H. 471
Great bribe offered to Christ, N. 111
commandments, two, H. 291
contrast, N. 264
harvest truly is, H. 282
he shall be, C. 27
how the little may be used to get the,
4


H. 447
in the sight of the Lord, C. 22, 23
627


INDEX. »


Great joy, good tidings of, H. 54
multitudes came together, H. 141
prophecy, H. 539

Greater forgiveness, greater love, N. 201
than Solomon .. . than Jonas, C. 321

Greatest, should be accounted the, C. 558
who should be, C. 266

Greatness and humility, H. 558
Christ’s, testimony to, N. 50
true, H. 557

Green tree, the, C. 585

Ground for suspecting that we are not

striving, N. 375
the, C, 339

Growth and progress, H. 370
in strength, wisdom, and grace, H. 73
in wisdom of Divine Boy, H. 81
physical, various stages of, N. 74
three obstructions to, N. 216

Grudging and legalistic Pharisee, picture of

the, H. 437

Guest, ambitious, H, 388

Guests and hosts, lessons to, H. 386
unlikely, H. 395

Guidance, clear, in Scripture, N. 113

Guides, false, warning against, H, 532

Guilt, accumulated, N. 326


HALF of my goods, C. 506
Hallowed be Thy Name, C. 307
Halt, lame, and blind, C. 395
Hand of the Lord was with him, C. 40
the, C. 557
took her by the, C. 240
withered, H. 163 ¢
Hands, behold My, etc., H. 612
into Thy, etc., C. 597
on her, He laid His, C, 367
Handle Me and see, H. 612
Hannah, Song of, compare Magnificat with,
H


Harbinger of peace and of spring, N. 100
Hardly, how! C. 494
Hardship, recruits warned of, H, 398
Harvest truly is great, H. 282
Haste, made, C. 506
need for, N. 395
went... with, C. 32
Hate, doth not, C. 398
you, shall, C. 172
Hated by all men, C. 543
Hatred, causes of their, N. 165
Christ demanding, N. 399
Having traced the course of all things,
C. 16
He made as though, C. 609
that is not, etc., C. 266, 316
that should come, C. 194
Heal thyself, C. 119
whether He would, C. 164
Healed, could not be, of any, H. 238
him, H. 569
Healing, miracles of, H. 141
prophetic, N. 125
of body pledge of healing of soul, H, 124
of dropsical, H. 383; N. 385


628


Hear Him, to, C. 407
not, if they, etc., H. 461
them, H. 461
this of thee, C. 443
Hearers, different classes of, H. 217
the wise and foolish, H. 177
two-hearted, N. 220
Heareth you, he that, C. 284
Hearing, responsibility of, N. 222
them, both, C. 76
Heart, a divided, N. 350
burn, did not our? C. 611
honest and good, C. 220
Law written in the, N. 294
man’s, deepest thing in, N. 134
thy, etc., C. 291
vacant, perils of a, H. 317
Hearts, arise in your, C. 612
burning, H. 612
how are human, beaten into a highway?
H. 218 ‘
of the father to the children, turn the,
C. 23
rocky, N. 220
which hear, H. 216
Heartiness in action, H. 538
Heaven, against, C. 433
and earth shall pass away, C. 544
as in, C. 307
beneficence a passport to, N. 443
bread from, H. 248
carried up into, C. 616
from, C. 287, 314
joy shall be in, C. 412
kingdom of, qualifications for, N. 171
names written in, C. 287
reward in, C. 172
was opened, C. 100
Heavenly and earthly rewards, N. 390
Hedges, highways and, C. 395
Heed, take, H. 544
Hell, in, C. 460
Help, promised, H, 334
Helplessness and loneliness, N. 485
Hen and chickens, H. 380
as a, C. 379
Herald angels sing, the, H. 51
Jobn as, H. 92
Heralds of the King, H. 277
Here and hereafter, H. 458
Herod and Jesus, H. 580
and Pilate, Jesus before, H. 579
Antipas, H. 246
in the days of, O. 19
message to, N. 379
nor yet, C. 582
reproved by him, ©. 94
sent Him to, C. 580
will kill Thee, C. 378
Herod’s steward, Joanna .. . wife of, 0, 213
Heterodoxy and orthodoxy, N. 294
Hid from the wise, C. 287
herself, C, 24
Hidden beauties of Bethlehem, H. 57
High priest’s house, brought Him to the,
C. 571


INDEX.





Higher aims than gratification of appetite,
N. 110


office than arbitrator of property, N. 337
place, H. 388
Highest, children of the, C. 175
glory to God in the, C. 55, 56
room, sit not down in the, C. 388
Highway, how are human hearts beaten
intoa? H. 218
Highways and hedges, C. 395
Him only shalt thou serve, C. 112
Hindrances to faith and obedience, H. 394
Hired servants, make me as one of thy,
C. 433
Historical parallels, N. 477
History of a soul, three stages in the, H. 318
of Jesus, epitome of, N. 116
of the theocracy, N. 523
Holiness, two kinds of, H. 293
united with love, N. 407
Holpen His servant Israel, He hath, C. 38
Holy character and life, definition of, N. 19
dove, N. 100
Ghost, filled with the, even from his
mother’s womb, C. 23
shall come upon thee, C. 28
sin against the, H. and N. 333
Mount, in the, H. 258
One of God, I know Thee... the, C. 123
Spirit, office of, in Incarnation, N. 28
testifies to Christ, H. 59
thing, that, C. 28
Homage, Jesus claims and receives, N. 514
Home religion, N. 233
weary of, anxious to see the world, N. 429
Honours and privileges conferred on Matthew,
N. 151


Hope and faith, Simeon’s, H. 63

fulfilled, N. 63

realised, N. 62
Hopes connected with house of David, N, 101
Hoped to have seen some miracle, C. 581
Hopefulness and patience inculcated, N. 370
Horn of salvation, C. 43
Hospitality and neighbourliness, duty of,

N. 309


violation of, N. 324
Hosts and guests, lessens to, H. 386
Hour, your, C. 569
House, I entered into thy, C. 204
must abide at thy, C. 505
of David, C. 26
of God, Jesus a lover of, N. 116
your, C. 380
Houses, two, and their fates, N. 178
Housetop, on the, etc., C. 478
How long shall I be with you? C. 264
many ! C. 432
what sort rather than, N. 374
much more, C. 312
shall this be? C. 28
Human and Divine estimates, H. 539
union of, N. 228
life at its best, H. 18
nature typified by leper, N. 139
pedigree, Divine root of, N. 101


Humanity, condition of, N. 427
of Christ, N. 46
Humiliation, Christ’s, purpose of, N. 51
Humility and dignity, N. 204
and endurance, N,. 469
and faith of Mary, N. 30
and greatness, H. 558
commended ; jealousy reproved, H. 264
exhortation to, H. 389
false, excluded, N. 389
of children a pattern, H. 493
pleasing to God, N. 186
self-righteousness and, H. 486
Hunger now, ye that, C. 172
Hungered, C. 108
Hungry, He hath filled the, C.37
Husbandmen, sent a servant to the, C, 524
wicked, H. 523
Hymn, morning, of gospel, H. 38
Hypocrisy and piety, H. 538
and truth, H. 331
two kinds of, H. 331
two marks of, N. 324
Hypocrites, pertinacity of, N. 88


I ALSO will ask you, H. 520
am among you, etc., H. 558
appoint unto you a kingdom, C, 559
know Him not, H. 572
must, C. 79
thank Thee, OC. 489
will arise, C. 433
Idea of Divine Sonship, N. 80
of our life-work, H. 79
Ideal life, picture of, H. 74
If any man come .. . and hate not, C. 398
I tell you, etc., C. 574
Thou wilt, Thou canst, C. 139
Ignorance, N. 590
in doing wrong, N. 590
Illustration, argument, and precept, H. 344
Image and superscription, whose? H. 528
Immortality, witnesses to, N. 261
Impart to him that hath none, C. 90
Impatience at loss, N, 232
Impediments, three, N. 274
Impenitent, warnings to, still needed, N. 246
Imperfect contrition, and God’s response to
it, N. 434
faith effectual, N. 184
Important truths and warnings, H. 203
Importunate faith, N. 310
prayér, conditions of, H. 486
parable on, H. 309, 310
Importunity, C. 310
in prayer reasonable and incumbent upon
us, H. 311
Impossible, C. 465
In remembrance of Me, C. 555
Incapacities, three, H. 262
Incarnation, Luke’s narrative of the, H. 53
mystery of, N. 28
office of Holy Ghost in, N. 28
Incense, at the time of, C. 20
Inconsistency of Pharisees, N. 386
Increase our faith, H. 467


629


INDEX,





Indebted to us, C. 308
Indifference of men, tears of Christ over,
H. 515
overcome by prayer, N. 308
Andignation, answered with, C, 367
of Jesus, N. 521
Inducements to accept the invitation, N. 395
Inexhaustible provision, N. 252
Infants, also, C. 493
Infirm woman in synagogue, H. 366
Infirmity, spirit of, C. 367
Infirmities, He cured many of their, C. 195
Influence and vitality, H. 370
secret, N. 371
Ingratitude, Christ’s bearing in relation to,
H, 472
gratitude and, H. 471
Inhumanity, excuses for, H. 293
Iniquity, workers of, C. 376
Inn, no room for them in the, C. 51
Innocent, but fatal, N. 393
Instruction, miracle of, N. 131
Instructions, last, H. 614
spirit of, N. 245
Intense faith, spontaneous and, H. 186
Intercession, N. 187
for others, N. 144
for respite, N. 364
Intercessor, our, N. 307
Invitation, inducements to accept the, N. 395
refused, N. 392
treacherous, N. 385
Inward certified by outward, N. 147
unity and outward conformity, N. 266
Irritation against Jesus, N. 164
Israel, blessed be the Lord God of, C. 42
His servant, He hath holpen, C. 38
in, C. 186
waiting for the consolation of, C. 62
It cannot be, C. 379


JACOB, reign over the house of, C. 27
James and John, C, 269
John, and Peter, N. 239, 260
Jealousy reproved: humility commended,
H. 264
Jerusalem, a man in, C. 52
beginning at, C, 615
Jesus tarried behind in, C. 75
overthrow of, prophecy of, H. 541
triumphal entry of Jesus into, H. 513
went to, every year, C. 74
Jesus, C. 27
a lover of house of God, N. 116
and Herod, H. 580
and Simon, H. 585
arrest of, H. 568
at feast, H. 387
baptized, N. 97
before Pilate and Herod, H. 579
boyhood of, N. 75
calmness of, H. 565
Christ ignoring social distinctions, N. 407
Lord’s Supper is a monument sacred
to the memory of, H. 553
opinions about, H. 255


630


Jesus claims and receives homage, N. 514
crisis in ministry of, N. 167
education of, N. 75
epitome of history of, N. 116
first pilgrim-journey of, N. 75
words of, N. 79
had done, C. 234
Himself drew near, H. and C. 607
in the family circle, H. 296
temple, H. 78
indignation of, N. 521
irritation against, N. 164
lost and found, N. 79
makes time for prayer, N. 126
name of, H. 61
not all equally intimate with, N. 168
prayed, various occasions on which, N, 99
publicans attracted to, N. 406
search for, N. 126
sitting at the feet of, C. 232
social prayers of, N. 304
sought to see, C. 505
tarried behind in Jerusalem, C. 75
the Bridegroom, N. 156
the Child, N. 75
touched him, H. 140
triumphal en ‘ry of, into Jerusalem, H. 513
voluntary self-humiliation of, H. 49
was called, C. 60
was found alone, C, 263
went with them, then, C. 185
wherein consists superiority of ? H. 92
young man seeking, H. 493
Jesus’ feet, sat at, 0. 297
praise of John, and John’s doubt of Jesus,
H. 192
sufferings, two alleviations of, H. 583
Jewish people, ruin of the, H. 543
Jews, King of the, H. 580
Joanna... wife of Herod’s steward, C. 213
John and James, C. 269
and Peter: a contrast, H. 573
Peter, and James, N. 239, 260
John also taught his disciples, as, H. 305
as herald, H. 92
his name is, C. 40
messengers of, H. 194
remarkable circumstances in connection
with, N. 196
tell, what things ye have seen, C. 195
until; and since, H. 456
word of God came unto, C. 86
Zacharias, Elisabeth, N. 43
John’s doubt of Jesus, and Jesus’ praise of
John, H, 192
later ministry, H. 94.
misconception of Christ’s work, N. 194
preaching, characteristics of, H. 86
Jonas, greater than, C. 321
sign of, C. 321
Joseph also went up to Bethlehem, OC. 50
of Arimathzea, H. 599
Journey, Christian’s, H. 256
to Emmaus, H. 607, 611
Joy, Christ’s, in finding lost, N. 412
family, vindication of, H. 436


INDEX.





Joy of disciples and joy of their Lord, H, 284
shall be in heaven, C, 412, 413
with, C. 220
Judas, betrayest thou? H. 568
Judge becomes Advocate, N. 298
not, H. 176
who made Me a? H. 336
Judgment and the love of God, N. 324
last, H. 543
of men and of God, H. 456
Judgments, accidents not, H. 358
Just men, C. 528
resurrection of the, C. 390
Justice and calmness of Christ upon the
cross, H. 593
Justification, N. 490
Justified, C. 490


KEEPERS, vineyard and its, H. 521, 528
Keeping the key, N. 326
Kept all these sayings in her heart, C. 81
Key of knowledge, C. 326
Kill Him, let us, C. 525
sought how they might, C, 549
Kind Master, the, H. 346
Kindly actions, five, N. 367
Kindness, disinterested, N. 389
melted by, H. 503
King, Christ a, C. 580
heralds of the, H. 277
new kind of, H. 511
of the Jews, H. 580
Prophet, and Priest, N. 586
watching for the, H. 348
King’s touch, N, 141
Kings, C. 288
Kingdom come, Thy, C. 307
coming of the, H. 474, 476; N. 475
earnest about the, or anxious about earth,
H. 342
future of the, H. 368
having received the, C. 510
how shall his, stand? C. 315
how to enter the, H. 490; N. 493
I appoint unto you a, OC. 558
near the, but not in it, N. 392
of God, H. 369; C. 554
has two kinds of power, H. 370
I must preach the, C. 126
is within you, C. 476
many in the, N. 376
of good, unity of, N. 412
of heaven, qualifications for, N. 171
on the borders of the, H. 504
poor inherit, N. 172
to preach the, C. 245
true preparation for coming of the, is
character, H. 508
who may enter the? H. 374
Kingdoms of the world, all the, C. 110
Kissed him, C. 434
Knewest, thou, C. 511
Knocking, asking, seeking, N. 311
Know, but that ye may, C. 148
not what they do, C. 590
not, ye, C. 269


Know of your own selves, C. 544
Knowledge, key of, C. 326

of Father and of Son, H. 288

progress in, N. 221

substituted for practice, N, 325
Known, hast not, C. 608


LABOURER is worthy, the, C. 283
Labourers sent forth by God, N. 168
Labours, unrecorded, of Christ, H. 283
Laid His hands on every one, C. 125
Lake and shore, H. 227
Lamb of God brought into the temple, N. 62
Lamb-like patience, lion-like courage, N. 379
Lamentation of love, H. 379
Lamented Him, C. 586
Lamp, place and function of, N. 332
Lamps and bushels, H. 321
Land of promise, Moses now admitted to,
N. 261
Lanes, streets and, C. 395
Last, first and, N. 324
first which shall be, C. 376
hours on earth, Christ’s, H. 615
instructions, H. 614
judgment, H. 543
Messianic prophecies, H. 20
offices of love, H. 598
prayer granted at, H. 21
state is worse, H. 319
words, H. 541
Later life, need of Christ in, H. 609
ministry, John’s, H. 94
Laugh, C. 173
Launch out into the deep, C, 132
Law and gospel, N. 494
gave no definition of “neighbour,” N
292
of love, Christ’s, H. 174
respect for the, N. 73
written in the heart, N. 294
Lawful, is it, for us? C. 528
to do, not, C, 162
Lazarus and Dives, H. 457
Martha, and Mary, H. 296
named, C. 459
Lead us not, C. 308
Leaders, blind, of blind, H. 176
Learner, Lord Jesus a, N. 76
Least . . . much, H. 448
Leaven, H. 370, 371, 372
spiritual, H. 372
Leavened, the whole was, C. 371
Led by Spirit, C. 107
Left house or parents, C. 495
Legal Christian, N. 511
righteousness, something higher than,
N. 412


Legalistic and grudging Pharisee, picture of
the, H. 437

Legion, C. 232

Leisure, Christian use of, H. 251

Leper and the Lord, the, H. 138

Lepers, the ten, H. 470; C. 472

Leprosy a symbol of Divine anger, N. 139
and death, N. 139


631


INDEX.





Leprosy is typical of sin, H. 139
Less prepared, more eager, N. 274
Lesson in religious liberty, H. 154
of evil tidings, H. 359
of mercy, N. 267
of patience, N. 81
to all religious teachers, H. 337
Lessons from Gethsemane, H. 565
from the great Teacher, H. 385
from the seventy, H. 279
on prayer, H. 304, 483
three, H. 318
three great, H. 256
to guests and hosts, H. 386
to the twelve, H. 265, 267
two great, taught, H, 435
Lest they also, N. 389 ; C. 460
Let him go, C. 386
Levi made Him a great feast, C. 152
Levite, a, C. 293
Levites and Samaritans, N. 293
Liberty, religious, lesson in, H. 154
Life, book of, H. 287


compassionate Lord of, H. 187, 189; N.
tO


human, at its best, H. 18
is more than food, OC. 344
of disciples, new stage in N. 304
our every-day, N. 90
possessions and, N. 338
righteous, N. 20
Life-work, idea of our, H. 79
Lifted up His hands, C. 616
Light, Christ the Bringer of, N. 221
from within, N. 260
love like the, N. 295
of the body is the eye, C. 322
of the world, Christ, H. 45
see the, N, 321
shall be heard in the, C. 332
to lighten the Gentiles, C. 70
Lightning, as the, OC. 286, 477
Likewise, C. 361
go and do thou, C. 295
Lion-like courage, lamb-like patience, N.
379
Literal and figurative beam N. 176
Little flock, C. 345
how the, may be used to get the great,
H. 447


in a very, C. 510

is heard of apostles afterwards, H. 168

satisfaction yielded by wealth, N. 340
Liturgy and warrant of prayer, H. 805
Live unto Him, 0. 531
Lives, our, Christ Ruler of, N. 131
Living, God of the, H. 531

sought among the dead, H. 604

the, C. 604
Loaves, three, C. 310
Loneliness and helplessness, N. 485
Long-suffering, punishment and, H. 360
Look, Saviour’s, N. 573

up, C. 543
Looked on him, C, 294

up, C. 539


632





Looking round about, C. 164
Loose his ox or his ass, C. 367
Loosed, C. 367
Lord above, Church below, H. 613
acceptable year of the, H. 114, 118
also of the sabbath, H. and C. 163
Christ the, C. 55
circumcision of our, H. 60
denial, mockery, and condemnation of
the, H. 569
glory of the, C. 52
great in the sight of the, C. 22, 23
hath need, the, C. 514
Jesus a learner, N. 76
joy of disciples and joy of their, H. 284
my, C. 34
of demons, H. 229
of life, compassionate, H. 187, 189; N.
191


our blessed, five portraits of, H. 118
stewardship for the, H. 446
the, C. 44
the, and the leper, H. 138
the mother of my, C. 33
their God, many shall he turn to the,
C. 23
turned and looked, C. 573
wait for their, H. 348
why call ye Me? O, 177
Lord’s Prayer, H. 306
beauty and value of the, N. 305
before the, N. 303
general character of the, N. 307
reply to a woman, our, H. 320
Supper is a monument sacred to the
memory of Jesus Christ, H. 553
the, H. 550, 551, 552, 554
Loss, N. 340
impatience at, N. 232
of faith, N. 194
profit and, H. 257
Lost . . . dead, C. 436
God’s love for, H. 408
office of shepherd was to seek, N. 411
one sought, H. 408
one’s return, H. 427
sheep and lost coin, H, 404, 408, 411
son, H. 427, 428
that which was, H. 410
Lot, the days of, C. 477
Lot’s wife, remember, C. 478
Loud voice, with a, C, 472
Love a sap mysteries revealed to, N,
3


and its reward, N. 295
anxieties of, H. 40
characteristics of, N. 294
Christ’s, claims of, N. 401
law of, H. 174
for lost, God’s, H. 408
forgiveness and, N. 201; H. 205
cause and measure of, H. 201
genuine, mark of, N., 294
greater forgiveness, greater, N. 201
holiness united with, N. 407
lamentation of, H. 379


INDEX.
ee


Love, last offices of, H. 598
like the light, N. 295
manifestations of, N, 294
manifested, N. 411
of God, judgment and the, N. 324
of the brethren and of one’s neighbour,
H, 294
repentance of, and of fear, N. 435
them, if ye, C. 175
thwarted, persistence of, H. 408
your enemies, C. 173
Loved much, she, C. 205
Low estate, C. 36
Lowest seats at feasts, N. 387
Luke, Gospel of—
analysis of, N. 5
object with which Gospel was written, N.3
prologue to, N. 14
style and character of Third Gospel, N. 4
time and place of writing, N. 3 -
writer of Gospel, N. 1
Luke’s narrative of the Incarnation, H, 53
record of the words from the cross,
H. 593
Lull, short, N. 114


MADNESS, C, 165
Magnificat, the, H. and N. 34

with Song of Hannah, compare, H, 35
Magnify, C. 35

the Lord, my soul doth, C. 34, 35
Maid, a certain, C. 572

arise, C. 240
Maimed, halt, and blind, C. 395
Maintenance of ministers of religion, N. 212
Make me as one of thy hired servants, C.

433

me clean, H. 139

ready for Him, to, C. 269

them sit down, H. 249; C. 252
Malefactor, experience of, H. 594
Mammon, the unrighteous, C. 449
Man, a certain, C. 292

a...,a woman, C. 371

and God, H. 306

service of, H. 291

and master, H. 184

bearing a pitcher, H. 551

Divine Sonship of Christ and of, H, 96

proposes, H. 339

Son of, N. 224

the strong, N. 315

to man, Christian’s duty as, H. 175
Man’s heart, deepest thing in, N. 134

life, a, C. 338
Manger, Christ in the, N. 50
. Manger-scene, H. 57
Manifest, be made, C. 221
‘Manifestations of love, N. 294
Manifold more, C. 495
Manner of spirit, what, H. 269
Many, C. 393

have taken in hand, C. 14

in the kingdom of God, N. 376

shall he turn to the Lord their God, C. 23

things . . . one thing, C, 298


Martha, three faults of, H. 297
Marvelled, C. 40, 70
at His answer, C. 529
Mary, humility and faith of, N. 30
Martha, and Lazarus, H, 296
out of whom went seven devils, C, 213
Master and man, H. 184
and slave, N, 184
Master ! C. 227
the kind, H. 346
trouble not the, C. 239
when once the, etc., C. 375
Master’s prayer, disciple’s confession, H. 255
Matthew, call of, H. 149
privileges and honours conferred on,
N. 151
the publican, C. 151
Me also, it seemed good to, C. 16
Meat, raiment, N. 344
to give her, C. 240
Meditation, grace of, H. 58
Meekness and courage of Christ, H. 268
Melted by kindness, H. 503
Memory in another world, H. 460
Men and of God, judgment of, H. 456
as other, C. 489
chosen, N. 169
four classes of, N. 217 :
indifference of, tears of Christ over,
H. 515
Messiah living on the bounty of, N. 212
ought, etc., C. 484
thou shalt catch, C. 135
two, N. 490
two classes of, H. 317
Menace, words of, N. 283
Mercy, have, C. 472
he that showed, C. 295
lesson of, N. 267
tender, of our God, C. 45
Message, Baptist’s, H. 87
Divine, acceptance and rejection of, H. 91
from God, miracles a seal to, N. 169
to Herod, N. 379
Messenger, I send My, C. 196
Messengers of John, H. 194
Messiah living on the bounty of men, N, 212
Messiahship, Sonshbip implies, N. 100
Messianic prophecies, last, H. 20
Met Him, C. 232
Mid-course, a, H. 332
Midnight, at, C. 310
Might be with Him, that he, C. 233
Mighty, He hath put down the, C. 36
Ministered unto them, C. 212
Ministerial power, H. 615
Ministering women, H. 597
Ministers and eye-witnesses of Word, C. 15
of religion, maintenance of, N. 212
Ministry, Christ’s actual and active, vivid
glimpse of, H. 121
fireside, H. 282
John’s later, H. 94
of Jesus, crisis in, N. 167
office of, H. 284
Miracle a parable, N. 229


633


INDEX,





Miracle of instruction, N. 131
of loaves ever being wrought, N. 252
teaching of, H. 252
parable in a, H. 129, 131; N, 133, 136
purpose of, H. 229
trust in Christ taught by, N. 131
wayside, H. 499
Miracles a seal to message from God, N. 169
and doctrine, N. 245
Christ’s, emblematical, N. 195
of healing, H. 141
prophetic, N. 125
the three, of raising the dead, N. 192
Mirror held up to the Pharisees, N. 437
Misery, sources of, H. 480
Miseries of worldly rich man, H. 339
Mismanagement of eternal interests, H. 445
Misplaced discontent, N. 336
Mission of the seventy, H. 279
character of the, H. 280
need of the, H. 280
of the twelve, H. 245
Missionary, Gadarene, H. 233
Mistake, fool’s fourfold, H. 337
Pharisee’s, H. 199
Mite, widow’s, H. 538
Mites, two, H. 538; C. 539
Mixed elements of character, N. 134
Mocked Him, C. 581
and smote Him, H. 573
Mockery, denial, and condemnation of the
Lord, H. 569
Moderation, N. 340
Modes of Divine procedure, different, N. 460
Moisture, it lacked, C. 219
Moment of time, in a, C. 110
Money a test of character, N. 338
Months, about three, C. 38
Monument sacred to the memory of Jesus
Christ, Lord’s Supper is a, H. 553
Mood, alternations of, N. 194
Moral independence, entire, is impossible,
N. 315
Morality, rudiments of, N. 90
More, C. 539
eager, less prepared, N. 274
tolerable, C. 283
Moses and Elias, C. 260
error of, not repeated, N. 337
now admitted to land of promise, N. 261
Mote, let me pull out the, C. 176
Mother, His, and His brethren, OC, 223, 224
of my Lord, C. 33
Motives for forgiveness, N. 466
Morning hymn of gospel, H. 38
Mount, holy, in the, H. 258
sermon on the, H. 170
Mountain to pray, into a, C. 167
Mountains, say to the, C. 586
Mouth and wisdom, a, C. 542
Much ... least, H. 448
Multitude, a, C. 55
of fishes, a great, C. 133
of people, a great, C. 169
Multitudes, great, C. 398
Murder, and for, C. 583


634


Murmured, C. 407

against His disciples, C. 152
Must release one, C. 582
“Musts,” Christ’s, N. 505
Mustard seed, H. 370

as a grain of, C. 467

My house, etc., C. 516
Mystery of Incarnation, N. 28
Mysteries revealed to faith and love, N. 533


NAIn, at gate of, H. 188
Name, hallowed be Thy, C. 307
His, C. 36
of Jesus, H. 61
your, C. 172
Names, four, N. 85
written in heaven, C. 287
Narrative of Annunciation, beauty of, N. 29
Nation, he loveth our, C, 184
shall rise, C, 542
National aspirations, N. 42
Natural and spiritual relationships, H. 222;
N. 223


Nature, Christ’s union with our, N. 140
of faith, N. 186
of true service of God, N. 44
Nay . . . but if one went, C. 461
Nazareth, sermon at, H. 117
Necessity for striving, H. 374
Need of a suffering Saviour, H. 608
of Christ in later life, H. 609
of entire self-sacrifice, N. 401
Needs of an Oriental comparatively few,
N. 213
Needful, but one thing is, C. 298
Negligence, H. 350
Neighbour, Law gave no definition of, N. 292
my, H. 291
one’s, love of the brethren and of, H. 294
which was ? C. 295
who is my? H. 288
Neighbours and cousins, her, C. 40
Neighbourliness and hospitality, duty of,
N. 309
Neither tell I you, C. 521
Nets, were washing their, C. 132
Neutral, none can be, N. 316
Neutrality impossible in religion, H. 312
Never gavest me, C. 438
man sat, C. 514
Nevertheless, H. 132, 566 ; C. 486
New departure, N. 174
difference between spirit of Old Testament
and of, N. 195
era, H. 457
kind of king, H. 511
no man. .. desireth, C. 157
old and, H. 554
organisation, the, N. 167
relationship, N. 224
spirit of Old Testament and of, H. 267
stage in life of disciples, N. 304
Teacher, H, 117
Testament, H. 555
a fault often condemned in, N. 339
Roman soldiers mentioned in, N. 186


INDEX.
co saporgeloemscopetie ahaa 1 ae lle tls a A ac


New wine . . . old bottles, C. 157
Nickname, chance, a, N. 292
Nine, where are the? H. 473
_ why the, acted as they did, N. 474
Nineveh, men of... queen of the south,
C. 321

No man knoweth, H. 288

more, we have, C. 251
Noah, the days of, C. 477
Nobility, but one true, N. 224
Noble character, a, H. 367
Nobleman, a certain, H. 509
Nominally religious, N. 393
Not worthy to be called God’s son, H. 424
Note of warning, H, 375
Nothing amiss, hath done, QC. 595

did eat, C. 107
Nought, set Him at, C. 581
Nunc Dimittis, H. 64; N. 66


%


OBEDIENCE and faith, hindrances to, H, 394
Ceesar’s unconscious, to God, N. 50
Object-lessons, Divine, H, 554
Obligations, H. 443
Observation, not with, C. 476
Obstructions, three, to growth, N. 216
Occupy, C. 509
Offences, H. 465
Offering, appropriate, N. 62
widow’s, and stones of temple, H. 537
Office of ministry, H. 284
Offices of love, last, H. 598
Old age, Christ and, H. 65
and new, H. 554
bottles . . . new wine, C. 157
Testament and of New, difference between
spirit of, N. 195
and of New, spirit of, H. 267
Omnipotence, Christ’s, N. 140
One family, N. 224
in ten, H. 471, 473
mightier, H. 92
not in his right mind, N. 432
stone, not be left, H. 539
thing, I will ask you, C. 164
. . many things, C, 298
thou lackest, C, 494
Only son, the, C. 189
Open acknowledgment, necessity for, N. 238
immediately, C. 347
Opened, it shall be, N, 311
while He, C. 611
Opinions about Jesus Christ, H. 255
Opportunity and desire, N. 308
sought, C. 550
Opportunities, good, N. 292
Orderliness of gospel Scripture, N. 17
Organisation, the new, N. 167
Oriental, needs of an, comparatively few,
N, 213
Orthodoxy and heterodoxy, N. 294
Other cities, H. 126
Ought not? C. 368
Outcry of evil spitit, N. 123 :
Outward conformity and inward unity, N.
266


Outward, inward certified by, N. 147
Overthrow of Jerusalem, prophecy of, H. 541
Ox, son or, C. 386


PARABLE, He spake by a, OC. 217
in a miracle, H. 129, 181; N. 133, 136
miracle a, N. 229
of extra service, H. 469
of the demon’s return, H. 317
of the pounds, H. 508, 509
of the sword and garment, H. 562
of the vineyard, H. 523
of two sons, H. 427
on importunate prayer, B. 309, 310
on prayer, N. 484
twin, H. 410
Parables have a dark and bright side, N. 218
most wonderful of, N. 311
two, N. 442
Paradise, with Me in, H. 595
Pardon, peace with, N. 206
Parent’s complaint, a, H. 77
Parting blessing, H. 616
Passed by, He, H. 293
Passing through the midst of them, C. 120
Passion, revelation of the, H. 256
the Passover before the, N. 353
third announcement of the, H. 495
Passover before the Passion, the, N. 353
reasons why Christ desired so earnestly
to eat this last, H. 553
when the, must be killed, C. 551
Passport to heaven, beneficence a, N. 443
Past and future, H. 561
present, and future, N. 308
Patience and faith, aid to, H. 260
and hopefulness inculcated, N. 370
Divine, N. 90
lamb-like, lion-like courage, N. 379
lesson of, N. 81
Patients, Physician and His, H. 153
Pause, solemn, N. 107; H. 432
Peace, H. 282; C. 354
and of spring, harbinger of, N. 100
be to this house, C. 282
belong unto thy, C. 515
desireth conditions of, C. 401
go in, C. 206, 239
of the cross, H. 596
strife sometimes better than, N. 354
with pardon, N. 206
Peace-bringer in world of nature, H. 226
Pedigree, human, Divine root of, N. 101
Penalty, remission of, forgiveness of sin
and, N. 145
Penitence, public acknowledgment of, N, 202
typical case of, N. 202
Penitent and Christ, H. 594, 595
thief, H. 596
Penitential confession, H. 435
Penny, show me a, C. 528
Penury, of her, H. 539
People, and the, C, 582
began to speak unto the, C. 195
followed Him, C. 251
pressed upon Him, C, 131


635


INDEX. '





People, to all, C. 54
to the, C. 524
Perfected, third day I shall be, H. 379
Perilous faults, more, N. 437
Perils of a vacant heart, H. 317
Perish, ye shall all likewise, C. 360, 361
Permanent change, N. 372
types of character not necessarily, N. 221
Perplexed, much, C. 604
Perplexity and alarm, N. 227
Persevering prayer, H. 482; N. 484
Persistence of thwarted love, H. 408
Personal God, a, N. 307
Persuasion and force, N. 395
Pertinacity of hypocrites, N. 88
Perverse and faithless generation, C. 264
Perverteth the people, C. 582
Peter, C. 560
and John : a contrast, H. 573
sent, C. 551
James, and John, N. 239, 260
sifting of, H. 559
then, C. 350
Peter’s fall, H. 571
first impulse, N. 134
question, answer to, N. 350
repentance a type of true sorrow, H. 573
Petition, Hallowed be Thy Name, fulfilment
of, N. 307
Petitions in Lord’s Prayer, N. 306
Pew, pulpit and, H. 221
Pharisee and publican, H. 488, 489
legalistic and grudging, picture of the,
H. 437


unconscious of sinfulness, N. 205
Pharisee’s errors, H. 489

ground of confidence, H, 489

house, He went into the, C, 201

mistake, H. 199

prayer, H. 489
Pharisees and doctors of the Law sitting by,

C. 144


inconsistency of, N. 386
mirror held up to the, N. 437
one of the, derided Him, C. 201
the chief, C. 385
rebuked, N. 324
some of the, C. 514
Pharisees’ sabbath, and Christ’s, H. 160, 162
Physical growth, various stages of, N. 74
Physician and His patients, H. 153
and Prophet, N. 119
Picture of Christ’s redeeming work, N. 295
of ideal life, H. 74
Pictures, three, H. 318
Piety and hypocrisy, H. 538
two aspects of, H. 495
Pilate and Herod, Jesus before, H. 579
back to, H, 582
led Him unto, C. 579
Pilate’s procedure, three good points in,
2


Pilgrim-journey, first, of Jesus, N. 75
Pious resolution, H, 433

Pitcher, man bearing a, H. 551

Pity, special appeal to Christ’s, N. 190


536


Place, to this, C. 580
Play, children at, N. 197, 198
Plea, strong, for Christ to remain, N. 134
Pleasure of giving and receiving, N. 298
Plough, CO. 274
Ploughing, or feeding cattle, C. 469
Plucked ears of corn, C. 162
Poets and artists, theme for, N. 202
Pondered . . . wondered, C. 58
Poor, blessed be ye, C. 172
call the, C. 390
gospel to the, N. 118
inherit kingdom, N. 172
the, C. 117
Population, a semi-heathen, N. 231
Portraits, five, of our blessed Lord, H. 118
three, H. 201
Possessions and life, N. 338
Possible with God, C. 495 -
Pound, take from him the, C. 511
thy, C. 510
Pounds, parable of the, H. 508, 509
Poverty, spiritual, N. 172 :
Power and authority, C. 245
and compassion, H. 183
and goodness, God’s, N. 233
and wisdom, Christ’s, N. 321
came forth . . . healed them all, C. 169.
equipment of, H. 615
in proportion to faith, N. 245
ministerial, H. 615
no word of God shall be devoid of, C. 29
of Christ, N. 187
of faith, H. 263
of feeble faith, H. 238
of the Spirit, C. 115
on earth, C. 148
the return with, H. 116
two kinds of, kingdom of God has, H.
370
use of supernatural, N. 112
Practice, knowledge substituted for, N. 325
Praising and blessing God, H. 616
and glorifying God, C. 59
God, C. 55
Pray, always to, H. 484
Christ teaching how to, H. 302
for them, C. 174
when ye, say, C. 306
ye therefore, C. 282
Prayed, but I have, C. 560
thus, C. 489
Prayer, answered, H. 233
answers to, N. 140, 260
and counter-prayer, H. 559
and faith, N. 467
at Christ’s baptism and at Transfiguration,
N. 98
-Christ’s, burden and answer of, H. 98
distinguishing mark of God’s children,


efficacy of, H. 308
evening, of Christ’s friends, H. 611
exemplary, N. 139
granted at last, H. 21
‘ importunate, conditions of, H. 486


INDEX.


_. Prayer, importunate, parable on, H. 309, 310


importunity in, reasonable and incumbent
upon us, H. 311
indifference overcome by, N. 308
Jesus makes time for, N. 126
lessons on, H. 304, 483
Lord’s, H. 306
before the, N. 303
Master’s, disciple’s confession, H. 255
persevering, H. 482; N. 484
strange, and wonderful answer, H. 135
the great example of, H. 565
Transfiguration, H. 259
warrant and liturgy of, H. 305
Prayers in the Garden, H. 565
of Christ, H. 142
social, of Jesus, N. 304
two, H. 488; N. 490
vague, H. 499
Prayerfulness, Christ’s, N. 98
Preach, go thou and, C, 274
Preached good tidings, C. 94
Preacher and witness, H. 92
desert, N. 86
of repentance and righteousness, H. 87
Preaching, Christian, substance of, H. 614
John’s, characteristics of, H. 86
of apostles, rejecting, N. 333
Precept, argument, and illustration, H. 344
Pre-Christian hymn, Nunc Dimittis, N. 66
Pre-eminence, to strive for, was unbecoming,
H. 558
Prejudice, shock to, N. 150
Preoccupation with worldly things, H, 220
Preparation for death, N. 69, 261
for the day of the Son of man, H. 478
vain, H. 340
Preparatory address, H. 432
Prepare His ways, C. 44
Prepared and unprepared, N, 348
speech only half said, N. 435
Preparedness, H. 347
Presence, Christ’s, a source of safety, N. 229
in thy, C. 376
unrecognised, H. 607
Present and future, N. 156; H. 533
past, and future, N. 308
Presumption, how to distinguish faith from,
N. 112


Pride, culpable, N. 407
how Christ rebuked, H. 266
lawful, sense of shame and, N. 389
spiritual, temptation to, N. 113
Priest, a certain, C. 19, 293
King, and Prophet, N. 585
true, N. 63
Priest’s office, while he executed the, C. 20
thanksgiving, N. 44
Priests, the chief, H. 516
Priestly service, Christian’s, N. 44
Principles, not rules, N. 561
Private celebration, N. 97
Privilege, a widely extended, N, 224
of service, H. 438
Privileges and honours conferred on Matthew,
N. 151





Prodigal and his brother, H. 420
son, H, 414, 418, 428
Profit and loss, H. 257
Progress and growth, H. 370
in knowledge, N. 221
Prologue to Luke’s Gospel, N. 14
Promise of the Father, C. 615
tempter’s, N. 111
warning and, H, 332
Promised to our fathers, C. 43
Prophecy, great, H. 539 ;
of overthrow of Jerusalem, H. 541
Simeon’s twofold, H. 69
Prophecies, fulfilment of, H. 369
Jast Messianic, H. 20
Prophet, C. 191
and Physician, N. 119
if He were a, C. 2038
much more than a, C. 196
no, C. 119
Priest, and King, N. 585
Prophets, His holy, C. 43
resisting the, N. 325
the, C. 172
written by the, C. 497
Prophetess, Anna the, H. 72
Protection withdrawn, N. 380 -
Proud, He hath scattered the, C. 36
Providence, Divine, H. 333
Provision, inexhaustible, N. 252
Prudence, Christian, H, 442, 444
false, N. 317
Prudent and wise, C. 287
steward, H. 441, 443, 446
Public acknowledgment of penitence, N. 202
rights, N. 174
Publican, a, C. 150, 151
an example, N. 490
Pharisee and, H. 488, 489
shows humility, N. 490
this, C. 489
Publicans attracted to Jesus, N. 406
great company of, C. 152
special reference to the, N. 442
then came also the, C. 91
Pulpit and pew, H. 221
Punishment and long-suffering, H. 360
of evil-doers, H. 350
sin and, H. 360
Purification, sacrifice of, N. 61
Purpose of the temptation in relation to
Christ, H. 107
Put down the mighty, He hath, C. 37
them all forth, C. 240


QUALIFICATIONS for kingdom of heaven,


N. 171
Qualities exhibited by the steward, N. 446
Queen of the south... men of Nineveh,
C, 321


Question as to inheriting eternal life, answer
to the, N. 297
concerning the resurrection, H. 529
of authority, H. 519, 520
of the Sadducees, H. 531
Questions put to Christ, N. 290


637


INDEX,





RAIMENT, meat, N. 344
Ran, C. 434, 505
violently down a steep place, C. 232
Rash judgments, H. 360
Read, have ye not? C, 163
Ready, all things are now, C, 393
for the road, H. 347
to go with Thee, C. 560
Reasoned with themselves, CO. 521
Reasons, two, why Christ need not come,
N. 185


why Christ desired so earnestly to eat
this last Passover, H. 553
Rebuke of Simon's under-breeding, N. 204
Thy disciples, C. 514
to our unbelief, N. 64
with severity, who may? N. 88
Rebukes, two, H. 569
Rebuked him, C. 499
the fever, C. 124
Receive Him, did not, H. 269
Me, C. 443
you, ©, 447
you, will not, H. 246
Received up, C. 269
Receiveth . . . findeth ...
opened, C. 311
this man, C. 407
Receiving, pleasure of giving and, N. 298
Reception of word, diverse, H. 217
soul and its, H. 433
Recognition in another world, N. 261
Recompensed, thou shalt be, H. 389
Recruits warned of hardships, N. 398
Redeemed His people, C. 42
Redeemer, consecration to office of, N. 99
Redeeming work, picture of Christ’s, N. 295
Refused, feast, H. 390
Regarded, C. 36
Reign over the house of Jacob, C. 27
Rejected stone, H. 526
Rejecting preaching of apostles, N. 333
Rejection and acceptance of Divine message,
H. 91


it shall be


of gospel, H. 526
Rejoice, began to, C. 514
with Me, C. 412
ye in that day, C. 172
Rejoiced with her, C. 40
Rejoicing, great, H. 436
Relation of believers to written word, H. 10
Relations, friends, rich neighbours, N. 889
Relationship, new, N. 224
Relationships, natural and spiritual, H. 222 ;
N. 223
Religion, home, N. 233
neutrality impossible in, H. 312
Religious experience, five phases of, N. 429
leaders and teachers, besetting sins of,
H. 322, 325
liberty, lesson in, H. 154
nominally, N. 393
process; Christ before the Sanhedrim,
H, 571
Reluctance, compromise, enthusiasm: three
types of character, H. 273


623


Reluctance, for work, N. 274

Remained, that, C. 252

Remarkable circumstances in connection
with John, N, 198

scene, H. 471

Remembered His words, C. 605

Remission of penalty, forgiveness of sin and,
N. 145

of sins, salvation by the, C, 45 -

Render unto Cesar, C. 529

Renewed powers, consecration of, H. 125

Repayment by God, N. 389

Repent, H. 360

Repentance and righteousness, preacher of,
H. 8


baptism of, N. 87
call to, H. 84
fruits worthy of, N. 89
nature of, N. 203
need no, C, 412
no encouragement to delay, N. 594
of fear, and of love, N. 435
Peter’s, a type of true sorrow, H. 573
soul and its, H. 432
time left for, N. 364
three motives to, H. 359
Repenteth, over one sinner that, C, 412
Repenting sinners, Divine joy over, H. 413
Reply of Christ, H. 531
of our Lord to a woman, H. 320
Reproachest us also, C. 325
Reproof to our shortcomings, N. 295
Repulsion and attraction of Christ, N. 133
Request denied, the, N. 460
disciples’, H. 304
Required, it should be as they, C, 583
shall be, C. 341
Resemblance to children, N. 493
Resisting the prophets, N. 325
Resolution, pious, H. 433
Respect for rulers, N. 379
Respite, intercession for, N. 364
Responsibility of hearing, N. 222
Result of Christ’s coming, N. 354
Results, from whom, are expected, N. 364
Resurrection of the just, C. 390
question concerning the, H. 529
salutation of the, H. 612
spiritual, N. 191
Return, lost one’s, H. 427
of the seventy, H. 285
to thine own house, C. 233
with power, the, H. 116
Returned with joy, C, 286
Reveal Him, to whom the Son will, C. 288
Revealed, hast . . . Thou hast hid, H. 287
unto him, it was, C. 62
Revelation, definite, of God’s thoughts to-
wards us, N. 429
of the Passion, H. 256
of the Saviour’s heart, H. 378
Reverence, it may be they will, C. 524, 525
H. 525


Reward, fidelity and its, H. 558
in heaven, C, 172
love and its, N. 295


INDEX,
I ce ee ee


Rewards, earthly and heavenly, N. 390
Rich, C. 173

and he was, C. 505

fool, the, H. 334, 336, 338

man, a certain, C. 339, 459

man’s ruin, abused wealth the, H. 454

neighbours, relations, friends, N. 389

temptation of the, N. 494

towards God, N. 341
Riches, abuse of, N. 459

change the place of, N, 341

false and true, H. 341

without godliness, N. 340
Richest feast, H. 436
Right, claiming a, N. 376

hand, one on the, C. 588

mind, one not in his, N. 432

side of the altar, on the, C. 21
Righteous anger, N, 88

both, C. 19

life, N. 20

man, CO. 597

not the, but sinners, C. 153
Righteousness and repentance, preacher of,

87


legal, something higher than, N. 412

Rights, public, N. 174

Riotous spendthrift, H. 430

Risen, is, C. 604

Road, ready for the, H. 347

Robe, best, H. and CO. 436

Rocky hearts, N. 220

Roman soldiers mentioned in New Testament,

N. 186

Room, I have no, C. 339
yet there is, C. 395

Root, Divine, of human pedigree, N. 101
faith the, H. 220

Rose up and followed Him, C. 151
up and ministered untc them, C. 124

Rudiments of morality, N. 90

Ruin of the Jewish people, H. 543

Rule, the golden, H. 175

Rules, principles not, N. 561

Ruler of our lives, Christ, N. 131
wealthy, Christ’s word to, H. 493

Rulers in the Church, warning to, N. 351
respect for, N. 379


SABBATH, Christ and the, N. 386
day, C. 385
_ rested the, C. 599
drew on, C. 599
in Capernaum, H. 120
is it lawful to heal on the? C. 386
Lord also of the, H. and C. 163
Pharisees’, and Christ’s, H. 160, 162
work which hallows the, H. 365
Sabbath’s work, single, record of a, H. 122
Sackcloth, sitting in, C. 283
Sacrifice of purification, N. 61
Sad, C. 608
Sadducees, question of the, H. 531
Sadness of the two disciples, H. 608
Safe and sound, C. 437
Safety, Christ’s presence a source of, N, 229


Safety, spiritual wretchedness not a ground
of, N. 396
while work is unfinished, N. 333
Said, it is, C. 113
Saints, communion of, with each other and
with God, H. 31
Salt is good, C. 401
Salutation of the Resurrection, H, 612
the, N. 33
Salvation, N. 44, 55, 270; C. 69
assurance of, H. 69
by the remission of sins, C, 45
horn of, C. 43
this day is, C. 506
Samaria and Galilee, N. 471
Samaritan, C. 294
good, H. 292
Samaritans and Levites, N. 293
Same day, that, C. 607
Sanctuary, scene in the, H. 366
Sanhedrim, Christ before the: religious pro-
cess, H. 571
Sat up and began to speak, C. 191
Satan, Christ the Conqueror of, H. 315
I beheld, fall, C. 286
then entered, C. 550
Satisfaction, little, yielded by wealth, N. 340
Saved, N. 206
few that be, H. 372; C. 374
from our enemies, C. 43
others, He, C. 594
thee, C. 474
who then can be? C. 495
Saviour, a, C. 55
a wearied, N. 227
and His adversaries, H. 378
God my, C. 36
suffering, need of a, H. 608
Saviour’s earnestness, secret of the, H. 353
heart, revelation of the, H. 378
look, N. 573
Saw him and said, C. 505
Say in a word, C. 185
Saying, they made known abroad the, C. 58
Sayings, let these, sink down into your ears,
C. 264


two complementary, N. 266
Scattered the proud, He hath, C. 36
Scene, characteristic, H. 169
in \he sanctuary, H. 366
Scenes, two, H. 458
Scorpions, serpents and, C. 287
Scribes, beware of the, C. 534
Scripture, Christ’s use of, H. 109
clear guidance in, N. 113
no flattery of world in, N. 312
Scriptures, authority of, N. 162
testimony of the, to Christ, N. 609
that they might understand the, C. 614
Seal to message from God, miraclesa, N. 169
Search for Jesus, N. 126
Season, for a, C. 113
Seats, lowest, at feasts, N. 387
Second coming, Christ’s, N. 348
temptation, H. 110
Secret cause of unbelief, H. 319


639


INDEX.





- Secret dispositions discovered, N. 388
influence, N. 371
of the Saviour’s earnestness, H. 353
Seed by wayside, H. 218
is the word of God, C. 219
same, and differing soils, H, 213
sower and, H. 215
Seeking, knocking, asking, N. 311
unseasonable, N. 375
Self, stewardship for, H. 448
Self-assertion a mode of fighting with God,
N. 401
Self-deception, N. 331
Self-denial, H. 257
what is? N. 257
Self-humiliation, N. 134
voluntary, of Jesus, H. 49
Selfish, warning to, H. 458
Selfishness and its doom, H. 458
utter, depicted, N. 310
Self-righteousness and humility, H. 486
Self-sacrifice, H. 535; N. 257
needs of entire, N. 401
Sell what ye have and give alms, C. 345
Semi-heathen population, a, N. 231
Sent them, He, C. 245.
that are, C. 379
they that were, C. 186
Sentinel, the, N. 63
Sepulchre, beheld the, C. 599
the, H. 599
Sepulchres, ye build the, C. 325
Serious crisis for some, N. 348
Sermon at Nazareth, H. 117
Christ’s first, text of, N. 117
first Christmas, H. 52
on the mount, H. 170
Serpents and scorpions, 0. 287
Servant, dutiful, H. 467
his, C. 393
no, C. 454
smote a, C. 569
who was dear unto him, C. 184
Servant’s defence, N. 510
Servants and subjects, N. 509
blessed are those, O. 348
sent forth, H. 244
unprofitable, H. 470
Serve, as he that doth, 0. 558
Him, that we . . . might, C. 43
thee, do I, C. 437
Service, extra, parable of, H. 469
spirit of, C. 465
of God and man, H. 291
of God, nature of true, N. 44
privilege of, H. 438
Set him by Him, C, 266
Seventy, N. 281
lessons from the, H. 279
mission of the, H. 279
of the, character of the, H. 280
need of the, H. 280
return of the, H. 285
significance of the number, N. 28]
Severity and graciousness, N. 198
who may rebuke with? N. 88


640


Shall not God? C. 485
Shame, sense of, and lawful pride, N. 389
Sheep, lost, and lost coin, H. 404, 408, 411
Shepherd and fisherman, N. 135

office of, was to seek lost, N. 411
Shepherds, N. 52
Ship, He went into a, C, 226, 227
Ships, entered into one of the, C. 132
Shock to prejudice, N. 150
Shore and lake, H. 227
Short lull, N. 114
Shortcoming, no confession of, N. 437
Shortcomings, a reproof to our, N. 295
Shoulders, on his, C. 412


Showed them His hands and His feet,


C. 612
Sick, all that had any, C. 125
healing the; raising the dead, H. 183
Sidon, Tyre, and Sodom, C. 283
Sift you, that he, may, C. 560
Sifting of Peter, H. 559
Sight, that, C. 597
Sign, a, C. 55
given to the disciples, H, 551
they seek a, C. 320
threefold, H. 99
which shall be spoken against, C. 71
Signs in the sun, etc., C. 543
of the times, ie 351
Signal chastisements, H. 360
Silence enjoined, N. 240
Silent, be: be clean, H. 137
years of Christ’s life, N. 81
Silver, piece of, C. 413
Simeon, H. 66
a man whose name was, C. 62
blessed them, C. 70
Simeon’s hope and faith, H. 63
twofold prophecy, H. 69
view of death, N. 65
Simon and Jesus, H. 585
appeared to, H. 612
in the house of, H. 200
made to reprove himself, N. 205
the cross-bearer, H. 585
Simon’s discourtesy, explanation of, N. 205
house, C. 124
under-breeding, rebuke of, N. 204
Sin against the Holy Ghost, H. and N. 333
and punishment, H. 360
and suffering, our inability to trace the
connection between, N. 361
Christ forgiving, H. 144
forgiveness of, and remission of penalty,
N. 145
leprosy is typical of, H. 139
soul and its, H. 429
Sins, all, are against God, N. 146
besetting, of religious leaders and
teachers, H. 322, 325
salvation by the remission of, C, 45
three, to be avoided, N. 282
thy, are forgiven thee, C. 145
Sinful men, C, 605
Sinfulness and weakness, fellowship with
our, N. 9


INDEX,








Sinfulness, Pharisee unconscious of, N. 205
Single sabbath’s work, record of a, H. 122
Sinlessness, Christ implies His own, N. 312
Sinner, a, C. 202
bewildered, unconscious, and voluntary,
N, 411
me a, C. 490
over one, that repenteth, C. 412
that is a, C. 506
Sinners above all the Galilzans, C. 360
Christ eating with, N. 408
cowardice of, N. 247
not the righteous, but, C. 153
receiving, N.
repenting, Divine joy over, H. 413
two types of, and God’s love for them,
H. 427
Sisters, Martha and Mary, characteristic con-
duct of the, N. 298
Sit on the right hand, C. 574
Sitteth not down first, C. 400
Sitting at the feet of Jesus, C. 232
at the place of toll, C, 151
in the midst, C. 76
Slave, master and, N. 184
willing, H. 431
Sleep and death, N. 190
Sleepeth, she is not dead, but, C. 240
Sleeping child awakened, H. 234
for sorrow, C. 567
Small congregation, N. 73
Smite, shall we? C. 569
Snare, as a, H. 544
Social distinctions, Jesus Christ ignoring,
N. 407
prayers of Jesus, N. 304
Society, Christ in, N. 406
Sodom, more tolerable for, C. 283
Tyre, and Sidon, C. 283
Soils, same seed and differing, H. 213
Soldiers also mocked Him, C. 594
likewise, the, C. 91
Roman, mentioned in New Testament,
N. 186
Solemn pause, H. 432; N. 107
Solitude, Christ in, N. 126
Solomon, N. 345
greater than, C. 321
Some fell, C. 218
of them said, C. 314
Something to avoid and to copy, N 490
Somewhat to say unto thee, I have, C. 203
Son and Father, knowledge of, H. 288
God’s, not worthy to be called, H. 424
lost, H. 427, 428
My beloved: hear Him, H. 262
I will send, C. 524
of God, C. 28
if Thou be the, C. 108
of man, N, 224
coming, OC, 543
for the, H. 506
one of the days of the, C. 476; H. 478
Spirit in, H. 29
to stand before the, C, 544
of peace, C. 282


TT


Son or ox, C. 386
prodigal, H. 414, 418, 428
the only, C. 189
thou art ever with me, C. 438
thy, C. 438
Sons, two, parable of, H. 427
Sonship, Divine, idea of, N. 80
of Christ and of man, H. 96
implies Messiahship, N. 100
Song, angels’, H, 56
Soothing words, N. 21
Sorrow, true, Peter’s repentance, a type of,
H. 573
Sorrowful, very, C. 494
Sorrowing, C. 77
Soul and its reception, H. 433
and its repentance, H. 432
and its sin, H. 429
danger of starving, N, 108
healing of body pledge of healing of,
H. 124
I will say to my, OC, 340
my, doth magnify the Lord, C. 34, 35
three stages in the history of a, H. 318
Sources of misery, H. 430
Sow, reap, storehouse, barn, C. 344
Sower, a, C. 218
and seed, H. 215
Spake and praised God, C, 40
again to them, C. 583
Speak well of you, C. 173
Special pains taken with the tree, signifi-
cance of, N. 365
Spectators, effects produced upon, by death
of Christ, H. 597
three classes of, N. 314
Speechless, remained, C. 24
Speedily, C. 486
Spendthrift, riotous, H. 430
Spheres, two distinct, N. 529
Spirit and power of Elias, C. 23
came by the, into the temple, C. 63
Elias’, N. 269
evil, outcry of, N. 123
in Son of man, H, 29
led by, C. 107
of extra service, H. 465
of infirmity, C. 367
of instruction, N. 245
of Lord is upor Me, C. 117
of Old Testament and of New, H. 267
difference between, N.195
power of the, C. 115
sin against the, H. 333
the dumb, H. 313
water, and fire, baptism with, N. 93
what manner of, H. 269
worldliness of, N. 393
Spirit’s fire, the, H. 92
Spiritual affinity, the closest of all, N, 225
and natural relationships, H, 222; N. 223
counsels, N. 389
dwarfs, H. 505
far-sightedness commended, N. 446
leaven, H. 372
poverty, N. 172


641


INDEX,





Spiritual pride, temptation to, N, 113
resurrection, N. 191
wretchedness not a ground of safety,
N. 396
Spiritually-minded first hear of Advent, N.
52


Spoken, had thus, C. 513
Spontaneous and intense faith, H. 186
Spring, harbinger of peace and of, N. 100
Stages, various, of physical growth, N. 74
Standing afar off, C. 490
Starving soul, danger of, N. 108
State of the case, true, N. 354
Steward, God’s faithful, H. 449
prudent, H. 441, 443, 446
qualities exhibited by the, N. 446
unjust, H. 442, 443, 446
Steward’s doom, unfaithful, N. 457
Stewardship for self, H. 448
for the Lord, H. 446
Stirreth up the people, He, C. 580
Stone, command this, C. 108
fall on this, C, 526
one, not be left, H. 539
rejected, H. 526
Stones of temple, and widow’s offering,
H. 537


of these, C. 89
will immediately cry out, the, C. 515
Stood, He Himself, OC. 612
up, OC. 117
Strait gate, the, H. 374
Strange passage in life of Christ, N. 106
prayer and wonderful answer, H. 135
things, C. 148
Stranger, this, C. 474
Strangers, entertaining, N. 609
Streets and lanes, C. 395
Strength bestowed, H. 148
wisdom and grace, growth in, H. 73
Strengthen thy brethren, H. and C, 560
Strengthening Him, CO, 566
Stretch forth, C. 164
Strife among them, C. 558
and victory, H. 563
sometimes better than peace, N. 354
Strive to enter, H. 374
Striving, necessity for, H. 374
Strong argument, N. 484
drink, he shall drink neither wine nor,
C. 23


faith rewarded, H. 183

man, the, N. 315

plea for Christ to remain, N. 134
Stumbling, Christ an occasion of, N. 195
Subject unto them, C. 80
Subjects and servants, N. 509
Submission of our wills to God’s will, N. 307
Substance of Christian preaching, H. 614
Sudden change for the better, N. 459
Suddenly, C. 55
Suffer and to rise, to, C. 615

before I, C. 553

first He must, C. 477

must, C, 256
Suffered them, He, C. 232


642


Suffering and sin, our inability to trace the
connection between, N. 361

Christ moved by the sight of, N. 385

cup of, H. 566

Saviour, need of a, H. 608
Sufferings, Jesus’, two alleviations of, H. 583

willingly met, H. 497
Summons, authoritative, N. 190
Superiority of Jesus, wherein consists ? H, 92
Supernatural power, use of, N. 112
Superscription, whose image and ? H. 528
Superstition, faith mingled with, N. 238
Superstitious inferences, N. 141
Supper, conversation after, H. 560

first word at the, H. 553

great, H. 393

my, C. 396

the Lord’s, H. 550, 551, 552, 554
ee Him to have been in the company,

5 0G


Susanna, C. 213
Swaddling-clothes and .. . a manger, C. 50
Sweep the house, C. 413
Swine cared for, swineherd neglected, N. 431
Swineherd neglected, swine cared for, N. 431
Sword and garment, H. 562

shall pierce, yea a, C. 71
Sympathy, Christ’s, for sinners, H. 408
Synagogue, demoniac in, H. 122

infirm woman in, H. 366
Synagogues, C. 116

of Galilee, C. 127


TABERNACLES, three, H. 261
Take care of him . , . I will repay, C. 294
heed, C. 466; H. 544
Talked together, that, C. 607
Taught in our streets, C. 376
them, C. 122
Taxed, should be, C. 50
Teach us to pray, C. 304
Teacher, great, lessons from the, H. 385
new, H. 117
true, H. 11
Teachers, Christ example to, H. 116
lesson to all religious, H. 337
Teaching, He was, H. 544
of miracle of loaves, H. 252
Tears of Christ over indifference of men,
H, 515
Tell, neither, I you, C. 521
no man, C. 140, 141, 240, 256
they could not, C. 521
Temple, came by the Spirit into the, C. 63
Christ’s first and His last visit to, N. 533
in the, C. 616
Jesus in the, H. 78
Lamb of God brought into, N. 62
stones of, and widow’s offering, H. 537
Temporary commission, N. 245
Tempt, thou shalt not, C. 113
Temptation, account of the, given by Christ
Himself, N. 106
all the, C. 113
and victory over it, H. 104
enter not into, C. 565


INDEX.


-oOo —————<—$—


Temptation, first, H. 108
».. evil, C. 308
in time of, fall away, C. 220
lest ye enter into, C. 567
of the rich, N. 494
second, H. 110
the, in relation to the Baptism, N. 106
third, H. 112
to spiritual pride, N. 113
Temptations, Christ’s, H. 558
in wilderness, H. 107
Tempter’s promise, N. 111
Ten cities, over, C. 510
lepers, the, H. 470; C. 472
one in, H. 471, 473
pieces, C. 413
Tender mercy of our God, C. 45
Terrible accusation, a, N. 314
Terrified, C. 612
be not, H. 542
Terror, faith should be a preservative from,
N, 228
of death, N. 567
Test of character, N. 293
Tested and found wanting, H. 232
Testimony, C. 141
Christ’s, to Himself, N. 79
of the Scriptures to Christ, N. 609
to Christ’s greatness, N. 50
Text of Christ’s first sermon, N. 117
Thank, doth he? C. 469
Thanks, gave, H. 554
giving Him, H. 472
to God, N. 42
Thanksgiving, priest’s, N. 44
Their faith, N. 145
Theme for artists and poets, N. 202
Theocracy, history of the, N. 523
Theologians, besetting sins of, H. 322, 325
Theophilus, most excellent, C. 17
Thief, dying, H. 595
Things concerning Himself, C. 608
Third alternative, a, N. 203
announcement of the Passion, H. 495
day I shall be perfected, N. 379
the, C. 497
temptation, H. 112
Thirty years of age, about, C. 101
Thorns, the, H. 219
which choke the word, N. 394
Thorough-going disciples, H. 396
Thou hast well said, C. 532
Thoughts, He knew their, C. 164
perceived their, C. 147
... revealed, C. 72
Threats and enticements, N. 114
Three arguments against fear, H. 332
aspirants, H. 270
classes of spectators, N. 314
crosses. H. 588
days, after, C. 76
disciples, H. 273
faults of Martha, H. 297
rebuked, N. 266
great lessons, H. 256
impediments, N. 274


Three incapacities, H. 262
lessons, H. 318
loaves, C. 310
miracles of raising the dead, the, N. 192
months, about, C. 38
motives to repentance, H. 359
obstructions to growth, N. 216
pictures, H. 318
portraits, H. 201
reasons for cross-bearing, H. 257
signs of the deep agony of Christ, H, 566
sins to be avoided, N. 282
stages in the history of a soul, H. 318
tabernacles, H. 261
types of character: enthusiasm, reluc-
tance, compromise, H. 273
words from the cross, H. 586
Tnreefold accusation, H. 580
consolation, H. 542
contrast, H. 368
sign, H. 99
Throne of His father David, C. 27
Thrown him in the midst, C. 123
Thrust Him out of the city, C. 120
Thwarted love, persistence of, H. 408
Thwarting God’s purpose, unbelief a, H. 196
Tidings, evil, lesson of, H. 359
Tiling, let him down through the, C. 144
Till He come, H. 506
Time, critical nature of the, N. 352
for prayer, Jesus makes, N, 126
give people, H. 269
left for repentance, N. 364
of incense, at the, C. 20
until the, C.' 381
Times, signs of the, H. 351
Timid faith rewarded and confirmed, H. 235
mind, how God appears to the, N. 310
Timidity overcome, N. 395
To-day and to-morrow, I do cures, C. 378
Told all these things, C. 605
Toll, place of, sitting at the, C. 151
Tomb, empty, H. 602, 604
Tombs, abode . . .in the, OC, 232
whitewashed, N. 325
Took and hid, C, 371
... blessed ... gave, O. 251
up that whereon he lay, C. 148
Touch, King’s, N. 141
Touched him, which, C, 203
Me, who? C. 238
Tower, a, C. 400
Towns, go into the, C. 251
Traders, Christ’s, H. 509
Training of apostles, N. 136
Transfiguration and baptism, Christ’s prayer
at, N. 98
meaning of the, H. 260
prayer, H. 259
Transgressors, reckoned among the, C. 563
Treacherous invitation, N. 385
Treachery unveiled, H. 557
Treasure is, for where your, C. 345
Tree, a, C. 371
significance of special pains taken with
the, N. 365


§43


INDEX.





Trembling, she came, OC, 238

Trench, cast a, C. 515

Trilogy, a, N. 458

Trinity, the, N. 307

Triumphal entry of Jesus into Jerusalem,
H. 513


Triune nature of Godhead, N. 99
Trodden down... devoured it, C. 218
Trouble me not, C. 310
not the Master, C. 239
not thyself, C. 185
Troubled, he was, C. 21
she was, C. 26
True and false riches, H. 341
follower, H. 274
greatness, H. 557
nobility, but one, N. 224
preparation for coming of the kingdom is
that of character, H. 508.
priest, N. 63
service of God, nature of, N. 44
state of the case, N. 354
teacher, H. 11
way to follow, N. 528
Trust in Christ taught by miracle, N. 131
Trusted in themselves, C. 489
Truth and hypocrisy, H. 331
exasperates, N. 386
Truths and warnings, important, H. 203
deeper, unveiled, N. 533
Truthfulness of Gospels, testimony to, N. 142
Turn to him the other also, H. 174
‘Turned back, C. 472
Turning-point, H. 433
Twelve apostles with Him, the, C. 553
choice of the, H. 165; N. 167
commission of the, H. 245
lessons to the. H. 265, 267
of them He chose, C. 168
years old, when He was, C. 75
Twenty thousand, cometh ... with, C. 401
Twin parables, H. 410
Two alleviations of Jesus’ sufferings, H. 583
and two before His face, H, 281
aspects of piety, H. 495
brothers, H. 426
classes of men, H. 317
complaints, N. 437
complementary sayings, N. 266
contrasted classes, H, 37
disciples, sadness of the, H. 608
distinct spheres, N. 529
forms of faith, H. 237
great commandments, H. 291
faults, H. 354
lessons taught, H. 435
grounds of comfort, H. 497
houses, and their fates, N. 178
kinds of holiness, H. 293
of hypocrisy, H. 331
marks of hypocrisy, N. 324
men, N. 490; C. 604
mites, H. 538; C. 539
of His disciples, sent, C. 513
others, C. 588
parables, N. 442


644


Two prayers, H. 488; N. 490
reasons why Christ need not come, N. 185
rebukes, H. 569 :
scenes, H, 458
swords, here are, C. 563
things needed, N. 318
types of sinners, and God’s love for them,


warriors, the, N. 315
Twofold prophecy, Simeon’s, H. 69
Two-hearted hearers, N. 220
Type of wayside hearer, H. 336
Types of Christ, N. 608
Typical case of penitence, N. 202
Tyre, Sidon, and Sodom, C. 283


UNBELIEF athwarting God’s purpose, H. 196
rebuke to our, N. 64
secret cause of, H. 319

Unconscious, bewildered,

sinner, N. 411

Unconsciousness of danger, H. 560

Under-breeding, Simon’s, rebuke of, N. 204

Understanding, eyes of the, opened, H. 605

Understandings, opened their, C. 614

Understood none, C. 497

Undone, not to leave the other, C. 324

Unexceptionable remark, N, 392

Unexpected good, N. 413

Unfaithful steward’s doom, N. 457

Unfruitful fig tree, H. 363

Unholy covenant, H. 548

Union, Christ’s, with our nature, N. 140

Unity, inward, and outward conformity, N,

266


and voluntary


of kingdom of good, N. 412
Unjust judge saith, hear what the, C. 485

steward, H. 442, 443, 446
Unleavened Bread, Feast of, C. 549
Unlikely guests, H. 395
Unloose, not worthy to, C. 93
Unlovely character, H. 437
Unprepared and prepared, N. 348
Unprofitable servants, H. 470
Unquenchable fire, C. 94
Unrecognised presence, H. 607
Unrecorded labours of Christ, H. 283
Unrighteous mammon, the, C. 449
Unseasonable seeking, N. 375
Unselfish Christ, H. 593
Unthankfulness, H. 473
Until the time, C. 381
Unto every one, C, 511

you, CO. 55

you it is given, C. 219
Upper room, C. 552
Utter selfishness depicted, N. 310


VACANT heart, perils of a, H. 317

Vague prayers, H. 499

Vain preparation, H. 340

Vanished out of their sight, C. 611

Various occasions on which Jesus prayed,
N. 99


stages of physical growth, N. 74
Vehemently accused. Him, C. 581


INDEX.


a


Veil of the temple was rent, ©. 596

Vengeance left out, N. 118

Very first, the, C. 17

Vessel, chosen, and an angelic declaration,
24


Victory over temptation, H. 104
strife and, H. 563
Village, throughout every city and, ©. 212
Vineyard and its keepers, H. 521, 523
fig tree in his, C. 364
give the, to others, C. 525
Violation of hospitality, N. 324
Violence, virtue of, H. 456
Vipers, C. 88 ;
Virgin, blessedness of the, N. 71
Virtue is gone out of Me, C. 238
of violence, H. 456
Visitation, H. 515
Visited His people, C, 43, 191
Vitality and influence, H. 370
Voice sf authority, N. 228
the, C. 87
Voices, lifted up their, C. 472
Voluntary self-humiliation of Jesus, H. 49
unconscious, and bewildered sinner, N.
411
Vultures, carrion and, H. 479


WAIT for their Lord, H. 348
patiently, N. 228
Waiting for Him, all, H, 237
Walk, I must, C. 379
Wanderer, the, H. 430
Wandering, H. 417
Want of due deliberation, H. 400
of faith, failure a proof of, N. 132
Wanting, tested and found, H. 232
Warning, a, H. 494
against avarice, N. 338
false guides, H. 532
and counsel, words of, H. 555
and encouragement, H. 376, 594
and exhortation, H. 375
and promise, H. 332
note of, H. 375
to rulers in the Church, N. 351
to selfish, H. 458
Warnings and truths, important, H. 203
to impenitent still needed, N. 245
Warrant and liturgy of prayer, H. 305
Warriors, the two, N. 315
Washing their nets, were, C. 132
Wasted, C. 430
life, N. 431
Watch, C. 347
ye therefore, H. 544
Watched Him, they, C. 385
Watching for the King, H. 348
Water, fire, and the Spirit, baptism with,
N. 93


Way, true, to follow, N. 528
went his, C. 550

Ways, prepare His, CO. 44

Wayside hearer, type of, H. 336
miracle, H. 499
seed by, H. 218


Wayside, the, C. 219

We know that Thou, etc., C,. 528.

Weak faith effectual, even, N. 227

Weakness and sinfulness, fellowship with our,
N. 97


and willingness, H. 560
of mere asceticism, H. 86
Wealth, abused, the rich man’s ruin, H.. 454
Christ’s teaching on, H. 447
little satisfaction yielded by, N. 340
Weapon not at hand, N. 228
Weapons and stratagems used against: Christ
unnecessary, N. 569
Wearied Saviour, a, N. 227
Weary me, C. 485
of home, anxious to see the world, N 429
Weep not, C. 190
not for Me, C. 586
now, ye that, C. 172
Weeping and gnashing of teeth, H. 376
stood at His feet, C. 202
Went before them, C. 568
down with them, C. 80
forth and saw, C. 151
. .. with haste, C, 32
Wept, OC. 573
over it, C. 515
What evil hath He done? H. 583
further need? C, 574
have we to do with Thee? C. 123
is this, then ?' C. 526
man? C. 411
manner of man is this? C. 229
shall I do? C. 290, 339, 443
we do then? C. 90
sort rather than how many, N. 374
went ye out... . tosee? C. 196
Wheat, C. 93
When shall these things be? ©, 541
thou goest, C. 354
ye pray, say, C. 306
Where are the nine? H. 473
Whereunto then shall I liken? C. 198
Which should do this thing . . . be accounted
the greatest, C. 557
While I was yet with you, C. 614
Whitewashed tombs, N. 325
Whither He Himself would come, C. 281
Whose neighbour am I? H. 288
Whosoever hath, C. 221
shall seek, C. 478
Why hast Thou thus dealt with us? C. 77
Wicked husbandmen, H. 523
more, C. 318
Widow, a, C. 73, 485
and she was a, C. 189
Widow’s mite, H. 538
offering, and stones of temple, H. 537
Widows’ houses, devour, ©. 534
Wife, a, C. 394
of Herod’s steward . . . Joanna C. 213
Wilderness, C. 107
in the, C. 411 |
temptations in, H. 107
withdrew Himself into, C. 142
Will be done, Thy, H. 307


645


INDEX.





Will come, C. 256


Wills submission of our, to God’s will, N.


307
Willing dependence, N. 81
slave, H. 431
Willingness and weakness, H. 560
Wind, rebuked the, C. 228
Wine nor strong drink, he shall drink neither,
C, 23


Wine-skins and garments, H. 156
Wisdom, a mouth and, C. 542
and power, Christ’s, N. 321
filled with, C. 74
grace, and strength, growth in, H. 73
growth in, of Divine Boy, H. 81
is justified of all her children, C. 198
of the just, the disobedient to the, C. 23
Wise and faithful, H. 350
and foolish hearers, the, H. 177, 178
and prudent, C. 287
follies of, H. 444
‘Wisely, C. 446
Withdrawn, was, N. 566
Withered hand, H. 163
Within, light from, N. 260
Witness and preacher, H. 92
for Christ raised up, N. 594
Witnesses to immortality, N. 261
ye are, C. 615
Woe unto you, C. 173
Woman, a...aman, C. 371
infirm, in synagogue, H. 366
our Lord’s reply to a, H. 320
Woman’s exclamation, a, H. 320
Women, and other, C. 605
certain, C, 212
Christ’s treatment of, N. 367
in the Gospels, notices of, N. 213
ministering, H. 597
two, C. 479
which bewailed, C. 585
Wonder of disciples, N. 228
Wondered at the gracious words, C. 118
... pondered, C. 58
Wonderful of parables, most, N. 311
Wondering, C. 605
Word, be it unto me according to Thy, C. 31
diverse reception of, H. 217
eyewitnesses and ministers of, C. 15
heard His, C. 297
of God came unto John, C. 86
no, shall be devoid of power, C, 29
the seed is the, C. 219
thorns which choke the, N. 394
was with authority, His, C. 122
written, relation of believers to, H. 10
Words from the cross, Luke’s record of the,
H. 593
gracious, N. 119
last, H. 541
My, shall not pass away, C. 444


646


Words of menace, N. 283
of warning and counsel, H. 555
take hold of His, C. 528
three, from the cross, H. 586
Work is unfinished, safety while, N. 333
reluctance for, N. 274
which hallows the sabbath, H. 365
Works, faith seen in, H. 145
Workers of iniquity, C. 376
World, against being preoccupied by things
of, H. 344
conversion of, H. 370
Light of the, Christ, H. 45
no flattery of, in Scripture, N. 312
of nature, Peace-bringer in, H. 226
the whole, C. 50
this, and the next, H. 458
use the, for God, N. 443
weary of home and anxious to see the,
N. 429
Worldliness of spirit, N. 393
Worldly character, the, H. 339
men often surpass Christians, points in
which, H. 446
rich man, miseries of, H. 339
things, preoccupation with, H. 220
Worse, last state is, H. 319
Worship, Christian, beginning of, N. 57
due to God alone, N. 112
me, if Thou therefore wilt, C. 112
of angels, N. 56
Worshipped Him, they, C. 616
Worshipper, Christ example as, N, 117
Worthy, not, C. 185
yet counted, N. 185
Would-be disciples, H. 272, 274
Wounds, bound up his, H. 294
Wrath, filled with, C. 120
to come, N. 88
Wretchedness, spiritual, not a ground of
safety, N. 396
Write fifty . . . fourscore, C. 444
Written, C. 109
again, it is, C. 113
Wrong, ignorance in doing, N. 590


YE would not, H. 380
Year, acceptable, of the Lord, H. 114, 118
Years, silent, of Christ’s life, N. 81
Yet there is room, C. 395
Young man, I say to thee, C. 190
seeking Jesus, H. 493
Younger, the, C. 429
Your own, that which is...
another man’s, H. 450
Youth, childhood, and age, N. 220


that which is


ZACCH US, conversion of, H. 504
Zacharias, Abel to, C. 325
Elisabeth, John, N, 43


INDEX,





HOMILIES FOR SPECIAL OCCASIONS.


Church Seasons : Advent, ch. i. 78, 79; xii. 35-38; 41-49. Christmas, ch. i. 78, 79; ii. 1-20;
8-20; 10; 10,11; 10-15; 14; 16. Feast of Circumcision, ch. ii. 21, Lent, ch, iii, 2, 3;
iv. 1-13. Feast of Annunciation, ch. i, 26-38; 38. Palm Sunday, ch. xix. 28-48; 37-44;
38; 41. Passion-tide, ch, xx, 9-18; 13; xxii. 1-6; 39-48; 42; 48; 54-71. Good Friday,
ch. xxiii. 1-25; 3; 25; 32-49; 33; 34; 42, 43; 46. Haster, ch. xxiv. 1-12; 5; 13-32;
13-43; 36. Ascension Day, ch. xxiv. 50-53; 50; 51. John Baptist’s Day, ch. i. 66; iii.
1-14 ;'15-17; 19, 20; vii. 18-35. St. Peter’s Day, ch. v. 1-11; xxii. 54-60, St. Matthew’s
Day, ch. v. 27-32. St, Luke’s Day, ch. i, 1-4.


Holy Communion : ch. xxii. 7-20; 10; 17-20; 19, 20; xxiv. 32.


Missions to Heathen: ch. iv. 43; viii. 39; x. 1-16; 25-37. Bible Society, ch. i. 1-4; iv. 4;
viii. 5.

Ewangelistic Services: ch. ii. 30; iii, 1-14; iv. 18, 19; v. 8; 12; 17-26; 31; vi. 47-49; vii. 47;
viii. 5; ix. 18; 25; 57-62; xi. 14-36; 23; 24-26; xii. 13-21; 15; xiii, 1-5; 6-9; 24, 25;
34; xiv. 15-24; xv. 1-10; 4-10; 8-10; 11-32; 15, 16; 17; 17-19; 18; 20-24; xvii. 22;
31-36; xix. 10.


Special: Ordination, ch. ix. 1-6. Workers, ch. iv. 16; vi. 41, 42; viii. 39; ix. 57-62; x. 3-9;
xi. 37-54; xvii, 7-10; xix. 11-27; 13. Baptism, ch. i. 66; xviii. 15-17. Confirmation,
etc., ch. ix. 23; xi. 37-54. Quiet Day, ch. ii. 19; ix. 10; xxiv. 15. To aged, ch. ii. 29,
30; xxiv. 29. To parents, ch. i. 66; ii. 48. Young men, ch, xviii. 18-30. Children,
ch. ii, 49. Hospital Sunday, ch. iv. 31-44; v. 12; 31; vili. 43; x. 25-37; xiii. 10-17.
Friendly Society, ch. v.18; xvi. 11,12. G.F.S., ch. viii. 1-3; x. 38-42; xiii. 11; xxiii.
49, Trade Unions, etc., ch. vii. 2; xvi. 10-12. Almsgiving, ch, xxi. 1-6; xxii. 12.


444736
INEOLOGY LIDRARY 647
CLAREMONT, CALIF





aa
ve


a


sb
ae re a


7








* :
i "
'
F 4
ee
" 7
£ ‘ a * te
i ‘
LS ae
. A
T
¢
Ae
?
4 ol ;
1 Tal a
4 vi, ha
: :
’














el Pi COL Sf
ee atk
CUSSION LT I gg it BOOM
SE Te LOMAS Tt Be OC A
Pree eee Cie ed


A ee AAA AAA i
on 5

BONE oe ee

La


LGA LAE LANL LA ADL
ia eae


Sree
seed
,


a wee vue
Retrae eae
See VEEN TE MOUS
Se ey ee
ede e gs
Chas
er


eevee
ovvvuyyy


vy
QU ey iy ey
‘ee eery Cy
vere voveey news
Vevey vee ye ee
ee ee
0%,
OM LSID
LI yal


ae
COTA
, Oe Ie
PPLELS GAIAM.
EL ED EEL Bd


eevee ¥
Suey envy @


OE a aa
LER A


Co cor eee g Hf
OL A ae eed LILLIA LS
ON Oe OSAMA SM Cee 4,
PPS IS. ot t ELE ES My
Cpe PPD ee CEPA LTS
Oe , f


vveyy rey
vee vyuyy


SNC:
Vey uy weve
<eeyy,
SO aly ey ee oe
ee A Me
BONES th bead


ne
vey we
ver vuvey ae eens oF
ee Ce EON, ar eee eM.
Woe ey sy teen dee toe
I ah CE) Oy sre
Vevegex “roe e sa
ou
‘ Oy eins ed
LM ad hE ALL EAE L,
IM og rue w dest


PR hs
vey ey
ew.


CO aay


SBR hao ‘
Poy vee .

LTTE

CELLET ES


ee

Reimers
, - ’ GIGI LL SSL.

ELA L Ite ESE

4 fas:


ad ; ¥ of LS fgg:
Ans ces TESLA ASAE ASG
RSE NO be ibys
ites EMAIL,

a


<


ot)
S<
a3
<
6
oe
SS.


iver ee ee

Vee ey

A OA hd

Siveverens Vee Bod oe
ys vy CO bat ae


ME Tf te 4 0
ey eee HES iy
ELSE LESSEE
; as Wieder Mee


eee
Ketek e%
B2e kot ke
aeecasccece
SeSeSesesese:
SeSeledeSets
eseseseseses
seeketeceste
SeSatoces
<3e
s
ry
<335<
a ScS¢
asec
3685)
5


<)
e
it
<
2


eteley
Vey


3

<t

oH

<8

Sehcte

mee

eSasete

asa sese
Corer

>

sietey

ciate

sepeces

eka

ears

<

4)


be
3S.
3
<
33
6
<
=
a 28
é,
<
Py
<


<
<
<3<,
S25,
4
38:
<,
<,


4
6.
2
<
..


i
<
&
<
et
8.
3
=,


3
<°
5)
ir
5
e
3
oi
<
“
e*,
<
ee
se


S
<
Zt
2%
<
x
of
28
<.
.
eS
o}
=.
<3
4


Pt aaa
oveber yy yw dey My
SUNY See ae


et
3¢,
a
4.
«
*,
3
<
>
<
3
mS
<
3


LECCE
if a
IME
SH EPE REE


ate
2.
$,
<
B
eat
S<
é
ae
Ss.
Ses,
<5,
alt
8x
at
28.
3
et
“x
“
La
RSE Sa3<
ess exese
ates,
Farts
so8
Seis.
2)
te
<


6,
<,
x,


36
<.
<.
5,


<
<
2
“
5
5
$e
=
34)
a


€
<
¢)
S,
“<:


see,
Se
ae
es.
ees
Ba!


4
See
£62,
oo.
oan
hPa
<
28
Se
Lo
eke
a
eee,
sks
3
ees
br)
oo
es
ates
<<
Se
3
<
<8
<<,
23
|


3
<
t2¢,
Sek
a,
23625
8
<,
3


s
e.
<
Fi
Rees
2355
5


<
¢!
<
<
23
<,
<.
5
<.
-:
<


Sop}
ae
<
Sas¢
seeks
tess
a30%
<'
3
33
Taek
36


<
«
i
33
‘
<,
)
<
<
2)
<


45452
t.e2e
taiete
att,
:
Sieh
sre,
Roe ee
sates,
Ss 7
<
2
Rots
bee
2% J
S
sie
Beek
5
wake
SSRN


ah
4c
A


33
<
<%,


é
preys
<
5
eae
«36°
< Se
<,
afes
A365
Pi3
a5<e:
ace
iene,
ace
SaS.
<
on se
Scee
eaase
SESE
P3
<


=,


ace
~


<


cs
-

e

RS


&,
‘<
,


<

2

*

at,

‘

*.
<

9
<
ex

2]
S252


<.
<
4
¢
ss.


<i
Se
¢
3
36.
3
e
ts


e
4
<

of

Se
2S
esi
pare


c}
¢


5
<
S,


,
Sass
a
%.
SIAE
<
Spee
3


34
at
«


ane
ate
ee
See s8
borane
2
Sas


S828
Ps


S


f 7
,
te Te
if G
(Aes
‘5 ree
APES ORE
LE EE EEL LE
PII LS ER Ds
EE PERLE A SER
; PCL et hy


a


ae
nhs


=


Rist 3
as ey


mal


‘~)
